CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE # 2008-04
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING ORDINANCE TO
REQUIRE A ZONING PERMIT FOR CERTAIN ZONING ITEMS THAT DO NOT
REQUIRE BUILDING PERMITS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. A Zoning permit shall be required for the following items that do not
already require a building permit:
1. Fences 6 feet in height or less.
2. One story detached accessory structures up to 120 square feet.
3. Permanent prefabricated above ground swimming pools which are less
than 24 inches in depth and less than 5,000 gallons. A permanent pool is
described as a pool that stays in the same location all year round acting
as a permanent structure.
4. Residential decks that are not attached to a structure and are less than 30
inches above grade.
SECTION 2. The fee for the required zoning permit will initially be $10 and may
be amended by resolution annually when the City Council adopts the annual fee
schedule.
SECTION 3. This amendment shall be in full force and effective immediately
following passage and publication.
Approved by the St. Augusta City Council this 16th day of September, 2008.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
BY:_________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY MINNESOTA
ORDIANCE NO. 2017-04
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS OF STORM SEWER USE
(ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION ORDINANCE)
In the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, the City Council of St. Augusta, Minnesota
hereby ordains:
STORM SEWER USE CODE
Section 1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the City of St. Augusta through the regulation of non-storm water
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and
state law. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm water discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
Section 2 Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
Authorized Enforcement Agency. Employees or designees of the City of St. Augusta designated to
enforce this ordinance.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good
housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and
other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment
practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. Such activities include but
are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illegal Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as
exempted in Section X.08 of this ordinance.
Illicit Connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
i. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illegal
discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances that allow
any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter
the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or
approved by an authorized enforcement agency or,
ii. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain
system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved
by an authorized enforcement agency.
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Storm Water Permits.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). The system of conveyances (including sidewalks,
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels,
or storm drains) owned and operated by the City of St. Augusta and designed or used for collecting or
conveying storm water, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit. means
a permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Non-Storm Water Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of
storm water.
Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity
recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited
to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved
including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Storm Drainage System. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed,
including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Storm Water. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Storm Water Management Plan. A document which describes the Best Management Practices and
activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a
site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Storm Water, Storm Water Conveyance
Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable.
Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a
facility.
Section 3 Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the City of St.
Augusta.
Section 4 Responsibility for Administration. The City of St. Augusta shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City of St.
Augusta may be delegated in writing by the St. Augusta City Administrator of the City of St. Augusta to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City of St. Augusta.
Section 5 Compatibility with other Regulations. This ordinance is not intended to modify or
repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance
are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and
where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes
higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
Section 6 Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions
or application of this ordinance.
Section 7 Ultimate Responsibility. The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant
to this ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized
discharge of pollutants.
Section 8 Discharge Prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of Illegal Discharges.
1. No person shall directly or indirectly discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to
directly or indirectly discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants,
other than storm water.
2. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is
prohibited except as described as follows:
a. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this
ordinance: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground
waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water,
discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation,
irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, de-chlorinated
swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
b. Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City of
St. Augusta as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
c. Discharges associated with dye testing; however this activity requires a verbal notification
to the City of St. Augusta prior to the time of the test.
d. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES
permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided
that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain
system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
4. Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected, if
necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system
upon approval of the City of St. Augusta.
5. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which
may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that
property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City of St. Augusta requiring that
such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which
the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of
connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be
identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the City of St.
Augusta.
Section 9 Watercourse Protection. Every person owning property through which a watercourse
passes and/or contains a stormwater inlet or catch basin, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain
that part of the watercourse and/or stormwater inlet or catch basin within the property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
Section 10 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges. Submission of Notice of
Coverage/Authorization to the City of St. Augusta.
A. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit
shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be
required in a form acceptable to the City of St. Augusta prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
B. The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water associated with industrial or construction activity shall submit a copy of the
coverage notification or notification of permit authorization to the City of St. Augusta.
C. The copy of the coverage notification or notification of permit authorization may be delivered to the
City of St. Augusta either in person or by mailing it to:
City of St. Augusta
Attn: City Administrator
1914 250th Street
St. Augusta, MN 56301
D. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging storm water
associated with industrial or construction activity without having submitted a copy of the coverage
notification or notification of permit authorization to do so to the City of St. Augusta.
Section 11 Compliance Monitoring.
A. Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling. The City of St. Augusta shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this ordinance.
1. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the City of St. Augusta.
2. Facility operators shall allow the City of St. Augusta ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under
the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The City of St. Augusta shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the City of St. Augusta to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's storm water discharge.
4. The City of St. Augusta has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
safe and proper operating condition by the discharger. Sampling and monitoring activities and
equipment, including installation, maintenance, and removal shall be at the discharger’s own
expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure
their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
City of St. Augusta and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of St. Augusta access to a permitted facility is a
violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this ordinance. A person who is the operator of
a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial or
construction activity commits an offense if the person denies the City of St. Augusta
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized
or required by this ordinance.
B. Search Warrants. If the City of St. Augusta has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community,
then the City of St. Augusta may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
Section 12 Requirement to Prevent, Control and Reduce Storm Water Pollutants by the Use of
Best Management Practices. The owner or operator of any activity, operation, or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the
United States shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the
use of structural and non-structural Best Management Practices. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at
said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the
discharge of storm water associated with industrial or construction activity, to the extent practicable, shall
be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a Storm
Water Management Plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
Section 13 Notification of Spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation
has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result
in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the
United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup
of such release, at their own expense. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City of St.
Augusta in person or by phone or email no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of St. Augusta within two
(2) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three (3) years. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this ordinance.
Section 14 Violations, Enforcement, and Penalties.
A. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of
the requirements of this ordinance. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this ordinance, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or
may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City
of St. Augusta is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to
take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City of St
Augusta is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in Section X.21.
B. Warning Notice. When the City of St. Augusta finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, the City of St. Augusta may
serve upon that person a written Warning Notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have
occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution
whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response
to the Warning Notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the Warning Notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of
the City of St. Augusta to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a Warning Notice.
C. Notice of Violation. Whenever the City of St. Augusta finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the City of St. Augusta may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation, at
their own expense: :
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
4. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property; and
5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
6. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done
by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.
Section 15 Costs. In addition to the other penalties provided herein, the City may recover
engineering fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, attorney fees, and other expenses of litigation or
enforcement by an appropriate action against the person or entity found to have violated this ordinance or
the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
Section 16 Suspension of MS4 Access.
A. Emergency Cease and Desist Orders. When the City of St. Augusta finds that any
person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, or any
order issued hereunder, or that the person’s past violations are likely to recur, and that
the person’s violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, the City of St. Augusta may issue an order to the violator directing it
immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
1. Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
B. Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this Subsection shall immediately
comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger’s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the City of St. Augusta may take such
steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States,
and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility’s
water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The City of St. Augusta may
allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City
of St. Augusta that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this ordinance. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part,
for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the City of St. Augusta within five (5) days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance
of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the violator.
C. Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The City of St. Augusta may, without
prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If
the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City of St. Augusta
may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
D. Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation
of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The City of St. Augusta will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4
access. The violator may petition the City of St. Augusta for a reconsideration and hearing.
E. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the City of St. Augusta.
Section 17 Civil Penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set
forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10)
days, or such greater period as the City of St. Augusta shall deem appropriate, after the City of St.
Augusta has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of St. Augusta may impose a
penalty not to exceed $ 1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation
remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
Section 18 Criminal Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $
1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not to exceed ninety (90) days or both.
Section 19 Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal
the determination of the City of St. Augusta. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days
from the date of the Notice of Violation, except in the instance where a Cease and Desist Order is issued
as described in Section X.14, then the notice of appeal must be received within ten (10) days from the
date of the Cease and Desist Order. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her
designee shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
Section 20 Enforcement Measures after Appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to
the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of
the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the City of St. Augusta, then
representatives of the City of St. Augusta shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized
to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
Section 21 Cost of Abatement of the Violation. Within forty-five (45) days after abatement of the
violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within
thirty (30) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the
municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a
special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City of St.
Augusta by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than twelve (12) equal
payments. Interest at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on
the first day following discovery of the violation.
Section 22 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and
penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and
may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or
otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
Section 23 Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of
the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
The City of St. Augusta may recover all attorney’s fees court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
Section 24 Effective Date.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
Adopted this 7th day of March, 2017.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By:_____________________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
Attest:
By__________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY MINNESOTA
ORDIANCE NO. 2017-05
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
In the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, the City Council of St. Augusta, Minnesota
hereby ordains:
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT CODE
Section 1 Intent & Purpose: The purpose of this regulatory mechanism is to set forth minimum
requirements for stormwater management that will prevent or reduce water pollution during and after
land disturbance activities to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the
environment in the City of St. Augusta.
Section 2 Definitions: The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Ordinance, shall
be interpreted as herein defined.
Best Management Practices or BMP: shall mean the practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of the
waters of the state, as defined by the MS4 Permit, including schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, and other management practices, and also includes treatment requirements, operating
procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge, or waste disposal or
drainage from raw material storage.
City: shall mean The City of St Augusta.
Common plan of development or sale: is a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct land
disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, on different schedules, but under one
proposed plan. One plan is broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or
physical demarcation indicating that land-disturbing activities may occur.
Construction Activity: includes construction activity as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14)(x) and small
construction activity as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(15). This includes a disturbance to the land that results
in a change in the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative), or the existing soil
topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, leading to soil erosion and movement of
sediment into surface waters or drainage systems. This may include clearing, grading, filling, and
excavating.
Land Disturbance: means any project or activity, including removal of vegetation, excavations, clearing,
filling, stockpiling, grading, or other earth change that directly or indirectly affects slopes, water bodies,
the moving of ground cover or which may result in the movement of sediment.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or MS4: means the conveyance or system of conveyances
including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains owned and operated by the City of St. Augusta, which is designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater.
New Development: means all construction activity that is not defined as redevelopment and areas where
new impervious is being created.
Owner and/or Operator: includes the plural as well as the singular, and where appropriate shall include a
natural person, partnership, firm, association, public, or quasi-public corporation, Private Corporation, or a
combination of any of them, with legal or equitable interest in the parcel of record or as identified on the
land disturbance permit.
Redevelopment: means any construction activity where, prior to the start of construction, the areas to be
disturbed have 15 percent or more of existing impervious surface(s).
Stormwater: means rainwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. (Minn .R.
7090.0080, subp.12.)
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan or SWPPP: means a comprehensive plan developed to manage and
reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater.
Structural Stormwater BMPs: mean stationary and permanent BMPs designed, constructed and operated
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater.
Section 3 Applicability: No land shall be disturbed, excavated, or developed and no use shall be
permitted that results in water runoff causing pollution, flooding, erosion, or deposit of minerals on
adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly managed in accordance with this ordinance and the City
of St. Augusta Stormwater Management Design Standards.
Section 4 Stormwater Management Permit: All land disturbance and/or construction activity that
disturbs land of equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet or a common plan of
development or sale that disturbs land of equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet or as
deemed necessary by the City of St. Augusta to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent
degradation to the environment in the City of St. Augusta shall require a Stormwater Management Permit
from the City of St. Augusta.
A. The permit authorizes, subject to the terms and conditions of this ordinance, land disturbance and the
discharge of stormwater.
B. No land disturbance or discharge of stormwater shall occur without first obtaining a permit from the
City of St Augusta. Such runoff shall be properly managed in accordance with the City of St. Augusta
Stormwater Management Design Standards.
C. No permit will be required for the following activities:
1. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or
natural resources.
2. Nursery, home gardening, and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory
use.
3. Maintenance work conducted by City of St. Augusta employees.
Section 5 Application and Required Information: Any person desiring a permit hereunder shall file
an application on such form as shall be provided by the City of St. Augusta. Such application shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by City resolution and information/documents proving compliance
with this ordinance and the City of St. Augusta Stormwater Management Design Standards. The request
shall be considered as being officially submitted and complete when the applicant has submitted and
complied with all the following required information, as applicable and specified by the Administrator.
A. Each application shall include at a minimum:
1. Application form and fee.
2. Project name.
3. Name, address, and contact information of the applicant.
4. Name, address, and contact information of the owner of the land.
5. The address and legal description of the land involved.
6. Purpose for land disturbing activity.
7. Total area (acres) to be disturbed.
8. Name and contact information of consulting firm(s) retained by owner and/or operator. (if
applicable)
9. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) meeting the requirements set forth in the City
of St. Augusta Stormwater Management Design Standards.
10. Details, plans, specifications, calculations, and any other documentation needed to verifying
compliance with this ordinance and the City of St. Augusta Stormwater Management Design
Standards.
11. Inspection and maintenance agreement and maintenance plan (if applicable).
12. Other information as may be specified by the Administrator.
Section 6 Technical Reports: The City of St. Augusta, upon receipt of a completed application, as
determined by preliminary staff review, will forward a copy thereof to the City Engineer, City Building
Official, and/or other technical advisors as necessary for review. Where protected watersheds, floodplains,
and/or protected wetlands are in question, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and Army
Corps of Engineers shall also be contacted. These technical advisors shall be requested to prepare reports,
as applicable, for the City Council. It is the responsibility of the owner and/or operator to meet the
provisions of this ordinance and the City of St. Augusta Stormwater Management Design Standards.
Section 7 Issuance of Permit: Upon receiving information and reports from the City staff, technical
advisor and other applicable agencies, the City Council or the Zoning Administrator shall make its
determination as to whether, and when, and under what conditions such permit for stormwater
management is to be issued to the applicant. The City of St. Augusta shall in writing either:
A. Approve the permit application;
B. Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
C. Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised
application and/or submission.
Section 8 Conditions of Permit:
A. No land shall be disturbed, excavated, or developed and no use shall be permitted that results in
water runoff causing pollution, flooding, erosion, or deposit of minerals on adjacent properties.
B. Maintenance of Structural BMPs: Any structural BMPs which are designed and installed to meet the
Post-construction Stormwater Management Requirements set forth in the City of St. Augusta
Stormwater Management Design Standards and shall meet the following requirements:
1. Private Facilities (owned and operated by a private entity):
a. A permanent public easement shall be provided to the City for the permanent stormwater
management facilities including a twenty (20) foot access for inspection and/or
maintenance purposes. Costs incurred by the City for any maintenance of private systems
will be billed and/or assessed to the owner/operator.
b. The owner shall enter into a Maintenance Agreement with the City of St. Augusta. The
agreement shall include as an attachment a maintenance plan, provided by the owner,
which identifies and defines inspection and maintenance responsibilities. Agreements are
transferrable to any party that becomes the owner/operator of the site.
c. If site configurations or structural stormwater BMPs change, causing decreased BMP
effectiveness, new or improved structural stormwater BMPs must be designed and
implemented to meet the requirements as the set forth in the City of St. Augusta
Stormwater Management Design Standards. New and/or improved BMP design
information and plans must be submitted to the City of St. Augusta for review and
approval.
2. Public Facilities (to be owned and operated by the City of St. Augusta):
a. A permanent public easement or out lot shall be provided to the City for stormwater
treatment facilities prior to final acceptance of the project. As a minimum easements
shall:
i. Extend a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the larger of the 100-year high water
level or emergency overflow.
ii. Include a minimum twenty (20) wide access to the facility for inspection and/or
maintenance purposes.
Section 9 Review, Inspection, and Fees:
A. The City of St. Augusta or City representative shall review all documents and material submitted
showing compliance with this ordinance and the City of St. Augusta Stormwater Management
Design Standards. The costs associated with the review process, including but not limited to, staff
hours, engineering fees, administrative tasks, reproductions and other expenses associated with
the review, shall be charged back to the owner and/or operator, including any follow-up reviews
for incomplete or non-compliant submittals.
B. The City of St. Augusta or City representative may make inspections of the temporary and/or
permanent stormwater management measures prior to construction, during the construction
and/or after construction is complete. Upon inspection the City of St. Augusta shall notify the
owner and/or operator wherein the work fails to comply with this ordinance, the City of St.
Augusta Stormwater Management Design Standards or the site specific Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan as approved.
C. The owner and/or operator or his/her agent of stormwater management facilities shall make
regular inspections of the property, construction activity, land disturbance activity, and permanent
stormwater facilities after construction is complete in accordance with this ordinance, the City of
St. Augusta Stormwater Management Design Standards, and the site specific Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan as approved. All inspections shall be documented in written form and
made available upon request to the City of St. Augusta or City representative. Records shall be
retained and made accessible for a period of at least ten (10) years.
D. The City of St. Augusta or City representative shall be allowed access to enter the property of the
owner and/or operator as deemed necessary to make inspections to ensure the validity and
compliance with this ordinance, the City of St. Augusta Stormwater Management Design
Standards, and the site specific Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan as approved.
E. See Fee Schedule for associated fees.
Section 10 Security: The City shall require either the applicant or the owner or user of the property
on which the land disturbance is occurring to post a security in such form and sum as determined by the
City of St. Augusta. The amount of the security shall be sufficient to cover the extraordinary costs of the
City or City representative for the expense of repairing, maintaining, constructing, or completing
stormwater facilities or stormwater management activities. The amount of the security shall also be
sufficient to insure compliance with all requirements of this section, the City of St. Augusta Stormwater
Management Design Standards and the particular permit, and to pay the expense the City or City
representative may incur as a result of the permit.
Section 11 Failure to Comply: The City may, for failure of any person to comply with any requirement
made of them in writing under the provisions of this ordinance, as promptly as can reasonably be done,
proceed to cause said requirement to be complied with, and the cost of such work shall be certified as an
assessment against the property whereon the land disturbance is located, or the City may at its option
proceed to collect such costs by an action against the person to whom such permit has been issued, and
their superiors if a bond exists. In the event that land disturbance and/or discharge of stormwater
requiring a permit are commenced prior to City review and approval, the City may require work stopped
and all necessary applications filed and processed. In such cases, application fees shall be double the
normal charge.
Section 12 Costs. In addition to the other penalties provided herein, the City may recover engineering
fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, attorney fees, and other expenses of litigation or enforcement by
an appropriate action against the person or entity found to have violated this ordinance or the orders,
rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
Section 13 Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage
and publication.
Adopted this 7th day of March, 2017.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By:_____________________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
Attest:
By__________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY MINNESOTA
ORDIANCE NO. 2017-08
AMENDING AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A STORM WATER UTILITY
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA, HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide a funding mechanism for the following
services:
A. The administration, planning, analysis, installation, construction, operation, maintenance, and
replacement of public drainage systems.
B. The administration, planning, implementation, construction, and maintenance of storm water Best
Management Practices (BMP’s) to reduce the introduction of sediment and other pollutants into local
water resources.
C. Other education, engineering, inspection, monitoring, testing, and enforcement activities as necessary to
maintain compliance with local, state, and federal storm water requirements.
D. Activities necessary to maintain compliance with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) Permit requirements established by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, including preparation, implementation, and management of a Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to address the following control measures:
1. Public Education and Outreach
2. Public Participation/Involvement
3. Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination (IDDE)
4. Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Control
5. Post-Construction Stormwater Management
6. Pollution Prevention/Good Housekeeping For Municipal Operations
Section 2. Storm Water Utility and Authority. There is hereby established a public utility to be known as
the Storm Water Utility for the City of St. Augusta. The Storm Water Utility shall be operated as a public
utility pursuant to the City Code of Ordinance and applicable Statutes. The revenues shall be subject to
provisions of this ordinance and Minnesota Statutes Section 444.075. This Ordinance shall apply to the entire
City of St. Augusta.
Section 3. Administration. The Storm Water Utility shall be part of the Public Works Department and shall
be administered by the City Administrator.
Section 4. Rates and Charges. In determining charges, the City Council may establish a Storm Water
Utility Policy and Credit Policy to specify application fees, exemptions and exceptions, unit areas, residential
equivalency factors, and unit rates to charge utility users based upon the volume or direct runoff estimated to
be generated by various land uses within the City.
A. Minimum or Maximum Fees. The City Council may establish a minimum or maximum fee.
B. Estimated Charges. If, for any reason, precise information related to the use, development or area of a
premise is not available; then Storm Water Utility Charges for such premise shall be estimated and
billed, based upon information then available to the City.
C. Billing Method. The City will compute Storm Water Utility Fees. Fees shall be collected by the City
together with other City utility fees, through the County billing system, or by any other method approved
by the City.
D. Delinquent Accounts. Delinquent and unpaid storm water utility fees may be certified to the County
Auditor for collection with real estate taxes during the following year or any year thereafter in the
manner consistent with MN Statute 444.075.
E. Appeal: If a property owner believes the fee charged to a particular property is incorrect, she/he may
request review and re-computation of said fee.
Section 5. Definitions. The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Ordinance, shall be
interpreted as herein defined.
Subd. 1. “Best Management Practices” or “BMP” shall mean the practices to prevent or reduce the pollution
of the waters of the state, as defined by the MS4 Permit, including schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, and other management practices, and also includes treatment requirements, operating procedures
and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge, or waste disposal or drainage from raw
material storage.
Subd. 2. “City” shall mean The City of St Augusta or the City Council of St. Augusta or the Public Utility.
Subd. 3. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems
Permit” or “MS4 Permit” shall mean the General Permit Authorization to Discharge Stormwater Associated
with Mall Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems.
Subd. 5. “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Program or SWPPP” shall mean a comprehensive program
developed by the City to manage and reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater and from the City’s
storm sewer system.
Subd. 6. “Storm Water Utility Policy” shall mean a policy approved by the City Council that defines the
methods and means to establish utility fees.
Subd. 7. “U.S. Environmental Protection Agency” or “EPA” shall mean the agency of the United States
federal government whose mission is to protect human and environmental health.
Section 6. Effective Date.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
Adopted this 7th day of March, 2017.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By:_____________________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
Attest:
By__________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
City of St. Augusta
2019
Fee Schedule
Purpose/Application Amount
Liquor Licenses
On Sale $ 2,000.00
Off Sale $ 100.00
Sunday $ 200.00
Club up to $ 3,000.00
Wine - On Sale $ 2,000.00
3.2% - On Sale $ 100.00
3.2% - 6Month $ 50.00
3.2% - One Day $ 20.00
3.2% - Off Sale $ 30.00
Consumption and Display $ 300.00
Consumption and Display - One Day $ 25.00
Investigation - New License, inside Minnesota $ 500.00
Investigation - New License, outside Minnesota actual Cost
Residential Garbage Hauler's Licens $ 100.00
Multi Family Residential Licensing/Inspection Fee
Duplex $ 75.00
3-6 Units, 1st Unit $ 75.00
3-6 Units, Additional Units $ 15.00
7-12 Units, 1st Unit $ 100.00
7-12 Units, Additional Units $ 15.00
13+ Units, 1st Unit $ 125.00
13+ Units, Additional Units $ 15.00
Sexually Oriented Businesses
Annual $ 5,000.00
Base Investigation $ 450.00
Additonal Investigation Actual Cost
Sign Permit Fee
fee Based on Valuation,
Minimum $50
*If footings are required, design needed
2 sets of detailed plans required with sizes and demensions
placement of sign and setback requirements
Work in City Right of Way
Permit $ 300.00
Refund after Clean Up $ 200.00
Water Meters
5/8" x 3/4" Actual Cost
3/4" home irrigation Actual Cost
1" Commercial Actual Cost
1 1/2" Commercial Actual Cost
Inspection Fee Actual Cost
City of St. Augusta
2019
Fee Schedule
Water
Base Fee $ 27.72
Volumetric per 1,000 gallons after 3,000 gallons/month $ 7.29
WAC Rate $ 3,000
Monthly Debt Service Charge $ 5.00
in the case where a residential lot has more than one meter, the combined usage
together and one minimum will be assessed that property owner
Fire Fill Station Water
First Use $ 30.00
Refundable Deposit $ 100.00
Volumetric per 1,000 gallons $ 3.00
Sanitary Sewer
Base Fee $ 24.69
Monthly Debt Service Charge $ 20.00
Volumetric per 1,000 gallons after 3,000 gallons/month $ 6.49
Water Supplemental Assistance Replacement Fund/1,000 gallons $ 0.50
SAC Rate $ 3,000
Summer usage to be based on average water usage for the months of December,
January and February of prior year
Storm Sewer
Residential/month $ 2.40
Multi-family/month/acre (Max $25/month) $ 15.23
Commercial-Industrial/acre/month (Max $25/month) $ 23.72
Institutional-church-ogvernment/acre/month(Max $25/month) $ 18.51
Agricultural/month $ 2.40
Shelter Rental
Kiffmeyer Park $ 125.00
Refund - Resident $ 75.00
Refund - Non-Resident $ 50.00
Hidden Lake Park $ 150.00
Refund - Resident $ 75.00
Refund - Non-Resident $ 50.00
Meeting Room Use
partial day - commercial or private use $ 50.00
full day - commercial or private $ 75.00
civic or local groups administrative discretion
Assessment Searches $ 10.00
Copies and Documents
8.5 x 11 $ 0.25
8.5 x 14 $ 0.50
City of St. Augusta
2019
Fee Schedule
11 x 17 $ 1.00
Color Maps 8.5 x 11 $ 1.50
Color Maps 11 x 17 $ 3.00
Zoning Ordinance $ 25.00
Subdivision Ordinance $ 7.50
Comprehensive Plan $ 25.00
Fax per page $ 1.50
Zoning and Land Use Escrow Total
Administrative Subdivision $ 50.00
Home Occupation Permit $ 250.00 $ 500.00
Zoning Amendment - Map or Text $ 250.00 $ 750.00
Appeals $ 250.00 $ 750.00
Conditional & Interim Use Permits $ 250.00 $ 750.00
Final Plat $ 150.00 $ 400.00
Site Plan Review $ 250.00 $ 500.00
Petition to Vacate $ 250.00 $ 500.00
Variance $ 150.00 $ 650.00
Preliminary Plat with services
First 8 Lots $ 1,000.00 $ 1,500.00
Between 8 and 50 Lots $150/lot more than 8
Greater than 50 Lots $75/lot more than 50
Preliminary Plat without services
First 8 Lots $ 800.00 $ 1,300.00
Between 8 and 50 Lots $100/lot more than 8
Greater than 50 Lots $60/lot more than 50
Subdivision Construction and Review Escrow
With Services $5,000 plus $50/lot
Without Services $2,500 plus $50/lot
Developer is to maintain a positive balance in this Escrow Account at all times
the applicant is required to pay a non-refundable base fee and escrow to be charged against the
time and expense necessary to process the request. If the review and consideration of the request
exceeds the cost covered by the escrow deposit as a consequence of lack of information, problems
or questions raised by staff, Planning Commission, or City Council, all processing of the
request will be halted until an estimation of completion is determined and a new escrow deposit made.
The City Clerk will notify the applicant of the decision following the City Council's decision and
refund any portion of the escrow deposit or bill the applicant for the balance due.
All fees must be paid at the time of application and shall be paid before issuance of a building permit
All new subdivisions must satisfy park dedication requirements (land an/or cash) as determined by
the City Council prior to City execution of the Final Plat.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-01
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 2.02 DEFINITIONS OF THE ZONING
ORDINANCE AND SECTION 22.01 RELATING TO EXPLOSIVES AND INCENDIARY
DEVICES WITHIN THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 2.02 of the Zoning Ordinance-City of St. Augusta is hereby
amended to include the following definition section related to explosives and incendiary
devices.
Explosive - Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion; that is, with substantially instantaneous
release of gas and heat capable of producing destructive effects. The term includes
devices that produce a chemical reaction that produces gas capable of bursting its
container and producing destructive effects. The term does not mean or include black
powder, smokeless powder, primers, and fuses when used for antique or replica
muzzleloading rifles, pistols, muskets, shotguns, and cannons or when possessed or
used for rifle, pistol, and shotgun ammunition, nor does it include fireworks as defined in
Minnesota Statutes Section 624.20.
Incendiary device - means a device so articulated that an ignition by fire, friction,
concussion, detonation, or other method may produce destructive effects primarily
through combustion rather than explosion. The term does not include a manufactured
device or article in common use by the general public that is designed to produce
combustion for a lawful purpose, including but not limited to matches, lighters, flares, or
devices commercially manufactured primarily for the purpose of illumination, heating, or
cooking. The term does not include firearms ammunition.
Section 2. Section 22.01 E relating to Land Filling and Land Excavation/Grading
Operations shall be amended to include the following:
The use of any explosive or incendiary device shall be prohibited in mining operations in
the City, provided, however, that the use of explosive or incendiary devices may be
used when necessary for the purpose of constructing roads or installing municipal
sanitary sewer or municipal water service.
Section 3. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this _________ day of ______________________ 2005.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _________________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-02
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 2 OF THE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
RELATED TO PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS WITHIN THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 1.11 Definitions of the Subdivision Ordinance-St. Augusta
is hereby amended to include the following definition related to Premature Subdivisions.
Premature Subdivision: Any subdivision of land within the City of St. Augusta
that does not meet the objectives of the Land Use Plan, Transportation Plan, Utility
Plan, Local Water Management Plan, or Capital Improvement Plan, as amended.
Section 2. Section 2 Procedures for Filing and Review of the Subdivision
Ordinance-St. Augusta is hereby amended to include the following section related to
Premature Subdivisions:
PREMATURE SUBDIVISION
Any sketch plan, preliminary plat, final plat deemed premature pursuant to the following
criteria shall be denied by the City Council:
Conditions for Establishing a Premature Subdivision
A subdivision may be deemed premature should any of the following conditions not be
met:
1. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan including any of the following:
a. Land use plan, as may be amended.
b. Transportation plan, as may be amended.
c. Utility (sewer and water) plans, as may be amended.
d. Local water management plan, as may be amended.
e. Capital improvement plan, as may be amended.
2. Consistency with Infill Policies. A proposed urban subdivision shall meet
the City’s infill policies:
a. At the discretion of the City Council, the cost of utilities and street
extensions must be covered by one or more of the following:
(1) An immediate assessment to the proposed subdivision.
(2) One hundred (100) percent of the street and utility costs are
privately financed by the developer.
(3) The cost of regional and/or oversized trunk utility lines can
be financed with available City trunk funds.
(4) The cost and timing of the expenditure of City funds are
consistent with the City’s capital improvement plan.
b. The developer payments will offset additional costs of utility
installation or future operation and maintenance.
3. Streets or Highways to Serve the Subdivision. A proposed subdivision
shall have adequate roads or highways when:
a. Intersections with streets or highways providing access to a
subdivision will provide or maintain a level of service (LOS)
approved by the City Engineer and City Council. Determination of
the LOS shall be in accordance with the current, approved Highway
Capacity Manual.
b. The traffic generated from a proposed subdivision shall not require
City street improvements that are inconsistent with the St. Augusta
Capital Improvement Plan or the developer shall pay to correct any
street deficiencies.
c. The existing LOS must be C or better for all streets and
intersections providing access to the subdivision. If the existing
level of service is D, E, or F, the developer must provide, as part of
the proposed project, improvements needed to ensure a level of C
or better.
d. If roads necessary to access the plat or those needed to gain
access from a County Highway are deemed inadequate by the City
Engineer or City Council due to width, weight, condition, design,
lack of turn lanes, or lack of passing lanes the Developer shall be
required to improve such roads to City standards.
e. Properties on the proposed plat can access a paved County
highway either directly or via a paved City street without a traveling
on an unpaved road.
f. Where paved roads required in part D do not exist the City may
approve the plat provided that the Developer agrees to construct
paved roads to City standards from the proposed plat to a County
Highway including all turn lanes, passing lanes, and associated
road improvements required to support the development of the plat.
4. Water Supply. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to have an
adequate water supply when:
a. The City water system has adequate wells, storage, or pipe
capacity to serve the subdivision.
b. The water utility extension is consistent with the St. Augusta Water
Plan, as may be amended, and offers the opportunity for water
main looping to serve the urban subdivision.
g. The extension of water mains will provide adequate water pressure
for personal use and fire protection.
h. Rural subdivisions shall meet the conditions of Minnesota Statute
7080, as amended.
5. Waste Disposal Systems. A proposed subdivision shall be served with
adequate waste disposal systems when:
a. The urban sewered subdivision is located inside the City’s Urban
Service Area.
b. The City has sufficient pipe capacity to serve the subdivision if
developed to its maximum density.
c. The subdivision will result in a sewer extension consistent with St.
Augusta Sewer Plan and Capital Improvement Plan, as may be
amended.
d. Rural subdivisions shall meet the conditions of Minnesota Statute
7080, as amended.
6. Drainage. A proposed subdivision shall provide a continuous public
easement acceptable to the City Engineer and the City Attorney from the
proposed plat to public waters for surface water drainage.
a. Where such a continuous public easement from the proposed plat
to public waters does not exist for surface water drainage, the City
may approve the plat provided:
i. The post-development stormwater runoff from the plat is no
greater than the pre-development stormwater runoff rate.
ii. The post-development stormwater runoff volume for a 100-
year storm event is no greater than the pre-development
stormwater runoff volume.
iii. The City determines that the drainage way from the
proposed plat is of a type that is not likely to need
maintenance in the future and the flow of stormwater through
such drainage way is not likely to become obstructed in the
future.
Section 3. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this _________ day of ______________________ 2005.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _________________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: ______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-03
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 3.02 OF THE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
RELATED TO INGRESS AND EGRESS REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE CITY OF ST.
AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 3.02 D of the Subdivision Ordinance-City of St. Augusta is
hereby amended to include the following section related to ingress and egress criteria:
Any new subdivision within all zoning districts with the exception of the A-1,
General Agricultural District and A-2, Limited Agricultural District, shall have a minimum
of two means of ingress and egress within the platted area. Any subdivision not having
two means of ingress and egress within the platted area shall be deemed a premature
subdivision. The City Council shall make the determination of the need for ingress and
egress within all minor subdivisions prior to final approval.
Section 2. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this _________ day of June 2005.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _________________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-05
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 2-2 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
RELATED TO THE LOT, BUILDABLE DEFINITION WITHIN THE CITY OF ST.
AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 2.02 Definitions of the Zoning Ordinance-City of St.
Augusta is hereby amended to include the following definition related to Lot, Buildable:
Lot, Buildable- Contiguous land area exclusive of lakes, ponds, creeks, or other
waterbodies, wetlands, drainageways, slopes in excess of 18 percent and rights-of-way.
The area shall meet or exceed all requirements within the land use plan and zoning
ordinance without the necessity of a variance.
Section 2. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this _________ day of ______________________ 2005.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _________________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _____________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-06
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 16.03 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
RELATED TO BUILDING TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION WITHIN CITY OF ST.
AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 16.03 of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby repealed in certain
sections and amended to include the following:
16.03 BUILDING TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION:
A. General Provisions.
1. Metal Buildings. No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalum or unfinished
aluminum buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to
have a corrosive designed finish such as corten steel or engineered
designed roofs of less than two-twelve (2/12) pitch shall be permitted in
any zoning district, except in association with farming operations or as
allowed by this subdivision.
2. Quality. Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of
architectural and aesthetic compatibility and harmony with surrounding
properties to ensure that they will not adversely impact the property values
of the abutting properties as intended by this Ordinance or adversely
impact the public health, safety, and general welfare.
3. Finishes. Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable
in grade and quality to the following:
a. Brick.
b. Natural stone.
c. Decorative concrete block.
d. Cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete panels.
e. Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood
of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood,
cypress.
f. Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum (nonstructural,
non-load bearing), provided such panels are factory
fabricated and finished with a durable non-fade surface and their
fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design.
g. Glass curtain wall panels.
h. Stucco.
i. Vinyl.
j. Other materials as determined by the City Building Official but not
including galvanized or unfinished metal.
B. Business and Industrial Uses and Zoning Districts.
1. For all uses within the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-W Zoning Districts, all principal
buildings which abut public rights-of-way, residential uses, and/or public
areas, shall have a decorative front on such exposure which is comprised
of at least fifty (50) percent of materials specified in Section 16.03.A.3.a-e.
Any metal finish utilized in the building shall be a minimum of twenty-six
(26) gauge steel. The roof slope shall be limited to a minimum slope of
one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot.
2. Any buildings within the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-W, I-1, and I-2 District that have
frontage onto an arterial roadway including those buildings with double
frontage or buildings located on a corner lot or arterial street as defined
within the Subdivision Ordinance shall be required to have a minimum of
fifty (50) percent materials specified in Section 16.03 A.3 a-e on all sides
of the building that abut the County Highway.
3. Within the I-1 Zoning District, exterior finish of all buildings shall comply
with Subd. 16.03 A.3. of this Ordinance. All principle buildings within I-1
and I-2 Industrial Districts which abut public rights-of-way, residential
uses, and/or public areas shall have a decorative front on such exposure
which is comprised of at least fifty (50) percent of materials specified in
Section 16.03.A.3.a-e.
4. In the I-2 Zoning District, all buildings constructed of curtain wall panels of
finished steel, aluminum or fiberglass shall be required to be faced with
brick, wood, stone, architectural concrete cast in place, pre-cast concrete
panels, or concrete block on wall surfaces abutting a public right-of-way,
residential uses, or public areas. The required wall surface treatment may
allow a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the metal or fiberglass wall to
remain exposed if it is coordinated into the architectural design.
5. The City shall require architectural plans within the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-W, I-1,
and I-2 Districts prior to building and site plan approval. The architectural
plans shall comprise of the following:
a. Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
b. Architectural elevations, in color, of all principal and accessory
buildings and structures (type, color, and materials used in all
exterior surfaces).
c. Typical floor plan and typical room plan drawn to scale with a
summary of square footage by use or activity.
5. The City may grant a deferment to the requirements of Subd. 16.03.B.2
and 16.03.B.3 of this Ordinance when a building or building addition will
be constructed in more than one (1) phase. Any such deferment shall be
processed as a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 4 of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to the following:
a. The deferment shall be until the completion of construction or five
(5) years, whichever is less.
b. Property owner shall provide the City with an irrevocable letter of
credit for an amount one and one-half (1-1/2) the City Building
Official's estimated cost of the required exterior wall treatment. The
bank and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council. The letter of credit shall assure compliance with this
section of this Ordinance.
C. Exceptions to the provisions of Subd. 16.03 of this Ordinance may be granted as
a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 4 of this Ordinance, provided that:
1. The proposed building maintains the quality and value intended by the
Ordinance.
2. The proposed building is compatible and in harmony with other existing
structures within the district and immediate geographic area.
3. The provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
Section 2. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this _________ day of ______________________ 2005.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _________________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: ____________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-07
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 3.19 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
(PARK LAND DEDICATION) OF THE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE RELATED TO
PARK DEDICATION FEES WITHIN THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 3.19 J of the Subdivision Ordinance is hereby repealed in
certain sections and amended to include the following:
J. When a subdivision is proposed, the Developer shall make a dedication of land for
public parks and trail use, as provided for in Section 3.19H of this Ordinance, or shall
pay a cash fee in lieu of such land equal to five hundred twenty-five dollars
($525.00) per dwelling unit for residential uses and one thousand four hundred
dollars ($1,400) per gross acre for commercial development and one thousand and
fifty dollars ($1,050) per gross acre for industrial development.
Said amount is the City’s best estimate of the effect of the residential subdivision on
the City’s trail system.
Section 2. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this _________ day of ______________________ 2005.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _________________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _____________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-09
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTIONS 15.04, 23.07. 45.06, 45.09, 46.06, 48.01,
51.01, 52.01 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE RELATED TO URBAN AND RURAL
SERVICE AREAS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 15.04.B.5 (Accessory Buildings, Uses and Equipment) of
the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows:
5. The combined total floor area of a detached accessory building or
buildings or detached garages shall not exceed the following maximum
area requirements:
a. Within the urban service area designated by the Comprehensive
Plan:
Lot Area Maximum Total Floor Area of All
Detached Accessory Structures
1/3 acre or smaller 480 square feet
1/3 acre to ½ acre 624 square feet
½ acre to 2/3 acre 816 square feet
2/3 acre to 1 acre 1,250 square feet
1.01 acre to 2.00 acres 1,500 square feet
2.01 to 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet
5.00 to 6.99 acres 2,500 square feet
7.00 acres or larger 4,000 square feet
c. Within the rural service area designated by the Comprehensive
Plan:
Lot Area Maximum Total Floor Area of All
Detached Accessory Structures
1.00 acre or smaller 1,250 square feet
1.01 to 2.00 acres 1,500 square feet
2.01 to 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet
5.00 to 6.99 acres 2,500 square feet
7.00 to 9.99 acres 4,000 square feet
10.00 acres or larger No Limit
2
Section 2. Section 15.04.G.2.a (Building Types and Standards) of the Zoning
Ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows:
a. The lot is within the urban service area or rural service area designated by
the Comprehensive Plan.
Section 3. Section 23.07.D (Prohibited Feedlots) of the Zoning Ordinance is
hereby amended to read as follows:
D. Prohibited Feedlots:
1 New feedlots or expansions of existing feedlots that exceed the following
cumulative number of animal units:
Maximum Number
District Designation of Animal Units
a. Urban Service Area 140
b. Rural Service Area 350
NOTE: See St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan for District Boundary
Designations. Expansions over the maximum number of animal units shall
require a permit from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and a
conditional use permit.
Section 4. Section 23.07.J.b (Feedlots - Conditional Use Permits) of the
Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows:
b. Feedlot expansions that exceed the following cumulative number of
animal units:
Animal
District Designation Units
1) Urban Service Area 140
2) Rural Service Area 350
NOTE: See St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan for district boundary
designations.
3
Section 5. Section 45.06.H (A-1 Conditional Uses) of the Zoning Ordinance is
hereby amended to read as follows:
H. As an exception to the standard density, the City will accommodate an urban
subdivision provided that utilities would be extended from the urban service area
at one hundred (100) percent of the cost being borne by the developer. Utility
costs would include trunk and lateral sanitary sewer, water, and any street
improvements that are necessary. This type of development would be evaluated
against the following criteria:
1. A Comprehensive Plan amendment would be required for development
outside of the urban service area. This will allow the Planning
Commission and City Council to review each proposed residential,
commercial, or industrial plat against the long term goals of the City.
2. The City shall make a determination if they have adequate sewer and
water capacity to accommodate the proposed development.
3. The proposed development shall be responsible for one hundred (100)
percent of the cost of extending utilities to and through the proposed
subdivision area.
4. The development shall be served by adequate streets and highways.
5. The proposed density shall be determined to be acceptable as a long
range land use for the City as evaluated against the land use policies of
the Comprehensive Plan.
6. The proposed development shall not adversely impact environmentally
sensitive areas or result in the disruption of wetlands, drainageways, or
other environmental features.
7. It will be the responsibility of any landowner or development within the
rural service area to demonstrate that their subdivision is not premature on
the basis of the aforementioned criteria and that the proposed land use
and density is appropriate for the location being proposed based on the
policies of the Comprehensive Plan. Without this demonstration, the City
would make a determination that the plat is premature and the four (4) per
forty (40) would apply.
8. Generally, rural residential subdivisions include a rural section street. To
make accommodation for pedestrian movements, the rural street section
shall include a four (4) foot paved shoulder for walking and bicycles,
exclusive of the drive lanes of the street.
4
Section 6. Section 45.09.H (A-1 Residential Divisions) of the Zoning
Ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows:
H. Maximum Density: Not greater than four (4) units per forty (40) acres. In
anticipation of future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of 4 units
per 40 acres with a minimum lot size of 1 acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be
mandatory to ensure that future City Services can be accommodated. Transfer of
development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer
area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of 40 acres shall be
required to split off 10 developable acres. A minimum of 30 acres shall be necessary to
split off 7.5 developable acres. A minimum of 20 acres shall be required to split off 5
developable acres. One lot, not to exceed 2.5 acres in size, may be split from an
existing parcel of less than 20 acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable
area satisfies the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that there is sufficient area
identified for the establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that
represents the requirements per acre.
Total Acres Maximum allowed for a lot split
40 acres 10 developable acres
30 acres 7.5 developable acres
20 acres 5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres 2.5 developable acres
Section 7. Section 46.06.G (A-2 Conditional Uses) of the Zoning Ordinance is
hereby amended to read as follows:
G. Maximum Density: Not greater than four (4) units per forty (40) acres. In
anticipation of future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of 4 units
per 40 acres with a minimum lot size of 1 acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be
mandatory to ensure that future City Services can be accommodated. Transfer of
development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer
area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of 40 acres shall be
required to split off 10 developable acres. A minimum of 30 acres shall be necessary to
split off 7.5 developable acres. A minimum of 20 acres shall be required to split off 5
developable acres. One lot, not to exceed 2.5 acres in size, may be split from an
existing parcel of less than 20 acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable
area satisfies the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that there is sufficient area
identified for the establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that
represents the requirements per acre.
Total Acres Maximum allowed for a lot split
40 acres 10 developable acres
30 acres 7.5 developable acres
20 acres 5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres 2.5 developable acres
5
Section 8. Section 46.07.B (A-2 Maximum Density) of the Zoning Ordinance is
hereby amended to read as follows:
B. Maximum Density: Not greater than four (4) units per forty (40) acres. In
anticipation of future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of 4 units
per 40 acres with a minimum lot size of 1 acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be
mandatory to ensure that future City Services can be accommodated. Transfer of
development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer
area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of 40 acres shall be
required to split off 10 developable acres. A minimum of 30 acres shall be necessary to
split off 7.5 developable acres. A minimum of 20 acres shall be required to split off 5
developable acres. One lot, not to exceed 2.5 acres in size, may be split from an
existing parcel of less than 20 acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable
area satisfies the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that there is sufficient area
identified for the establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that
represents the requirements per acre.
Total Acres Maximum allowed for a lot split
40 acres 10 developable acres
30 acres 7.5 developable acres
20 acres 5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres 2.5 developable acres
Section 9. Section 48.01 (R-1 Purpose) of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby
amended to read as follows:
48.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the R-1, Suburban Residential District is to provide
for low to medium density single family detached dwelling units and directly related,
complementary uses in areas designated as the rural service area by the
Comprehensive Plan.
Section 10. Section 48.06.D (Conditional Uses) of the Zoning Ordinance is
deleted in its entirety.
Section 11. Section 48.07.B (Density). Not greater than one (1) dwelling unit
per forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet. In anticipation of future urban
development, the City shall allow interim densities of 4 units per 40 acres with a
minimum lot size of 1 acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be mandatory to ensure
that future City Services can be accommodated. Transfer of development rights shall
be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer area occurs is contiguous
and of common ownership. A minimum of 40 acres shall be required to split off 10
developable acres. A minimum of 30 acres shall be necessary to split off 7.5
developable acres. A minimum of 20 acres shall be required to split off 5 developable
acres. One lot, not to exceed 2.5 acres in size, may be split from an existing parcel of
less than 20 acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable area satisfies the
6
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that there is sufficient area identified for the
establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that represents the
requirements per acre.
Total Acres Maximum allowed for a lot split
40 acres 10 developable acres
30 acres 7.5 developable acres
20 acres 5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres 2.5 developable acres
Section 12. Section 48.08.D (R-1 Lot Coverage and Height) of the Zoning
Ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows:
a. Within the urban service area designated by the Comprehensive Plan.
Lot Area Maximum Total Floor Area of
All Detached Accessory
Structures
1.00 acre or smaller 1,250 square feet
1.01 to 2.00 acres 1,500 square feet
2.01 to 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet
5.00 to 6.99 acres 2,500 square feet
7.00 acres or larger 4,000 square feet
b. Within the rural service area designated by the Comprehensive Plan.
Lot Area Maximum Total Floor Area of
All Detached Accessory
Structures
1.00 acre or smaller 1,250 square feet
1.01 to 2.00 acres 1,500 square feet
2.01 to 4.99 acres 2,000 square feet
5.00 to 6.99 acres 2,500 square feet
7.00 to 9.99 acres 4,000 square feet
10.00 acres or larger No Limit
Section 13. 48.08 E. Density. In anticipation of future urban development, the
City shall allow interim densities of 4 units per 40 acres with a minimum lot size of 1
acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be mandatory to ensure that future City
Services can be accommodated. Transfer of development rights shall be allowed
provided the properties upon which the transfer area occurs is contiguous and of
common ownership. A minimum of 40 acres shall be required to split off 10
developable acres. A minimum of 30 acres shall be necessary to split off 7.5
developable acres. A minimum of 20 acres shall be required to split off 5 developable
acres. One lot, not to exceed 2.5 acres in size, may be split from an existing parcel of
less than 20 acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable area satisfies the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that there is sufficient area identified for the
7
establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that represents the
requirements per acre.
Total Acres Maximum allowed for a lot split
40 acres 10 developable acres
30 acres 7.5 developable acres
20 acres 5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres 2.5 developable acres
Section 14. Section 50.07 Lot Area and Setback Requirements. In anticipation
of future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of 4 units per 40
acres with a minimum lot size of 1 acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be
mandatory to ensure that future City Services can be accommodated. Transfer of
development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer
area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of 40 acres shall be
required to split off 10 developable acres. A minimum of 30 acres shall be necessary to
split off 7.5 developable acres. A minimum of 20 acres shall be required to split off 5
developable acres. One lot, not to exceed 2.5 acres in size, may be split from an
existing parcel of less than 20 acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable
area satisfies the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that there is sufficient area
identified for the establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that
represents the requirements per acre.
Total Acres Maximum allowed for a lot split
40 acres 10 developable acres
30 acres 7.5 developable acres
20 acres 5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres 2.5 developable acres
Section 15. Section 51.01 (R-4 Purpose) of the Zoning Ordinance is thereby
amended to read as follows:
51.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the R-4, Medium Density Residential District is to
provide for low to moderate density through the mixture of one and two unit medium
density dwellings and directly related complementary uses. The allowance of such uses
and establishment of the district is dependent upon the availability of publicly controlled
sanitary sewer service and only within portions of the City which have been designated
as urban service areas by the Comprehensive Plan.
Section 16. 51.07.D Lot Area and Setback Requirements In anticipation of
future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of 4 units per 40 acres
with a minimum lot size of 1 acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be mandatory to
ensure that future City Services can be accommodated. Transfer of development rights
shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer area occurs is
8
contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of 40 acres shall be required to split
off 10 developable acres. A minimum of 30 acres shall be necessary to split off 7.5
developable acres. A minimum of 20 acres shall be required to split off 5 developable
acres. One lot, not to exceed 2.5 acres in size, may be split from an existing parcel of
less than 20 acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable area satisfies the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that there is sufficient area identified for the
establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that represents the
requirements per acre.
Total Acres Maximum allowed for a lot split
40 acres 10 developable acres
30 acres 7.5 developable acres
20 acres 5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres 2.5 developable acres
Section 17. Section 52.01 (R-5 Purpose) of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby
amended to read as follows:
52.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the R-5, High Density Residential District is to
provide for high density housing and directly related complementary uses. The
allowance of such uses are dependent upon the availability of publicly controlled
sanitary sewer service and only within portions of the City which have been designated
as urban service areas by the Comprehensive Plan.
Section 18. Section 52.07 D Lot Area and Setback Requirements: In
anticipation of future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of 4 units
per 40 acres with a minimum lot size of 1 acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be
mandatory to ensure that future City Services can be accommodated. Transfer of
development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer
area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of 40 acres shall be
required to split off 10 developable acres. A minimum of 30 acres shall be necessary to
split off 7.5 developable acres. A minimum of 20 acres shall be required to split off 5
developable acres. One lot, not to exceed 2.5 acres in size, may be split from an
existing parcel of less than 20 acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable
area satisfies the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that there is sufficient area
identified for the establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that
represents the requirements per acre.
Total Acres Maximum allowed for a lot split
40 acres 10 developable acres
30 acres 7.5 developable acres
20 acres 5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres 2.5 developable acres
9
Section 19. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this __________ day of _________________ 2005.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _______________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
ORDINANCE #2005-11
ESTABLISHING PLANNING COMMISSION POLICY
ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE APPROVING POLICY THAT DEFINES THE ESTABLISHMENT,
COMPOSITION, PURPOSE, ORGANIZATION AND WORK RULES FOR THE ST.
AUGUSTA PLANNING COMMISSION
BE IT ORDAINED THAT THE CITY COUNCIL OF
ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY ESTABLISHES THE FOLLOWING POLICY
A. Establishment. The Planning Commission hereafter established may be
abolished by a four-fifths vote of the City Council. The Planning Commission
shall be appointed by the City Council.
B. Composition.
1. Number. The Planning Commission may consist of up to seven members
appointed by the City Council. Before taking office, every appointed
Planning Commissioner shall take an oath to faithfully perform the
Planning Commission rules.
2. Term. Unless sooner removed by four-fifths vote of the City Council,
Planning Commission members shall serve three year terms, starting in
the following sequence and appointed again in three year cycles:
a. Three member position shall be appointed to a three year term
beginning in 2006.
b. Two member positions shall be appointed to a three year term
beginning in 2007.
c. Two member positions shall be appointed to a three year term
beginning in 2008.
Current members shall hold their positions until the appointment date
unless sooner removed by the City Council.
3. Planning Commission members may be removed for any reason by a
four-fifths vote of the City Council.
C. Purpose. The St. Augusta Planning Commission acts as an advisory group to
the St. Augusta City Council. It is authorized to carry on City planning activities
related to the study, review, and evaluation of:
Planning Commission Work Rules
City of St. Augusta
1. The St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan.
2. The St. Augusta Zoning Ordinance text and/or map amendments.
3. Review of development applications including, but not limited to, zoning
amendments, conditional use permits, site and building plan review, and
variances.
4. Plat and subdivision review.
5. Community Development Committee.
6. Other City planning activities assigned or requested by the City Council.
D. Organization.
1. Offices. Annually, the Planning Commission shall elect a chair person
and vice chair person.
2. Duties of the Officers:
a. Chair.
1) The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Commission.
2) The Chair shall preserve order and decorum and shall
decide questions of order
3) The Chair shall appoint all assignment areas unless
otherwise requested by a majority.
4) The Chair with the approval of the City Administrator may
call special meetings. A posting of the meeting shall be
done according to required Statutes and shall include a
statement of the purpose of such meeting.
5) The Chair shall be responsible to have the staff report on the
status of previous recommendations made to the Council,
stating the Planning Commission’s recommendation and
Council action.
b. Vice-Chair. The Vice-Chair shall preside at all meetings in the
absence of the Chair.
E. Work Rules.
1. The first Monday after the first Tuesday shall be considered regularly
scheduled official meeting night.
a. The Planning Commission will meet on the first Monday after the
first Tuesday of each month.
b. In the event that there are more Planning Commission cases than
can reasonably be concluded by 10:00 PM, the Chair and the
Planning Commission shall be empowered to extend the meeting
Planning Commission Work Rules
City of St. Augusta
time or schedule another meeting during the same month to take
care of the overload.
c. The Chair and/or planning staff shall have prerogative to cancel or
postpone any regularly scheduled meetings.
2. All public hearings shall be held at the City Hall or Officially Noticed
location. All meetings shall be called at 7:00 PM and shall conclude at
11:00 PM unless waived by the majority. Any business unfinished at the
scheduled closing time may be taken up at a subsequent meeting
designated by the Chair.
3. The Commission, at the first regular meeting of the new year, shall elect
from its group, a Chair and a Vice-Chair.
4. A majority of four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. In the absence
of a quorum, the minority shall adjourn any item of business requiring
official Commission action, to a specified time.
5. A member may be excused from an individual meeting for reason of
illness, work, out-of-town trips, or other justifiable reason.
6. In the absence of the Chair and Vice-Chair, the remaining members shall
elect a Temporary Chair for that respective meeting.
7. The Chair shall call the meeting to order and the Secretary to the
Commission shall call the roll and announce a quorum.
8. The order of business shall be as follows unless amended by the Chair:
a. Call to order.
b. Roll call.
c. Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting.
d. Public hearings/board of appeals.
1) Old business.
2) New business.
e. Other items of concern.
1) Discussion items.
2) Information items.
f. Adjournment.
9. The following statement shall be printed on all agendas:
“MISSION STATEMENT:
The Planning Commission is an advisory body to the City Council. One of
the Commission’s functions is to hold public hearings and make
Planning Commission Work Rules
City of St. Augusta
recommendations to the City Council. The City Council makes all final
decisions on these matters.
The Planning Commission reviews development applications and
evaluates all applications for consistency with St. Augusta’s
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Guidelines and Development regulations.
City Ordinances require that certain documents and information be
included in applications. The Planning Commission may postpone
consideration of an application that is incomplete and may for other
reasons postpone final action on an application.
For each agenda item the Commission will receive reports prepared by
the City Staff, open the hearing to the public if required, and discuss and
act on the application.”
10. All recommendations shall be sent to the Council by means of written
minutes, and shall include the record of the division of votes on each
recommendation.
11. Minutes of the meetings shall be recorded and kept by the Planning Staff.
12. All meetings shall be public.
13. Any resolution or motion, except motion to adjourn, postpone, reconsider,
table, or call the previous questions, shall be reduced to writing if
requested by the Chair.
14. Any resolution or motion may be withdrawn at any time before action is
taken on it.
15. When a question is under debate, no other motion shall be entertained
except to table, or to call for the question, action on the question,
postpone, refer to committee, or amend. Motions shall take precedence in
that order and the first two shall be without debate.
16. All motions shall be carried by a majority vote of the members present,
except call for the question. Any member of the Commission may call for
a roll call vote on any issue.
17. Only members recognized by the Chair can make motions.
18. Speaking without recognition of the Chair shall be cause for another
member to call “point of order” and the member speaking out of turn must
relinquish the floor.
Planning Commission Work Rules
City of St. Augusta
19. “Call for the question” or “previous question” is a motion and must be
seconded. It is not debatable and must be voted upon immediately. A
two-thirds majority is necessary to call the previous question. If the twothirds
majority is given, the motion or question on the floor must be
immediately put to a vote without debate except for a motion to table.
20. “Question” is not a motion but only an indication to the Chair that the
person making statement is ready to have the motion or question put to a
vote.
21. The Chair may direct that a motion be divided if requested by a member.
22. Members must limit their remarks to the subject matter being discussed
and shall not be repetitious. The speaking order shall be at the discretion
of the Chair, however, all members shall be allowed to speak in their turn.
23. Any member, who shall be absent without leave of absence for two
consecutive unexcused meetings, shall receive a reminder from the
clerical secretary assigned by the City, as directed by the Chair. Upon
three consecutive unexcused absences, he/she may be recommended to
the City Council for replacement.
24. Any member having a direct financial and/or direct personal interest or
conflict in an individual action under consideration by the Commission
shall excuse himself/herself from the Commission and not vote on that
particular matter. Said member will have the same rights as any citizen
who has an interest in any action being considered by the Planning
Commission.
25. These rules may be repealed or amended by a majority vote of the St.
Augusta City Council. Amendments to these rules may be initiated by
recommendation of the St. Augusta Planning Commission.
F. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and
publication.
ADOPTED this 16th day of August 2005.
_______________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
Planning Commission Work Rules
City of St. Augusta
___________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Clerk/Administrator
1
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
COUNTY OF STEARNS
STATE OF MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-12
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE
ENFORCEMENT OF CODE REGULATIONS
The City Council of the City of St. Augusta ordains as follows:
SECTION 1. Administrative Enforcement of Code and Ordinance Regulations.
Subd. 1. Purpose and Intent. The Administrative enforcement procedures
established within this Ordinance are intended to provide the City of St. Augusta with
an informal, cost-effective and more efficient alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil litigation for certain violations of the adopted City Code and City Ordinances.
The City of St. Augusta retains the right, at its sole discretion, to enforce provisions
of its Code and Ordinances by bringing criminal charges or commencing civil
litigation in any case where the City determines it is appropriate or necessary, but
finds that an administrative process is beneficial to the residents of the City and
further finds that that such a process is a legitimate and necessary alternative method
of enforcing Code or Ordinance violations.
Subd. 2 Definitions.
A. Code Compliance Officer. Is any officer of the Stearns County Sheriff’s
Department, any employee of the City of St. Augusta, or any person or company
contracted to provide code enforcement services who has received official
authority by the St. Augusta City Council to enforce the City Code and
Ordinances. There may be more than one person designated as Code Compliance
Officer at any given time.
B. Code Offense. Is a violation of any section, subdivision, paragraph or provision
of the St. Augusta City Code or any St. Augusta City Ordinance and is subject to
a civil penalty determined according to a schedule adopted by Resolution of the
St. Augusta City Council from time to time and payable directly to the City
Treasurer. Each day the violation exists constitutes a separate Code Offense.
C. Owner. Is an individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal
ownership interest in land, buildings, structures, dwelling unit(s) or other
property.
2
D. Person. Means a natural person of either sex, a firm, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, any other association of people, and includes the
manager or agent of that person or organization.
Subd. 3 Procedure.
A. Administrative Notice. A Code Compliance Officer may issue, either in person
or by United States first class mail, an Administrative Notice to a person
suspected or known to have committed a Code Offense and/or to be the owner of
property upon which a Code Offense is being committed. The Administrative
Notice shall identify the Code Offense, the location upon which the Code Offense
occurred or is occurring, and the recommended corrective action for the Code
Offense. The Administrative Notice may also state that the alleged violator has, at
the discretion of the Code Compliance Officer, up to fifteen (15) days to correct
or abate the Code Offense. If the alleged violator and/or owner of property upon
which a Code Offense is being committed is unable to correct or abate the Code
Offense within the prescribed time, that person may request in writing an
extension of no more than 30 additional days from the Code Compliance Officer.
Any extension granted by the Code Compliance Officer shall be in writing and
shall specifically state the date of expiration. If the Code Offense is not corrected
or abated, as outlined in the Administrative Notice, within the prescribed time or
any extension thereto, the Code Compliance Officer may issue a citation, as
provided below.
B. Citation. A Code Compliance Officer is authorized to issue a citation upon the
belief that a Code Offense has occurred, whether or not an Administrative Notice
has first been issued in regard to said Code Offense. The citation shall be given to
the person responsible for the violation and/or to the owner of the property upon
which the violation has occurred, either by personal service or by United States
first class mail. Said citation shall state the nature of the Code Offense, the time
and date said Code Offense occurred, the civil penalty applicable to that Code
Offense as set forth in a schedule of civil penalties which shall be adopted by
Resolution of the City Council from time to time, and the manner for paying the
civil penalty or requesting a hearing before a Hearing Officer to contest the
citation.
C. Responding to a Citation / Payment. Once a citation is issued, the alleged
violator and/or the owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred
shall, within fifteen (15) days of the time of issuance of the citation, either pay the
civil penalty set forth in the citation or request a hearing in writing according to
the procedure set forth in this Section. The civil penalty may be paid either in
person at City Hall, or by United States first class mail, postage prepaid and
postmarked within said prescribed fifteen (15) days. Payment of the civil penalty
shall be deemed to be an admission of the Code Offense.
Subd. 4 Appeal to Hearing Officer.
3
A. Requesting a Hearing. Any person contesting a citation issued pursuant to this
Chapter may, within fifteen (15) days of the time of issuance of the citation,
request a hearing before a Hearing Officer. Any request for a hearing before a
Hearing Officer shall be made in writing on a form provided by the City for such
a request and either delivered personally to the City at City Hall or mailed to the
City by United States first class mail, postage prepaid and postmarked within said
prescribed fifteen (15) days. The hearing shall be held at City Hall within thirty
(30) days of the date the City received a timely written notice that a hearing has
been requested. Failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the violator’s
rights to an administrative hearing and an admission of the violation. A hearing
officer may waive this result upon good cause shown. A determination of good
cause shall be made by the Hearing Officer, but does specifically not include
forgetfulness or intentional delay.
B. Hearing Officer. The City Council shall by Resolution from time to time appoint
a list of persons authorized to act as a Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer is
authorized to conduct an informal hearing to determine if a Code Offense has
occurred. The Hearing officer may be compensated by the City for such hearings
and related findings. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to uphold or
dismiss the citation or reduce, stay or waive the civil penalty imposed upon such
terms and conditions as the Hearing Officer shall determine. The Hearing
Officer’s decision shall be made in writing on a form provided by the City for
such purpose. A copy of the Hearing Officer’s decision shall be served by United
States first class mail upon the person requesting the hearing. The Hearing
Officer’s decision is final, except for appeal of the Hearing Officer’s decision in
limited cases to the City Council, as set forth below.
C. Conduct of Hearing. At the hearing, the parties will have the opportunity to
present testimony, documents and exhibits and question witnesses. The Hearing
Officer shall tape record the proceedings and receive testimony and exhibits.
Strict rules of evidence will not apply. The Hearing Officer must receive and give
weight to evidence, including hearsay evidence, that possesses probative value
commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs.
Subd. 5 Appeal of Hearing Officer Decision.
A. The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be appealable to the City Council only for
the following matters:
1. an alleged failure to obtain a required permit, license, or other approval
from the City Council as required by the City Code;
4
2. an alleged violation of a permit, license, or other approval, or the
conditions attached to the permit, license or approval, that was issued by
the City Council; or
3. an alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity who has
received a license issued by the City Council.
B. An appeal to the City Council of the Hearing Officer’s decision must be made in
writing on a form provided by the city for such an appeal and must be served on
the City Clerk by United States first class mail, postage prepaid, within ten (10)
days after the date of the Hearing Officer’s decision.
C. A timely appeal will be heard by the City Council after a notice of hearing is
served by the City upon the appellant in person or by certified mail at least ten
(10) days in advance of the date of the hearing. The parties to the hearing will
have an opportunity to present oral or written arguments regarding the Hearing
Officer’s decision.
D. The City Council shall consider the record, the Hearing Officer’s decision, and
any additional arguments before making a determination. The City Council is not
bound by the Hearing Officer’s decision, but may adopt all or part of the Hearing
Officer’s decision. The City Council’s decision may be voted upon and given at
the hearing or may be given in writing within fifteen (15) days of the hearing.
E. The failure of the appellant to appear in front of the City Council or participate in
the appeal constitutes a waiver of the violator’s right of appeal and an admission
of the violation. The Council may waive the result upon good cause shown. The
determination of a showing of good cause shown shall be made solely at the
discretion of the City Council but does not include forgetfulness and intentional
delay.
Subd. 6 Failure to Pay.
A. In the event a person charged with a Code Offense fails to pay the civil penalty
and correct or abate the Code Offense for which a citation was issued within the
prescribed time, a late charge of fifteen percent (15%) shall be imposed thereon
for each seven (7) days the civil penalty remains unpaid and the Code Offense
remains uncorrected or unabated beyond the due date.
B. An unpaid civil penalty and accrued late charges will constitute a personal
obligation of the person(s)to whom the citation was issued and the City shall have
the right to collect such unpaid civil penalty and accrued late charges, together
with the City’s costs and reasonable attorney’s fees, in criminal or civil
proceedings.
5
D. Pursuant to Minn. Stat. Chapter 429.101., Minn. Stat. Chapter 514.67 and other
applicable law, a lien in the amount of the civil penalty and any accrued late
charges may be assessed against the property where the Code Offense occurred
and collected in the same manner as taxes. Any such assessment shall not
preclude the City from issuing additional citations for a continuing Code Offense,
nor shall it preclude the City from making additional assessments against the
same property resulting from a continuing or new Code Offense.
E. The City may suspend or revoke a license or permit or other approval associated
with the Code Offense if the civil penalty and accrued late charges are not timely
paid.
Subd. 7 Subsequent Violations. If a second citation for a Code Offense is issued by
the City to the alleged violator and/or owner of the property upon which the violation has
occurred within twenty four (24) months of the issuance of a previous citation for the
same Code Offense, the civil penalty shall increase by 25% over the scheduled civil
penalty amount. If a third citation for a Code Offense is issued by the City to the alleged
violator and/or the owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred within
twenty four (24) months of the issuance of a previous citation for the same Code Offense,
the civil penalty shall increase by 50% over the scheduled civil penalty amount. If a
fourth citation for a Code Offense is issued by the City to the alleged violator and/or the
owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred within twenty-four (24)
months of the issuance of a previous citation for the same Code Offense, the civil penalty
shall increase by 100% over the scheduled civil penalty amount.
SECTION 2: This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication
according to law.
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of St. Augusta, Stearns County, Minnesota
this ____day of November, 2005.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
_____________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
_____________________________
William McCabe, City Clerk
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-03
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO ABANDONED
OR JUNK VEHICLES
THE CITY COUNCIL OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY ORDAINS:
The City Council of St. Augusta, Minnesota ordains:
Section 1. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Words and phrases: For the purpose of this ordinance, the following
words and phrases have the meaning given to them in this section.
Subd. 2. Abandoned motor vehicle: Means a motor vehicle, as defined in
Minnesota Statutes, Section 169.01, that has remained for a period of more than 48
hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or has remained for a
period of more than 48 hours on private property without the consent of the person in
control of such property or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial
further use consistent with its usual functions unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or
storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner
to and accepted by a unit of government or its agent. A classic car or pioneer car, as
defined in Section 168.10, Minnesota Statutes, shall not be considered an abandoned
motor vehicle within the meaning of this ordinance. Vehicles on the premises of junk
yards and automobile graveyards, which are defined, maintained and licensed in
accordance with Section 161.242, Minnesota Statutes, or which are licensed and
maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations shall not be considered
abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning of this ordinance. A junk vehicle shall be
considered to be an abandoned vehicle for the purpose of this ordinance.
Subd. 3. Junk vehicle: means a motor vehicle, including a trailer or other motor
vehicle accessory which attaches to a motor vehicle which:
(a) is not in operable condition, or
(b) is partially dismantled, or
(c) is used for sale of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for
other vehicles, or
(d) has expired license plates, or
(e) is kept for scrapping, dismantling, or salvage of any kind, unless such vehicle
is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.
Subd. 4. Private property: means all property not defined as public property in
Subdivision 5.
Subd. 5. Public property: means property in control of any government or its
agencies, including that portion of the right of way between the traveled portion of a
2
street and the adjacent property line.
Subd. 6. Street: means any public street, avenue, road, alley, or highway located in
the city limits and established for the use of vehicles.
Subd. 7. Unclaimed vehicle: means any impounded vehicle not claimed by, or for
any reason not released to, the owner thereof within 15 days after notice is mailed to
him or such notice is published as provided herein.
Subd. 8. Vital component parts: means those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the
motor, drive train, and wheels.
Section 2. Vehicles Constituting a Public Nuisance
Subd. 1 Abandoned and junk vehicles are declared to be an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to health and safety of the public because they invite plundering,
create fire hazards, and attract vermin. The accumulation and outside storage of such
vehicles is determined to be in the nature of rubbish, litter and unsightly debris, and a
detriment to the environment and may be abated as provided herein or as provided
under Ordinance 2002-03 of the City of St. Augusta or the statutes of the State of
Minnesota.
Subd. 2 Any vehicle, whether occupied or not, that is found stopped, standing or
parked in violation of any ordinance or Minnesota statute, or that is found impeding
public safety efforts is declared to be public nuisance and may be removed from public
property without prior notice or abated by removal from private property with the
consent of the property owner or vehicle owner.
Section 3. Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Any person
who violates any provision of this ordinance may also be subject to an administrative fine
of $____________ per violation pursuant to City ordinance No. 2005-12, titled An
Ordinance To Provide For Administrative Enforcement Of Code Regulations. Every day
that the offense occurs shall be deemed a separate violation of this ordinance.
Section 4. Effective Date
This ordinance becomes effective upon its passage and publication according to
law.
ADOPTED this __________ day of _________________ 2006.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _______________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
3
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-04
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 3 OF THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING ORDINANCE TO
PROVIDE A CHANGE IN ZONING CLASSIFICATION FROM R-1 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL
TO B-W, BUSINESS WAREHOUSE
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING
ORDINANCE IS HEREBY AMENDED TO REZONE THE FOLLOWING LEGALLY DESCRIBED
PROPERTY FROM R-1, SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL TO B-W, BUSINESS WAREHOUSE.
LEGAL DESCRIPTION
Section 12, Township 123, Range 28: south 56 feet of lot 3 and all of lot 4, Meyers Subdivision.
SECTION 2. THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR IS HEREBY DIRECTED TO MAKE THE
APPROPRIATE CHANGE TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
TO REFLECT THE CHANGE IN ZONING CLASSIFICATION AS SET FORTH ABOVE.
SECTION 3. THIS REZONING SHALL BE IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECTIVE
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING PASSAGE AND PUBLICATION AND SHALL BE CONSISTENT
WITH THE CITY’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
Approved by the St. Augusta City Council this _______day of May, 2006.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
BY:_________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
_______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-06
AN ORDINANCE ADDING SECTION 15.04 G. 3 IN ORDER TO ALLOW POLE
BUILDINGS, AS DEFINED UNDER THE ORDINANCE, TO BE ALLOWED AS A
PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE WITHIN THE R-1 DISTRICT.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 15.04 G.3 of the City Code is hereby added to the Ordinance
and shall read as follows:
Pole buildings, as defined by this Ordinance, are allowed as a permitted
accessory structure within the R-1 District provided that:
a. The lot on which the building is to be located is five (5) acres or
larger.
b. The exterior of the building shall be of steel or aluminum, factory finished with
a durable non-fade surface and their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant
design. Galvanized or unfinished metal exteriors shall be prohibited.
c. The pole building shall be located to meet all setback requirements and size
restrictions of the ordinance.
d. A certificate of compliance or administrative permit shall be applied for and
approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. The location and exterior
finish of the pole building shall be placed upon the consent agenda during the
next available City Council meeting for approval.
Section 2. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon
its passage and publication.
ADOPTED by the Mayor and City Council of St. Augusta, Minnesota this 15th day of
AUGUST, 2006
BY:___________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
____________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-06
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 3 OF THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING
ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE A CHANGE IN ZONING CLASSIFICATION FROM R-1
SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL TO A-2, LIMITED AGRICULTURE
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING
ORDINANCE IS HEREBY AMENDED TO REZONE THE FOLLOWING LEGALLY
DESCRIBED PROPERTY FROM R-1, SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL TO A-2, LIMITED
AGRICULTURE.
LEGAL DESCRIPTION
All lots within the Solar Acres Plat
SECTION 2. THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR IS HEREBY DIRECTED TO MAKE
THE APPROPRIATE CHANGE TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF
ST. AUGUSTA TO REFLECT THE CHANGE IN ZONING CLASSIFICATION AS SET
FORTH ABOVE.
SECTION 3. THIS REZONING SHALL BE IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECTIVE
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING PASSAGE AND PUBLICATION AND SHALL BE
CONSISTENT WITH THE CITY’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
Approved by the St. Augusta City Council this _______day of September, 2006.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
BY:_________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-08
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTIONS 15.04 B. 3 AND 16.07 B. OF THE ST.
AUGUSTA ZONING ORDINANCE TO REGULATE BREEZEWAYS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 15.04 B. 3 of the City Code is hereby amended and shall read
as follows:
For lots less than five (5) acres, no building permit shall be issued for more than
one (1) detached accessory building or detached garage for each single family
dwelling. Buildings attached by a breezeway or other similar method where there
is not a continuous frost depth foundation and fully enclosed attachment meeting
all the standards of Section 16.07 is a detached building for the purpose of this
ordinance.
Section 2. Section 16.07 B. of the City Code is hereby amended and shall read
as follows:
Not be less than thirty (30) feet in length and not less than twenty-four (24) feet in
width over that entire minimum length. Width measurements shall not take
account of overhang and other projections beyond the principal walls. Dwellings
shall also meet the minimum floor area requirements as set out in this Ordinance.
No room, hallway, breezeway, or other similar attachment to a dwelling that is
less than ten (10) feet in width and is connected to an accessory building or
garage may be greater than sixteen (16) feet in length. No such room, hallway,
breezeway or other similar attachment to a dwelling that is connected to an
accessory building or garage may be narrower than six (6) feet in width.
Section 3. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon
its passage and publication.
ADOPTED by the Mayor and City Council of St. Augusta, Minnesota this 5th day of
Decenber, 2006
BY:___________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
____________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-01
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1999-1 TITLED
“ORDINANCE PROHIBITING DOGS AND CATS FROM
RUNNING AT LARGE AND PROHIBITING VICIOUS DOGS”
The City Council of the City of St. Augusta, Stearns County, Minnesota, ordains:
Section 1. Section 1 of Ordinance No. 1999-1 is hereby amended to add paragraph D as
follows:
D. “Habitually Barking Dog” means any dog that (i) barks, whines, cries or makes
other similar such noises for a period of five minutes or more, with less than 1
minute intervals between noises and (ii) such noises are audible off of the
Owner’s property or premises, or such other property or premises upon which the
dog is kept.
Section 2. Section 2 of Ordinance No. 1999-1 is hereby amended to delete the existing
text of said Section 2 and replace it with the following text:
Section 2. Noisy Animals. Habitually Barking Dogs are hereby declared a public
nuisance. No owner shall keep or harbor a Habitually Barking Dog within the
City of St. Augusta. An Owner of a Habitually Barking Dog shall be subject to
the penalties provided in section thirteen (13) below.
Passed by the St. Augusta City Council this 2nd day of January, 2007.
This ordinance shall be effective upon passage and publication in the official City
newspaper.
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
William R. McCabe, Clerk/Administrator
Adopted September 16, 2003
ORDINANCE No. 2003-162007-02
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING #2003-16, ESTABLISHINGWHICH ESTABLISHED
SANITARY WATER RATES FOR THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA, HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Water Rate. The following rates are hereby established for charges made
to the users of the sanitary sewer system of the City of St. Augusta, Minnesota:
A. Minimum Monthly Fee. Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall pay a
minimum monthly charge of $17.02 per month. This Minimum Monthly Fee includes
water consumption of up to three thousand (3,000) gallons per month, as measured by the
premises water meter.
B. B. Volume Fee. Each customer of the municipal water system shall pay
$4.10 per one thousand gallons of municipal water consumed for all amounts
greater than 3,000 gallons per month, as measured by the premises water meter.
C. Amending Fees. These fees can be changed from time to time by resolution of
the City Council.
Section 2. Payment of Water Fees. Bills for water consumption shall be rendered
on a monthly basis succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and shall be due 20
days from the date of rendering. Any bill not paid in full 30 days after the due date will be
considered delinquent. At that time the city shall notify the delinquent owner/occupant in
writing regarding the delinquent bill and subsequent penalty. The penalty shall be computed at
10% of the original bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every quarter the bill is
outstanding.
A. Delinquent Accounts, Disconnection and Other Provisions. The provisions of the
Sewer Use Ordinance, Ordinance No. 2003-09, shall apply to all delinquent payments or
accounts, disconnection from service and any and all other provisions.
Section 3. Severability. Should any section, paragraph, provision, sentence or lesser
part of this Ordinance be found invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, then such invalid
section, paragraph, provision, sentence or phrase shall be severed from this Ordinance and all
remaining portions or this Ordinance shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 4. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon passage and
publication in the official newspaper as provided by law.
PASSED by the City Council of the City of St. Augusta this 16th 17th day of SeptemberJanuary,
20032007.
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Indent: First line: 0.5"
Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Hanging: 0.5"
Formatted: No underline
Formatted: Underline
Adopted September 16, 2003
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
Ollie MondlochB. J. Kroll, Mayor
Attest:
Aaron AndWilliam R. McCabeerson, City Clerk – Administrator
Approved August 17, 2004
ORDINANCE No. 2004-122007-03
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 2004-12. WHICH ESTABLISHINGED
SANITARY SEWER USE RATES FOR THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA, HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Sanitary Sewer Use Rate. The following rates are hereby established for
charges made to the users of the sanitary sewer system of the City of St. Augusta, Minnesota:
A. Minimum Monthly Fee. Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall pay a
minimum monthly charge of $14.30 per month. This Minimum Monthly Fee includes
sanitary sewer usage up to three thousand (3,000) gallons per month, as measured by the
premises water meter.
B. Volume Fee. Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall pay $2.90 per one
thousand gallons of sanitary sewer usage for all amounts greater than 3,000 gallons per
month, as measured by the premises water meter.
C. Commercial, Industrial, Other Non-Domestic Users. The City of St Augusta shall
establish a sanitary sewer use rate for any user of the city’s sanitary sewer system that
meets the criteria set out in the §360.40 of the Sewer Use Ordinance, Ordinance No.
2003-05, as may be amended from time to time.
D. Seasonal Adjustment . For the months of June, July, August, and September the
sewer use charge for residential sewer users shall be based on their average usage for the
months of December, January and February of the preceding year.
D.1. 2004 Seasonal Adjustment. The Volume Fee for residential users for the
months of July, August and September, 2004, shall be $1.53 per one thousand
gallons of sanitary sewer usage for all amounts greater than 3,000 gallons per
month, as measured by the premises water meter.
E. Amending Fees. These fees can be modified or changed from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
Section 2. Payment of Sewer Use Fees. Bills for sewer service charges shall be
rendered on a monthly basis succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and shall
be due 20 days from the date of rendering. Any bill not paid in full 30 days after the due date
will be considered delinquent. At that time the city shall notify the delinquent owner/occupant in
writing regarding the delinquent bill and subsequent penalty. The penalty shall be computed at
10% of the original bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every month the bill is
outstanding.
Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", First line: 0.5"
Formatted: Indent: Hanging: 0.5"
Approved August 17, 2004
A. Delinquent Accounts, Disconnection and Other Provisions. The provisions of the
Sewer Use Ordinance, Ordinance No. 2003-05, shall apply to all delinquent payments or
accounts, disconnection from service and any and all other provisions.
Section 3. Severability. Should any section, paragraph, provision, sentence or lesser
part of this Ordinance be found invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, then such invalid
section, paragraph, provision, sentence or phrase shall be severed from this Ordinance and all
remaining portions or this Ordinance shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 4. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon passage and
publication in the official newspaper as provided by law.
PASSED by the City Council of the City of St. Augusta this 17th 16th day of AugustJanuary, 20047
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
Aaron AndersonWilliam R. McCabe, City Clerk – Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-04
AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING KEY BOXES FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT
ACCESS AT MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL,
AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES
In the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, the City Council of St.
Augusta, Minnesota hereby ordains:
Section 1. Key Box
When access to or within a multi-housing building of three (3) or more units or other
multi-housing, commercial or industrial structure, or an area is unduly difficult because
of secured openings, or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting
purposes, the chief of the fire department may require a key box to be installed in an
accessible location. The key box shall be a type approved by the chief of the fire
department and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the chief of the
fire department.
Section 2. Effective Date
This ordinance becomes effective upon its passage and publication according to law.
ADOPTED this 20th day of March 2007.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _______________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-05
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 15-4 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
RELATED TO ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND GARAGES WITHIN THE CITY OF
ST. AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 15.04 Subdivision B (4) is hereby amended and reads as
follows:
“On lots greater than 2 acres, attached garages shall not exceed one thousand
one hundred twenty (1,120) square feet in area or the size of the house foundation
(excluding garage) whichever is greater. On lots 2 acres or smaller, attached garages
shall not exceed one thousand one hundred twenty (1,120) square feet in area or 90%
of the size of the house foundation (excluding garage) whichever is greater.”
Section 2. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this 17th day of April, 2007.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _________________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _____________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-06
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING FEES FOR FIRE PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA MINNESOTA DOES
ORDAIN:
SECTION ONE: PURPOSES AND INTENT
This ordinance is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the City of St. Augusta to
charge for fire and emergency response service as authorized by Minn. Stat. §§ 366.011,
366.012, and 415.01.
SECTION TWO: FEES ESTABLISHED
A. The city council shall, by resolution, establish fees for fire protection service
and/or emergency response which are not otherwise specified by contract. Said fees
shall be established at a fixed rate for certain specific types of incidents or for actual
costs incurred by the fire department in responding to the incident.
1. False Alarms: Fees for response to false fire alarms and false carbon monoxide
alarms shall be charged to the property owner or tenant for any incident after the
third call to the property within a twelve (12) month period.
2. Car Fires and Accidents: Fees will be charged for responses to automobile
accidents and car fires of persons who are not residents of the City of St. Augusta.
3. Burning Permits: Fees will be charged for response to a fire resulting from a
burning which was required to receive, but failed to obtain, a valid burning permit
from the city.
B. Fees shall include, but shall not be limited to, actual manpower costs for all
personnel that respond to the incident (minimum of 1 hour) and the cost on a per hour
basis for each fire apparatus or other city mechanical equipment that responds to the
incident (minimum of 1 hour per unit).
C. In addition, the bill for service shall include any cost of cleanup of any
contaminated equipment and/or repair of any equipment damaged during the incident
or its replacement, along with replacement of any disposable equipment, supplies,
and/or communication equipment, and administrative costs to be established at ten
percent (10%) of the total bill.
2
SECTION THREE: BILLING AND COLLECTION
A. Parties requesting and receiving fire or emergency response services may be billed
directly by the City. Additionally, if the party receiving fire or emergency response
services did not request services but a fire or other situation exists which, at the
discretion of the fire department personnel in charge requires fire or emergency
response service, the party will be charged and billed. All parties will be billed
whether or not the fire or emergency response service is covered by insurance. Any
billable amount of the fire charge not covered by a party’s insurance remains a debt of
the party receiving the fire or emergency response service.
B. Parties billed for fire or emergency response service shall pay such bill within 30
days. If the fire or emergency response service charge is not paid by that time, it will
be considered delinquent and the City will send a notice of delinquency.
C. If the fire or emergency response service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after
this notice of delinquency is sent, the City may use all practical and reasonable legal
means to collect the fire or emergency response service charge. The party receiving
fire or emergency response service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by
the City including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
D. If the fire or emergency response service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after
the notice of delinquency is sent, the City Council may also, on or before November
15 of each year, certify the unpaid fire or emergency response service charge to the
county auditor in which the recipient of the services owns real property for collection
with property taxes pursuant to Minn. Stat. §429.101 or any other applicable state
statute. The county auditor is responsible for remitting to the city all charges collected
on behalf of the city.
SECTION SIX: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT
When the City fire department provides fire or emergency response service to another
fire department pursuant to a Mutual Aid Agreement, the billing will be determined
by the Mutual Aid Agreement.
SECTION SEVEN: APPLICATION OF COLLECTIONS TO BUDGET
All collected fire charges shall become city funds and shall be used to offset the
expenses of the City fire department in providing fire and emergency response
services.
SECTION EIGHT: EFFECTIVE DATE
3
The ordinance shall become effective upon passage and publication.
ADOPTED this 17th day of April, 2007.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By:______________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
DRAFT: April 9, 2014
1
ORDINANCE No. 2007-07
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO INSTALLATION OF STREET LIGHTS AND
PROVIDING FOR THE PAYMENT OF INSTALLATION AND OPERATING
EXPENSES
The City of St Augusta does hereby ordain as follows:
Section 1. Purpose. The Council has determined that it is in the best interests of the
City’s residents and businesses to create a process relating to the installation of streetlights and to
establish an equitable method to provide for the payment of installation and operating expenses.
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish criteria for ordering street light installations and to
establish the financial responsibilities for installation and operation.
Section 2. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance the following terms shall
be defined as follows:
A. Area Benefit Lights. Lights for lighting local streets and intersections which provide
primary benefit to the immediate property owners.
B. Operating Expenses. The energy costs imposed by the electric utility for the operation of
streetlights, including but not limited to: the costs of maintenance, replacement and the
City’s clerical, administrative and incidental costs related to streetlights.
C. Existing Developments. Any subdivision, development or otherwise subdivided parcels
of land platted or subdivided before January 1, 2007.
D. New Developments. Any subdivision or development platted or subdivided on or after
January 1, 2007.
Section 3. Installation of Streetlights in New Developments. Street lighting shall
be required in all New Developments, both residential and non-residential, located within the
Urban Services Area as shown in the City’s Comprehensive Plan. The developer may request a
waiver of the street lighting requirement from the City Council. If the waiver is denied, the
developer shall submit a lighting plan for City Council approval. Upon approval of the street
lighting plan by the City Council, the developer shall be responsible for the installation costs for
all street lights within that New Development. Such responsibility shall be further memorialized
in the Developer’s Agreement between the City and the developer.
Section 4. Responsibility for Operating Expenses of Street Lights in New
Developments.
DRAFT: April 9, 2014
2
A. Area Benefit Lights – Operating Expenses for First Two Years. After installation the
developer shall be responsible for the first two (2) years of Operating Benefits for the
Area Benefit Lights in New Developments. Such responsibility shall be further
memorialized in the Developer’s Agreement between the City and the developer.
B. Area Benefit Lights – Operating Expenses for Residential Developments after the First
Two (2) Years. After the first two (2) years, Area Benefit Light Operating Expenses in
all new residential subdivision shall be charged and allocated equally to all of the
benefited existing and potential dwellings of that development. The charge shall be
included as a street lighting charge included on the city’s utility bills, or otherwise
invoiced. This charge shall be borne on a per lot basis for single family residential units
by all benefited occupied and unoccupied lots within the residential New Development
and this charge shall be borne on a per dwelling basis for multi-family dwellings for all
benefited dwelling units occupied or unoccupied within the New Development.
C. Area Benefit Lights – Operating Expenses for Non-Residential Developments after the
First Two (2) Years. After the first two (2) years, Area Benefit Light Operating Expenses
in all non-residential New Developments shall be charged and allocated to all of the
benefited parcels of that development on a pro-rata area benefit basis or on an alternate
equitable basis as determined by the City Council. The charge shall be included as a
street lighting charge included on the city’s utility bills, or otherwise invoiced. The
charge shall be imposed on all parcels whether occupied or unoccupied.
D. Collection of Operating Expenses. If these Area Benefit Light Operating Expenses billed
to the benefited property owners are not paid the Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges
for the service against each separate lot or parcel or dwelling which has not paid such
charges. After notice and hearing as provided in Minnesota Statutes §429.061, the City
Council may then spread the unpaid charges against the property which has not paid but
is benefited as a special assessment pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §429.101 for
certification to the county auditor.
Section 5. Installation of Street Lights in Existing Developments.
A. Feasibility Reports. The City may initiate installation of streetlights in Existing
Developments, or affected property owners may petition for streetlights. Upon receiving
a petition requesting the installation of streetlights the City Council may conduct a study
to determine the feasibility or need for the requested streetlight.
B. Area Benefit Light – Installation Expenses. If after public hearing conducted to consider
a request for the installation of Area Benefit lights in Existing Developments shall be
allocated to all of the benefited existing and potential dwellings of that development. The
charge shall be included as a street lighting charge included on the city’s utility bills, or
otherwise invoiced. The charge will be borne on a per lot basis for single family
residential units by all benefited occupied and unoccupied lots within the residential
Existing Development and the charge shall be borne on a per dwelling unit basis for
DRAFT: April 9, 2014
3
multi-family dwellings for all benefited dwelling units occupied or unoccupied within the
Existing Development.
Section 6. Operating Expenses for Street Lights in Existing Developments.
A. Area Benefit Lights – Operating Expenses for Residential Developments. Area Benefit
Light Operating Expenses for streetlights installed in Existing Developments shall be
charged and allocated to all of the benefited existing and potential dwellings of that
development. The charge shall be included as a street lighting charge included on the
city’s utility bills, or otherwise invoiced. The charge will be borne on a per lot basis for
single family residential units by all benefited occupied and unoccupied lots within the
residential Existing Development and the charge shall be borne on a per dwelling unit
basis for multi-family dwellings for all benefited dwelling units occupied or unoccupied
within the Existing Development.
B. Area Benefit Lights – Operating Expenses for Non-Residential Developments. Area
Benefit Light Operating Expenses for streetlights installed in non-residential Existing
Developments shall be charged and allocated to all of the benefited parcels of that
development on a pro-rata area benefit basis or an alternate equitable basis as determined
by the City Council. The charge shall be included as a street lighting charge included on
the city’s utility bills, or otherwise invoiced. The charge shall be imposed on all parcels
whether occupied or unoccupied.
C. Collection of Operating Expenses. If these Area Benefit Light Operating Expenses billed
to the benefited property owners are not paid the Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges
for the service against each separate lot or parcel or dwelling which has not paid such
charges. After notice and hearing as provided in Minnesota Statutes §429.061, the City
Council may then spread the unpaid charges against property which has not paid but is
benefited as a special assessment pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §429.101 for
certification to the county auditor.
Section 7. Severability. Should any section, paragraph, provision, sentence or lesser
part of this Ordinance be found invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, then such invalid
section, paragraph, provision, sentence or phrase shall be severed from this Ordinance and all
remaining portions or this Ordinance shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 8. Repealer. All ordinances, or portions of ordinances, in conflict herewith
are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 9. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect following passage and
publication in the official newspaper as provided by law.
PASSED by the City Council of the City of St. Augusta this day of , 2007.
DRAFT: April 9, 2014
4
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
Attest:
William R. McCabe, City Clerk – Administrator
Approved August 17, 2004
ORDINANCE No. 2004-122007-10
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 2007-03 WHICH ESTABLISHINGED
SANITARY SEWER USE RATES FOR THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA, HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Sanitary Sewer Use Rate. The following rates are hereby established for
charges made to the users of the sanitary sewer system of the City of St. Augusta, Minnesota:
A. Minimum Monthly Fee. Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall pay a
minimum monthly charge of $14.3017.02 per month. This Minimum Monthly Fee
includes sanitary sewer usage up to three thousand (3,000) gallons per month, as
measured by the premises water meter.
B. Volume Fee. Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall pay $2.904.50 per one
thousand gallons of sanitary sewer usage for all amounts greater than 3,000 gallons per
month, as measured by the premises water meter.
C. Commercial, Industrial, Other Non-Domestic Users. The City of St Augusta shall
establish a sanitary sewer use rate for any user of the city’s sanitary sewer system that
meets the criteria set out in the §360.40 of the Sewer Use Ordinance, Ordinance No.
2003-05, as may be amended from time to time.
D. Seasonal Adjustment . For the months of May, June, July, August, and
September the sewer use charge for residential sewer users shall be based on their
average usage for the months of December, January and February of the preceding year.
D.1. 2004 Seasonal Adjustment. The Volume Fee for residential users for the months
of July, August and September, 2004, shall be $1.53 per one thousand gallons of sanitary
sewer usage for all amounts greater than 3,000 gallons per month, as measured by the
premises water meter.E. Amending Fees. These fees can be modified or changed
from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
Section 2. Payment of Sewer Use Fees. Bills for sewer service charges shall be
rendered on a monthly basis succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and shall
be due 20 days from the date of rendering. Any bill not paid in full 30 days after the due date
will be considered delinquent. At that time the city shall notify the delinquent owner/occupant in
writing regarding the delinquent bill and subsequent penalty. The penalty shall be computed at
10% of the original bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every month the bill is
outstanding.
A. Delinquent Accounts, Disconnection and Other Provisions. The provisions of the
Sewer Use Ordinance, Ordinance No. 2003-05, shall apply to all delinquent payments or
accounts, disconnection from service and any and all other provisions.
Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5"
Formatted: No underline
Formatted: No underline
Approved August 17, 2004
Section 3. Severability. Should any section, paragraph, provision, sentence or lesser
part of this Ordinance be found invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, then such invalid
section, paragraph, provision, sentence or phrase shall be severed from this Ordinance and all
remaining portions or this Ordinance shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 4. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon passage and
publication in the official newspaper as provided by law.
PASSED by the City Council of the City of St. Augusta this 17th 3rd day of AugustJuly, 20047
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
Aaron AndersonWilliam R. McCabe, City Clerk – Administrator
Formatted: Superscript
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-11
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 16.03 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
RELATED TO BUILDING TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION
WITHIN THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 16.03 of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby repealed in certain
sections and amended to include the following:
16.03 BUILDING TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION:
A. General Provisions.
1. Metal Buildings. No galvanized or unfinished steel, unfinished galvalum or
unfinished aluminum buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically
intended to have a corrosive designed finish such as corten steel or
engineered designed roofs of less than one and one half-twelve (1.5/12)
pitch shall be permitted in any zoning district, except as allowed by this
subdivision.
2. Quality. Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of
architectural and aesthetic compatibility and harmony with surrounding
properties to ensure that they will not adversely impact the property values
of the abutting properties as intended by this Ordinance or adversely
impact the public health, safety, and general welfare.
3. Finishes. Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable
in grade and quality to the following:
a. Brick.
b. Natural stone.
c. Decorative concrete block.
d. Cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete panels.
e. Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood
of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood,
cypress.
f. Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum (nonstructural,
non-load bearing), provided such panels are factory
fabricated and finished with a durable non-fade surface and their
fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design.
g. Glass curtain wall panels.
h. Stucco or Efis.
2
i. Vinyl (in agricultural or residential districts only.)
j. Other materials as determined by the City Building Official, but not
including galvanized or unfinished metal.
B. Business and Industrial Uses and Zoning Districts.
1. For all uses other than those specified in Section 16.03.B.2 within the B-1,
B-2, B-3 and B-W Zoning Districts, all principal buildings which abut public
rights-of-way, residential uses, and/or public areas, shall have a
decorative front on such exposure which is comprised of at least fifty (50)
percent of materials specified in Section 16.03.A.3.a-e and Section
16.03.A.3.g-h of this Ordinance. Exterior doors and windows shall not be
included in the calculation of exterior wall space or materials
requirements. Any metal finish utilized in the building shall be a minimum
of twenty-six (26) gauge steel. The roof slope shall be limited to a
minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot.
2. Any buildings constructed within the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-W, I-1, and I-2
Districts that are on parcels within three hundred (300) feet of State
Highway 15, County Road 7, and County Road 75 shall have exterior wall
finishes consisting entirely of materials comparable in grade and quality to
the materials specified in Section 16.03.A.3.a-e and Section 16.03.A.3.g-h
of this Ordinance. Exterior doors and windows shall not be included in the
calculation of exterior wall space or materials requirements.
By resolution, the City Council may approve buildings that vary from these
specific requirements up to 50% of all exterior walls, provided that the City
finds that the applicant has made alternative improvements to the site
and/or building that result in a project which meets or exceeds the intent of
this ordinance, including, but not limited to:
a. Substantial use of natural stone and/or brick on the exterior
surfaces of the building; and
b. Substantial improvements to the landscaping of the site beyond
that normally required for the zoning district; and
c. Improved architectural detailing to building walls, roof,
entranceways, and other portions of the building; and
d. Other architectural or site planning enhancements as approved by
the City Council; and
e. The overall site design is suitable for the neighborhood and within
the character of other buildings in the area.
3. Any buildings within the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-W, I-1, and I-2 Districts
that have frontage onto an arterial roadway not specified in Section
16.03.B.2, including those buildings with double frontage or buildings
located on a corner lot or arterial street, as defined within the Subdivision
Ordinance, shall be required to have a minimum of fifty (50) percent
materials specified in Section 16.03.A.3.a-e and Section 16.03.A.3.g-h of
3
this Ordinance on all sides of the building that abut the arterial roadway.
Exterior doors and windows shall not be included in the calculation of
exterior wall space or materials requirements.
4. All principal buildings within I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts which abut
public rights-of-way, residential uses, and/or public areas shall have a
decorative front on such exposure which is comprised of at least fifty (50)
percent of materials specified in Section 16.03.A.3.a-e and Section
16.03.A.3.g-h of this Ordinance, unless otherwise specified in Section
16.02.B.2 of this Ordinance. Exterior doors and windows shall not be
included in the calculation of exterior wall space or materials
requirements.
5. Unless otherwise specified in Section 16.03.B.2, in the I-2 Zoning District,
all buildings constructed of curtain wall panels of finished steel, aluminum
or fiberglass shall be required to be faced with brick, wood, stone,
architectural concrete cast in place, pre-cast concrete panels, or
decorative concrete block on wall surfaces abutting a public right-of-way,
residential uses, or public areas. The required wall surface treatment
may allow a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the metal or fiberglass wall to
remain exposed if it is coordinated into the architectural design. Exterior
doors and windows shall not be included in the calculation of exterior wall
space or materials requirements.
6. All roofs over one and one half-twelve (1.5/12) pitch shall have a minimum
twenty-four (24”) overhang with soffit.
7. The City shall require architectural plans within the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-W, I-1
and I-2 Districts prior to building and site plan approval. The architectural
plans shall comprise the following:
a. Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
b. Architectural elevations, in color, of all principal and accessory
buildings and structures (type, color, and materials used in all
exterior surfaces).
c. Typical floor plan and typical room plan drawn to scale with a
summary of square footage by use or activity.
8. The City may grant a deferment to the requirements of Sections 16.03.B.2
and 16.03.B.3 of this Ordinance when a building or building addition will
be constructed in more than one (1) phase. Any such deferment shall be
processed as a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 4 of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to the following:
a. The deferment shall be until the completion of construction or five
(5) years, whichever is less.
4
b. Property owner shall provide the City with an irrevocable letter of
credit for an amount one and one-half (1 ½ ) the City Building
Official’s estimated cost of the required exterior wall treatment. The
bank and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council. The letter of credit shall assure compliance with this
section of this Ordinance.
Section 2. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this _______ day of _________________________ 2007.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: ____________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: __________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-12
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 15.04 E. 1. OF THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING
ORDINANCE TO REGULATE ACCESSORY BUILDING HEIGHT IN THE A-1, A-2, R-1,
AND R-2 DISTRICTS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 15.04 E. 1. of the City Code is hereby amended and shall
read as follows:
Accessory buildings shall comply with the following height limitations:
Zoning
District
Maximum Height
A-1 25 feet or the height of the principal
structure, whichever is greater
A-2 25 feet or the height of the principal
structure, whichever is greater
R-1 25 feet
R-2 25 feet
R-3 20 feet
R-4 20 feet
R-5 20 feet
B-1 35 feet
B-2 35 feet
B-3 35 feet
B-W 35 feet
I-1 35 feet
I-2 35 feet
Section 3. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon
its passage and publication.
ADOPTED by the Mayor and City Council of St. Augusta, Minnesota this ____ day of
July, 2007.
BY:___________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
____________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-13
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 15.04 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
RELATED TO ACCESSORY STRUCTURE BUILDING TYPE AND STANDARDS
WITHIN THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 15.04G of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby repealed in
certain sections and amended to include the following:
G. Building Type and Standards:
1. Architectural details for accessory buildings on all platted lots less than 10
acres are to be the same or similar as for the principal building, except for
those specifically allowed in Section 2 below, based upon (but not limited
to) the following criteria:
a. Scale and detailing.
b. Roof pitch orientation and slope.
c. Overhang depth and details.
d. Window and exterior door proportion and types.
e. Building material.
f. Exterior color.
2. Pole buildings, as defined by this Ordinance, are allowed as a permitted
accessory structure within the A-1 District and A-2 District provided that:
a. The lot is within the urban service reserve area or rural service area
designated by the Comprehensive Plan.
b. The unplatted lot on which the building is to be located is larger
than five (5) acres or platted lot on which the building is located is
ten (10) acres or larger.
2
Section 2. Enactment. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication.
ADOPTED this 21st day of August, 2007.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: ____________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: __________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007- 15
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 3 OF THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING
ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE A CHANGE IN ZONING CLASSIFICATION FROM
B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS TO B-W, BUSINESS WAREHOUSE
AT 24695 COUNTY ROAD 7
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA HEREBY
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING
ORDINANCE IS HEREBY AMENDED TO REZONE THE FOLLOWING LEGALLY
DESCRIBED PROPERTY FROM B-3, GENERAL BUSINESS TO B-W, BUSINESS
WAREHOUSE:
LEGAL DESCRIPTION
.83 A S 150 OF N 1595 of E 241.71 OF W2NW4; OLD 29.17827.000
SECTION 2. THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR IS HEREBY DIRECTED TO MAKE
THE APPROPRIATE CHANGE TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF
ST. AUGUSTA TO REFLECT THE CHANGE IN ZONING CLASSIFICATION AS SET
FORTH ABOVE.
SECTION 3. THIS REZONING SHALL BE IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECTIVE
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING PASSAGE AND PUBLICATION AND SHALL BE
CONSISTENT WITH THE CITY’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
Approved by the St. Augusta City Council this 16th day of October, 2007.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
BY:_________________________
Bob Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________
Bill McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-17
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING DUTY TO REMOVE ICE AND SNOW
FROM CITY SIDEWALKS
In the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, the City Council of St.
Augusta, Minnesota hereby ordains:
Section. 1. Ice and Snow a Nuisance All snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks
is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or
tenant of the abutting private property within 24 hours after such snow or ice has ceased
to be deposited.
Section 2. City to Remove Snow and Ice The City may cause to be removed from all
public sidewalks beginning 24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, all snow or ice
which may be discovered thereon, and it shall keep a record of the cost of such removal
and the private property adjacent to which such accumulations were found and removed.
Section 3. Cost of Removal to be Assessed The City Clerk shall, upon direction of the
Council, and on receipt of the information provided for in the preceding Section, extend
the cost of such removal of snow or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcel
of ground abutting on walks which were cleared, and such special assessments shall at
the time of certifying taxes to the County Auditor be certified for collection as other
special assessments are certified and collected.
Section 4. Civil Suit for Cost of Removal The City Clerk shall, in the alternative, upon
direction of the Council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from
the persons owning land adjacent to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in Section
2 hereof, the cost of such clearing and the cost and disbursement of a civil action
therefore.
Section 5. The City Clerk to Report Sidewalks Cleared The City Clerk may, from time
to time, present to the Council after snow or ice has been cleared from the sidewalks as
provided in Section 2 hereof a report of the City thereon, and may request the Council to
determine by resolution the manner of collection to be used as provided in Sections 3 or 4
of this Section.
Section 6. Placing Snow or Ice in a Roadway or on a Sidewalk It is a misdemeanor for
any person, not acting under a specific contract with the City to remove snow or ice from
private property and place the same in any roadway or on a sidewalk.
2
Section. 7. Continuing Violation Each day that any person continues in violation of this
Section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such.
Section 8. Effective Date
The ordinance shall become effective upon publication.
ADOPTED this 4th day of December, 2007.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By:______________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator




































CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
ORDINANCE #2008-06
ESTABLISHING A POLICY ON THE
USE OF OUTDOOR WOOD BURNERS (OWB)
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA,
HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1: Purpose: The City of St. Augusta has the responsibility to protect the
general health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the City. It is recognized
and found that the type of fuel used by and the scale and duration of the burning
by outdoor wood burners (OWB) and the smoke and particulate emissions
emanating from them create noxious and hazardous smoke, soot, fumes, odors,
and air pollution that can be detrimental to the citizens’ health, and can deprive
neighboring property owners/users of the enjoyment of their property or premises
when such devices are located in an urban setting. Such devices are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
Section 2: Definition: OWB means any equipment, device or apparatus, or any
part thereof, which is installed or constructed for the purpose of combustion of
fuel to produce heat, hot water, and/or energy that is used as a component of a
heating system providing heat for the interior of a building or for a pool, where
the equipment, device, or apparatus is located outside of the building or pool for
which the heat, hot water, and/or energy is to be generated. Said device shall be
deemed to be outdoors, even if it is located in a building.
Section 3: Prohibition of OWB: It shall be unlawful for any person to install,
construct, operate, or use an OWB in any of the City’s residential zoning districts,
except as set forth in Section 4.
Section 4: Non-Conforming Use:
Subdivision 1: The lawful use or operation of any OWB, existing as of
the effective date of this ordinance, may be continued, subject to the
requirements of this subsection.
Subdivision 2: No non-conforming OWB shall hereafter be extended,
enlarged, or expanded.
Subdivision 3: Any OWB existing as of the effective date of this section,
which use has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months, shall not be permitted to be re-established as a non-conforming
use, cannot be used or operated, and must be immediately removed by the
property owner from the subject premises. If the property owner fails to
remove the OWB at the end of said twelve (12) months, the City shall give
written notice by certified mail or personal service. Such notice shall
provide that such person shall remove OWB within fifteen (15) days of the
notice.
Subdivision 4: OWB permitted to be used or operated, pursuant to Subd.
1 of this Section, shall be required to use clean wood or wood/product
specifically permitted by the manufacturer as fuel. Clean wood is defined
as natural wood which has not been painted, varnished, or coated with a
similar material, has not been pressure-treated with preservatives, and
does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood
products. The use of the following materials as fuel, unless they are
specifically engineered as a backup source, is strictly prohibited:
1. Rubbish or garbage including but not limited to food wastes,
food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted
materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or
demolition debris, or other household or business wastes.
2. Kerosene, gasoline, or petroleum products.
3. Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
4. Wood or wood products, other than clean wood.
5. Any plastic material including but not limited to nylon, PVC,
ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics,
plastic film and plastic containers.
6. Rubber, including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
7. Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, and office
paper.
Section 5: Permissible Uses: An OWB furnace may be installed and used in the
City of St. Augusta only in accordance with the following provisions:
Subdivision 1: The OWB shall be installed and used only in an area
zoned for Agricultural, Commercial or Industrial with an administrative
permit.
Subdivision 2: The OWB shall not be used to burn any of the prohibited
materials listed in Section 4, subdivision 4 of this ordinance. The burning
of prohibited materials will cause the immediate suspension of the
administrative permit and the owner will be subject to fine imposed under
the Administrative Code Enforcement (Ordinance #2005-12).
Subdivision 3: The OWB shall be located at least two hundred feet
(200’) from the nearest building which is not on the same property as the
OWB.
Subdivision 4: The OWB shall have a chimney that extends at least
fifteen feet (15’) above the ground surface. If there are any residences
within five hundred feet (500’), the chimney shall also extend at least as
high above the ground surface as the height of the roofs of all such
residences. The Building Official may approve a lesser height on a caseby-
case basis if necessary to comply with the manufacturer’s
recommendations and if the smoke from the lower chimney height does
not create a nuisance for neighbors.
Section 6: Enforcement: The Stearns County Sheriff, the Fire Chief, City
Administrator, Building Official, or their subordinates are authorized to enforce
the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 7: Effective Date: This ordinance shall be in full force and effective
immediately following passage and publication.
Approved by the City Council of the City of St. Augusta this 16th day of December,
2008.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
BY:_________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator




















CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STATE OF MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO.: 2010-07
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO GRASS AND
WEEDS WITHIN NON-AGRICULTURAL ZONED
AREAS FO THE CITY
The City Council of the City of St. Augusta, Minnesota hereby ordains:
Section 1: Definitions:
The following word or term, when used in this Article, shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(A) Brush - Includes parts of plants, such as but not limited to, twigs, tree and
shrub branches. Brush does not include firewood and construction material.
(B) Grass – Grasses commonly used in regularly cut lawn areas, such as
bluegrass, fescue, and rye grass blends and non woody vegetation interspersed
with them.
(C) Weeds - Includes all noxious weeds as defined by the statutes of the State of
Minnesota and all such useless and troublesome plants as are commonly
known as weeds to the general public.
Section 2: Nuisance:
(A) Weeds and Grass. All weeds or growing grass upon any lot or parcel of land
in the City of St, Augusta, other than land zoned agricultural, that reach a
height of at least 8 inches, or which have gone or are about to go to seed, are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the health, safety, and good
order of the City with the following exceptions:
(1) native prairie and long grass areas shown on an approved landscape plan,
(2) native prairie and long grasses within a defined landscape area on a single
or two-family residential parcel, provided that such defined landscape
area:
(a) occupies no more than fifty percent of the pervious surface area of the
parcel excluding natural wooded areas, wetlands, water bodies, rain
gardens, lakescaping, and scenic easements;
(b) is set back from property lines by at least five feet. The setback is not
required where the defined landscape area abuts another similar
private or public landscape area, a wetland, pond, lake or stream or if a
fully opaque fence at least four feet in height is installed along the lot
line adjoining the planned landscape area.
(c) is maintained at least once per year through mowing or, if appropriate
permits are obtained through the City Fire Marshal, burning;
(3) natural wooded areas;
(4) wetlands, ponds or rain gardens; and
(5) areas where mowing is prohibited by easement or law.
(B) Brush. All brush piles not properly stored in a closed container upon any lot
or parcel of land in the City of St. Augusta are hereby declared to be a vermin
harborage and attractive nuisance and dangerous to the health, safety, and
good order of the City with the following exceptions:
(1) brush piles located near the street or other specific area for pickup or
collection for a period of time of less than one week;
(2) brush accumulations from a large storm event where it is not reasonable
that brush be collected in a week or less; and
(3) brush that has fallen in natural wooded or wetland areas or yards.
Section 3: Notice to Remove:
If the provisions of this chapter are not complied with, the city shall serve written notice
upon the owner, lessee, or occupant or any person having control of such lot or land, to
comply with the provision of this section.
(A) Occupied lots/land: One written notice shall serve as notice to the person
upon whom it was served for the entire season.
(B) Unoccupied lots/land: For any vacant lot/land the City may serve written
notice by leaving a door hanger in a visible place on the lot/land. One door
hanger shall serve as notice to the owner, lessee, or occupant or any person
having control of such lot or land for the entire season.
Section 4: Removal by City:
(A) Occupied lots/land. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails to
remove the weeds, grass, brush or other vegetation within five (5) days from
the date such notice is postmarked or delivered, then the city shall cause the
weeds, grass, brush and other vegetation of such lot or land to be cut and
removed.
(B) Unoccupied lots/land. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails to
remove the weeds, grass, brush or other vegetation within two (2) days from
the date the door hanger is left, then the city shall cause the weeds, grass,
brush and other vegetation of such lot or land to be cut and removed.
Section 5: Cost Assessed:
The actual cost of cutting and removal, plus such sums as determined by the city council
to reimburse the city for its costs of inspection, shall be certified by the city administrator
and shall thereupon become a lien upon the lot or land on which such weeds, grass,
brush, and other vegetation were located and shall be added to and become and form a
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear
interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner
as real estate taxes; provided, however, the owner, lessee or occupant or any person
having control of the lot or land may pay to the city, in full, the actual costs incurred for
cutting and removal, plus the inspection fee, by September 15 of the same calendar year
in which the cutting and removal occurred in order to avoid having such costs levied
upon the lot or land.
Section 6: Penalty:
Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor. Each day on which
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 7: Severability
In any case any Section of this Ordinance is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the invalidity shall extend only to the Section affected, and other Sections of
the Ordinance shall continue in full force.
Passed by the council this ______ day of ______________, 2010.
_____________________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Clerk
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
COUNTY OF STEARNS
STATE OF MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO.: 2010-09
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A SEWER TRUNK
DISTRICT
The City Council of the City of St. Augusta, Minnesota hereby ordains:
Section 1. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings set forth in this subsection.
CITY: The City of St. Augusta, Stearns County, Minnesota
MUNICIPAL SEWER CONNECTION: The act of connecting any property or
structure to city municipal sewer system such that said property or structure is able to
discharge fluids into the municipal sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEWER DISTRICT: A geographical division of property within the
city providing the basis for the municipal sewer trunk access charge.
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM: Any part of the network of municipal sewer
connections and pipes located within the City of St. Augusta, including sewer trunk
lines and lateral sewer lines.
MUNICIPAL SEWER TRUNK ACCESS CHARGE: A charge imposed by the city
for connection to the city’s trunk sewer line within a given municipal sewer district.
OWNER: An individual or entity holding legal or equitable title to property within
the City of St. Augusta.
Section 2. Municipal Sewer Trunk District: The city hereby establishes a sewer trunk district
over all property within the borders identified on Exhibit A attached hereto.
Section 3. Access Charge Imposed; Exemptions: Municipal sewer trunk access charges shall be
imposed on all land within this sewer district so as to reimburse the costs associated with the
installation of sewer trunk lines, sewer mains, and other necessary sewer distribution facilities.
The city council may, by resolution, exempt from the municipal sewer trunk access charge those
lands within the municipal sewer district which are already connected to the city municipal sewer
or which have been previously assessed for the costs of installation of municipal sewer trunk
facilities. No connection shall be made to the city municipal sewer system serving the property
of any person or occupants of the land, parcel or premises upon which municipal sewer trunk
access charges remain unpaid.
Section 4. Amount of Charge: The municipal sewer trunk access charge shall be $1,400.00 per
acre for all property (but excluding delineated wetlands) located within the Municipal Sewer
Trunk District which is platted or connected to the sewer system. The City Council may amend
this charge from time to time.
Section 5. Time of Payment:
1. All trunk access charges shall be paid to the city at the earlier of
a. Final plat approval for any plat in which a new municipal sewer connection is
required in such plat which is located within the Municipal Sewer Trunk District.
b. Issuance of a building permit by the city for which a new municipal sewer
connection is required within this Municipal Sewer Trunk District.
2. No final plat approval or building permits shall be issued prior to payment of the
trunk access charges unless other arrangements for the payment of the municipal
sewer trunk access charge are made and approved by the city.
3. Payment shall be in cash or by check acceptable to the city.
Section 6. Use of Charges: The city may establish one or more trunk sewer funds and may credit
all trunk access charges collected from this Municipal Sewer Trunk District to such funds. Such
funds may, as determined by the City Council, be used to offset costs incurred in the installation
of existing or future sewer lines, or to reimburse others who have installed trunk sewer lines
under a contract with the City which calls for such reimbursement, or to pay debt service incurred
in the past or to be incurred in the future to finance the municipal sewer expansions,
improvements, or any combination of the above within this district.
Section 7. Provisions Not Limiting: This section in no way precludes the city council from
adopting additional ordinances imposing other sewer related charges in lieu of assessments, or
other such ordinances relating to area or service charges with regard to the municipal sewer
system, nor does this section preclude the city from assessing to property owners the costs related
to the installation of sewer lines, trunk mains, laterals and other sewer related facilities installed
by the city.
Passed by the council this ______ day of ______________, 2010.
_____________________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Clerk
ORDINANCE #2011-03
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
COUNTY OF STEARNS
STATE OF MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ALLOWING THE CITY TO CONTRACT FOR ELECTRICAL
INSPECTIONS.
The City of St. Augusta ordains:
SECTION 1:
Subdivision 1. Authority to inspect. The City of St. Augusta hereby provides
for the inspection of all electrical installations, pursuant to
Minn. Stat. § 326B.36. subd. 6.
Subdivision 2. Adopted by reference. The Minnesota Electrical Act, as
adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 326B, Sections 326B.31 to
326B.399. The Minnesota Electrical Act is hereby incorporated
into this ordinance as if fully set out herein. The Minnesota
State Building Code incorporates by reference the National
Electrical Code pursuant to Minn. R. 1315.0020. All such
codes incorporated herein by reference constitute the electrical
code of the City of St. Augusta.
Subdivision 3. Compliance. All electrical installations shall comply with the
requirements of the electrical code of the City of St. Augusta
and this ordinance.
Subdivision 4. Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the
collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota
Statutes 326B.37. Any inspection or handling fees will be
payable to the City of St. Augusta following the Minnesota
Department of Labor and Industry fee schedule.
Subdivision 5. Notice and appeal. All notices of violations and orders issued
under this ordinance shall be in conformance with Minn. Stat. §
326B.36, subd. 4.
Subdivision 6. Violations and penalties. A violation of the Minnesota
Electrical Act is a misdemeanor. (M.S. 326B.082, subd. 16).
SECTION 2. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish an electrical inspections program in the City of
St. Augusta that is administered and enforced by the City.
SECTION 3: SUMMARY
The following official summary of Ordinance 2011-03 has been approved by the City
Council of the City of St. Augusta as clearly informing the public of the intent and effect of
the Ordinance.
It is the intent and effect of Ordinance 2011-03 to establish an electrical inspections
program in the City of St. Augusta that is administered and enforced by the City, as
permitted in Minn. Stat. § 326B.36, subd. 6.
SECTION 4: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance becomes effective immediately upon passage and publication.
Adopted by the City Council of St. Augusta the 6th day of September, 2011.
Mayor
ATTEST:
City Clerk
ORDINANCE #2011-04
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 31.05C.4.a IN ORDER TO ALLOW SIGNS UP
TO 85 FEET IN A CORRIDOR THAT IS BOUND BY INTERSATE HIGHWAY94 AND
COUNTY ROAD 75.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 31.05.C.4.a of the City Code is hereby amended and shall
read as follows:
a. Freestanding: Not more than one (1) double-sided freestanding sign. Sign
height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet except in a corridor bounded by
Interstate 94 and County Road 75 where the height shall not exceed eightyfive
(85) feet.
Section 2. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon
its passage and publication.
ADOPTED by the Mayor and City Council of St. Augusta, Minnesota this 6th day of
SEPTEMBER, 2011.
BY:___________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
____________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
Exhibit B1:
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2011-05
AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE 2011-1 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
ZONING DISTRICT
AND
AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA,
MINNESOTA
AND
REZONING PROPERTY FROM B-W DISTICT TO PUD
AND
APPROVING PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PUD PLAN / SITE PLAN ASSOCIATED
WITH A HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROPOSED BY ALLIANCE
BUILDING CORPORATION WITHIN THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
WHEREAS, the Applicant, Alliance Building Corporation filed an application with
the City of St. Augusta on September 28, 2011 requesting a rezoning of a parcel of land
from B-W Business / Warehouse District to PUD – Planned Unit Development, for the
property commonly known as 24908 County Road 7 and legally described below.
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission, after a public hearing duly called and
held on October 10, 2011, as required by law, and due deliberation and consideration
at the continued meeting held on October 24, 2011, has forwarded a recommendation
in writing by a vote of 5-2 to the City Council that a certain boundary change be made
on the official Zoning Map of the city; and
WHEREAS, the City Council, after due deliberation and consideration, reviewed
and considered the reports, documents, testimony, and other materials presented, and
finds the general welfare will be best served by approving said recommendation of the
Planning Commission; and
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA, HEREBY
ORDAINS:
Section 1. Creation of the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District. The 2011-1 PUD
Zoning District is hereby created which provides as follows:
2011-1 PUD ZONING DISTRICT
A. Intent. The intent of the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District is to create a new zoning
district for the proposed St. Augusta Apartment proposed 94-unit residential
apartment development proposed by Alliance Building Corporation. In
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, this development will provide
Residential Medium / High Density, multi-family residential units. This
2
development will be characterized by site planning and architecture that is
compatible with surrounding residential and commercial neighborhoods.
B. Permitted Uses, Uses Permitted by Administrative Permit, Accessory Uses, and
Conditional Uses. The permitted uses, uses permitted by administrative permit,
accessory uses , and conditional uses of the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District shall be
those permitted, conditional, accessory uses, and uses permitted by
administrative permit as listed below:
1. Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,
the following are permitted uses in the 2011-1 PUD District:
a. Essential services.
b. Multiple family dwellings not exceeding 47 units per structure.
c. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as
regulated by Section 29 of the Zoning Ordinance.
d. Public parks, playgrounds, and recreational uses.
e. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
2. Uses by Administrative Permit. Subject to applicable provisions and
performance standards of the Zoning Ordinance, and processing
requirements of Section 6 of the Zoning Ordinance, the following are uses
are allowed in the 2011-1 PUD District by administrative permit as may be
issued by the Zoning Administrator:
a. Model homes (units), temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of the
Zoning Ordinance.
b. Real estate offices, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of the
Zoning Ordinance.
3. Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the 2011-1 PUD
District:
a. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in
Section a., b., and d. of this Ordinance.
b. Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of the Zoning Ordinance.
c. Home occupations and home offices as regulated by Section 25 of the
Zoning Ordinance.
d. Television receiving antennas necessary for the operation of
household electronic equipment.
e. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in the 2011-1 PUD District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and
regulated by Section 4.02 and 4.04 of the Zoning Ordinance):
3
a. Elderly (senior housing), provided that:
1. Not more than ten (10) percent of the occupants may be persons
sixty (60) years of age or under.
2. To continue to qualify for the elderly housing classification, the
owner or agency shall annually file with the Zoning Administrator a
certified copy of a monthly resume of occupants or such a multiple
dwelling, listing the number of tenants by age and clearly identifying
and setting forth the relationship of all occupants sixty (60) years of
age or under to qualified tenants, or to the buildings.
3. Elevator service is provided to each floor level above ground floor.
b. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or
community centers.
c. Swimming pools as an accessory use provided that:
1. The use is fenced in accordance with Section 16 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
2. The use shall meet setbacks from principal structures.
3. All necessary City permits are obtained for the use.
C. Building Location, Area, Height, and Architecture. Building location, area, height,
and architecture shall conform to the approved Final Development Plans
described in Section 3 of this Ordinance and on file with the City Administrator
pursuant to the City of St. Augusta Legislative Code.
D. Final Development Plan Specifications. Any significant changes to the principal
and / or accessory buildings from the approved Final Development Plans shall
require an amendment to this Ordinance, as determined by the City
Administrator. Minor modifications or amendments may be made and
documented administratively by the City Administrator.
E. Parking, Access, and Circulation. Parking, access, and circulation shall conform
to the approved Final Development Plans described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance and kept on file with the City Administrator.
F. Landscaping and Screening. Tree placements, species and types, landscaping,
and screening shall conform to the approved Final Development Plans described
in Section 3 of this Ordinance and on file with the City Administrator. The City
Administrator shall determine if additional landscaping or screening is required
once the building and site improvements are constructed. Minor modifications or
amendments may be made and documented administratively by the City
Administrator.
G. Site and Building Signage. Site and building signage shall be consistent with the
provisions of the Residential Zoning District standards, pursuant to Section 31 of
the St. Augusta Zoning Ordinance. Signage shall be coordinated throughout the
PUD to promote a unified development. Any future sign (or signage) that does
not meet the standards or requirements of the Code shall require an amendment
to this Ordinance and the Final PUD Development Plan / Site Plan.
4
H. Grading, Drainage, Utilities, Storm Water Management, and Other Performance
Characteristics. The grading, drainage, utilities, storm water management, and
other performance characteristics of the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District
(“Performance Characteristics”) shall conform to the approved Final
Development Plans described in Section 3 of this Ordinance and on file with the
City Administrator.
I. Additional Performance Standards of the PUD 2011-1 Zoning District. In addition
to the Performance Characteristics set forth above, the following additional
performance standards shall apply in the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District:
1. Any and all exterior lighting for the site, either affixed to poles or the building,
shall be hooded or shielded to avoid any glare or diffusion of light onto
surrounding properties. If requested, the Applicant shall provide a lighting
plan with a photometric plan detailing all lighting on this site. No automatic or
“motion-detector” style lights shall be allowed.
2. Trash storage facilities or dumpsters shall be provided for in the underground
garage area or within an enclosed accessory structure that matches the
exterior of the building. Location and style shall be approved by the City
Administrator.
3. Timing of the Creation of the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District. This 2011-1 PUD
Zoning District is created upon the occurrence of both of the following events:
1) the City Council’s approval of the Preliminary and Final PUD Plans and
Site Plan for the St. Augusta Apartments 94-unit residential apartment
development proposed by Alliance Building Corporation and 2) Execution of
the Development Contract between the City and Alliance Building Corporation
as approved by the City Attorney. In the future event that the 2011-1 PUD
Zoning District is repealed with respect to any part of the development, any
existing use and structure permitted by the 2011-1 PUD Zoning Ordinance
shall be treated as a pre-existing legal non-conforming use.
Section 2. Findings for Creation of the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District. In
creating the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District associated with the proposed St. Augusta
Apartments development, the City Council of the City of St. Augusta finds the following:
A. The PUD 2011-1 Zoning District is consistent with the amended Comprehensive
Plan.
B. The proposal better adapts itself to the physical and aesthetic setting of the site
and with the surrounding land uses than if the proposal were developing using
strict standards and land uses allowed in another residential zoning district of the
Zoning Ordinance.
C. The proposal benefits the area surrounding the development to a greater degree
than development allowed in another residential zoning district of the Zoning
Ordinance.
D. The proposal provides land use and site design flexibilities while enhancing site
or building aesthetics to achieve an overall higher quality of development than
5
would otherwise occur in another residential zoning district of the Zoning
Ordinance.
E. The proposal ensures the concentration of open space into more workable or
usable areas and preserves the natural resources of the site more so than would
otherwise occur in another residential zoning district of the Zoning Ordinance.
F. The City Council has given due consideration to existing conditions and the
conservation of property values.
G. The provisions of the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District promote building development
that is to the best advantage of the entire City and to the uses for which the
subject property is being devoted; and
H. The creation of the 2011-1 PUD Zoning District is required for the public good
and is in the best interest of public health, safety, and welfare.
Section 3. Approval of the Preliminary and Final PUD Plans / Site Plan
associated with the Proposed St. Augusta Apartments Development. The City
Council of the City of St. Augusta approves the Preliminary and Final PUD Development
Plans and the Site Plan associated with the proposed St. Augusta Apartments
development as follows:
A. Approved Preliminary and Final PUD Development Plans / Site Plan. The subject
property shall be developed in substantial conformance with the following plans
except as may be modified by the conditions of approval described in Section 3,
B of this Ordinance. The Final PUD Development Plan / Site Plan shall be on file
with the City Administrator.
1. Sheet AS-101, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Mahler & Associates
Architecture.
2. Sheet AS-102, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Mahler & Associates
Architecture.
3. Sheet A-201, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Mahler & Associates
Architecture.
4. Sheet C1 of 6, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Schultz Engineering
& Site Design, PLLC.
5. Sheet C2 of 6, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Schultz Engineering
& Site Design, PLLC.
6. Sheet C3 of 6, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Schultz Engineering
& Site Design, PLLC.
7. Sheet C4 of 6, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Schultz Engineering
& Site Design, PLLC.
8. Sheet C5 of 6, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Schultz Engineering
& Site Design, PLLC.
6
9. Sheet C6 of 6, dated September 27, 2011, prepared by Schultz Engineering
& Site Design, PLLC.
B. Contingencies to the Approval of the Preliminary and Final PUD Plans / Site
Plan. The Final PUD Development Plan / Site Plan shall be deemed approved at
such time as all of the following events occur:
1. The plan be amended to show a sidewalk along CSAH 7 on the developer’s
property and dedicated to the City.
2. The Applicant modifies the Final PUD Development Plan/Site Plan to
address, to the satisfaction of the City Administrator, all issues raised by the
City Engineer, and in the memorandum from WSB & Associated, Inc. dated
October 5, 2011, and October 27, 2011 and regarding the proposed St.
Augusta Apartments Development.
3. The Applicant modifies the Final PUD Development Plan/Site Plan to
address, to the satisfaction of the City Fire Chief, any issues or conditions
established by the City Fire Chief upon his review of this development site;
and
4. The Applicant and the City execute a Development Contract in a form and
content satisfactory to the City Attorney. The drafting of said Development
Contract shall be made by the City Attorney.
5. The Applicant pays all costs incurred by the City in processing all applications
related to the St. Augusta Apartments, including all planner, engineer and
attorney fees incurred by the City.
6. The Applicant obtaining all necessary approvals and permits from other
applicable jurisdictions including Stearns County.
7. The Applicant change that portion of the property planned for “Native Prairie
Planting” to a “Seed Mix” that will be mowed and maintained, as approved by
the City Administrator.
C. Future Amendments to the Final PUD Development Plan / Site Plan. Minor
changes to the Final PUD Development Plan / Site Plan may be made
administratively at the discretion of the City Administrator. Changes that would
trigger Site Plan review by the Planning Commission and approval by the City
Council as described in the City’s Zoning Ordinance shall require an amendment
to this Ordinance and the Final PUD Development Plan / Site Plan.
D. Findings for Approval of the Preliminary and Final PUD Development Plans / Site
Plan. The City Council finds that the Plans are consistent with the criteria for
approval of the Preliminary and Final PUD Development Plans as described in
Section 63.03 of the St. Augusta Zoning Ordinance and that the Plans are
consistent with the criteria for Site Plan approval as described in Section 10.05 of
the St. Augusta Zoning Ordinance. More specifically the City Council finds the
following:
1. The proposed development is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan,
as amended and approved under separate consideration and action by the
City Council;
7
2. The proposed development presents a complete and unified development
within its own boundaries in terms of relationship of structures, patterns of
circulation, visual character, interrelationship of utilities and drainage
infrastructure, and overall architectural theme.
3. The proposed layout of land uses within the development will result in
compatible land uses with present and planned land uses in the surrounding
area.
4. The development is sufficient unto itself on the basis of size, composition,
arrangement, and the provision of municipal utilities.
5. The impacts of the proposed development on municipal services and facilities
have been reviewed and mitigative measures have been identified where
needed.
6. The impacts of the proposed development on environmental quality and the
reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding property have been identified,
analyzed and mitigative measures identified where needed.
7. The proposed development reasonably addresses the safety and
convenience of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site and in relation
to access streets.
8. Any deviations from the standards of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision
Regulations are justified by the design of the development.
E. Expiration of Approval of the Preliminary and Final PUD Development Plans /
Site Plan. Approval of the Preliminary and Final PUD Development Plans/Site
Plan shall expire five years from the date of passage of this Ordinance for any
structure and related appurtenances which have not been constructed within five
years from the date of approval of this Ordinance.
Section Four. Rezoning Amendment. Upon the occurrence of all of the events
set out in Section 3.B. as set forth above, the real property associated with the St.
Augusta Apartments development, legally described below, shall be deemed rezoned
from B-W Business / Warehouse District to 2011-1 PUD Planned Unit Development
District:
State of Minnesota, Stearns County
That certain tract or parcel of land lying and being situated in the Northeast Quarter of
the Northwest Quarter, Section 12, Township 123 North, Range 28 West, Stearns
County, Minnesota, described as follows, to-wit: Beginning at a point on the West line
of said Northeast Quarter of Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, 344 feet South of the
Northwest corner of the said Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter; thence
running South a distance of 290 feet along said West line; thence running East on a line
parallel to the South line of said Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter a distance
of 657 feet to the right of way of U.S. Highway No. 152; thence running in a
Northwesterly direction along the West right of way line of said U.S. Highway No. 152 a
distance of 333 feet; thence running West on a line parallel to the North line of said
8
Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter a distance of 465 feet to the point of
beginning and there terminating.
(Abstract Property)
Section Five. Official Zoning Map. The official Zoning Maps on file with the St.
Augusta City Clerk’s office at City Hall, are so changed and shall not be republished to
show the aforesaid rezoning, but the City Clerk shall appropriately mark the said Zoning
Maps on file in the City Clerk’s Office for the purpose of indicating the rezoning
hereinabove provided for in this Ordinance and all of the notations, references, and
other information shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part
of this Ordinance.
Section Six. Findings for Rezoning. In rezoning the above referenced property
to 2011-1 PUD Zoning District and related Preliminary and Final PUD Plans, and Site
Plan, the City Council has found the following:
A. The 2011-1 PUD Zoning District is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and
protects the health, safety, and welfare of the residents.
B. The proposal better adapts itself to the physical and aesthetic setting of the site
and with the surrounding land uses than if the property were developed using
strict standards and land uses allowed within another residential zoning district.
C. The proposal benefits the area surrounding the development to a greater degree
than development allowed within another residential zoning district.
D. The proposal provides land use and site design flexibilities while enhancing site
or building aesthetics to achieve an overall higher quality of development than
would otherwise occur in another residential zoning district.
E. The proposal ensures the concentration of open space into more workable or
usable areas and preserves the natural resources of the site more so than would
otherwise occur in another residential zoning district.
F. The City Council has given due consideration to existing conditions and the
conservation of property values;
G. The direction of building development is to the best advantage of the entire City
and to the uses for which the property affected is being devoted at this time; and
H. The change is required for the public good, is in the interest of public health,
safety, and welfare, and is compatible with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
Section Seven. Severability. Should any section, paragraph, provision,
sentence or lesser part of this Ordinance be found invalid by a Court of competent
jurisdiction, then such invalid section, paragraph, provision, sentence or phrase shall be
severed from this Ordinance and all remaining portions of this Ordinance shall continue
in full force and effect.
Section Eight. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon passage
and publication in the official newspaper as provided by law.
9
PASSED this _______ day of _________________________ 2011.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: ____________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: __________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2012 – 03
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 15.04 G. OF THE ST. AUGUSTA ZONING
ORDINANCE TO REGULATE BUILDING TYPES AND STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 15.04 G. of the City Code is hereby amended and shall read as follows:
G. Building Type and Standards:
Accessory buildings on all lots less than 2 acres (regardless of building structure type –
post/pole versus stick) shall be similar in design to the principal building relative to:
1. Color schemes
2. Style of materials
3. Enclosed overhang (1 foot minimum required on all accessory structures)
Similar shall mean that the accessory structure has a substantial likeness, resemblance or
characteristics of the principal structure.
Section 2. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage
and publication.
ADOPTED by the Mayor and City Council of St. Augusta, Minnesota this 2nd day of October, 2012.
BY:________________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
Attest: __________________________________________
William R. McCabe, City Clerk-Administrator
1
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
ORDINANCE #2013-01
MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. License Required: No person shall operate a multi-family rental dwelling
without first having obtained a license to do so from the city as hereinafter provided.
Section 2. Expiration And Renewal Of License: Each such operating license shall be
issued annually and shall expire on December 31. License renewals shall be filed at least
ninety (90) days prior to license expiration date. In the case of new, unlicensed
dwellings, license applications shall be filed with the request for issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
Section 3. Inspection Required: No application for an initial or renewal license shall be
submitted to the city council for approval until the compliance official has verified that
the required biennial inspection has been completed and that all life, health and safety
violations or discrepancies have been corrected.
Section 4. Fees:
Subsection 1. License Fees:
a. License fees, as set forth by city council resolution, shall be due ninety
(90) days prior to the expiration of the existing license; in the case of new,
unlicensed dwellings, license fees shall be due upon submission of a rental
license application.
b. A delinquency penalty of five percent (5%) of the license fee for each
day of operation without a valid license shall be charged operators of
rental dwellings.
Subsection 2. Inspection Fees: A fee, as set forth by city council resolution, shall
be charged for all re-inspections necessary after the first re-inspection. The reinspection
fee(s) will be payable at the time of license renewal for the property, in
the case of rental housing, and at the time of recertification of occupancy for
nonresidential properties.
Section 5. Application For License Or Renewal:
Subsection 1. License application or renewal shall be made by the owner of rental
units or his legally constituted agent. Application forms may be acquired from
and subsequently filed with the compliance official. The applicant shall supply:
2
a. Name, address, and telephone number of dwelling owner; owning
partners if a partnership; corporate officers if a corporation.
b. Name, address and telephone number of designated resident agent, if
any.
c. Name, address, and telephone number of vendee, if the dwelling is
being sold through a contract for deed.
d. Legal address of the dwelling.
e. Number of dwelling units within the dwelling.
f. Description of the procedure through which tenant inquiries and
complaints are to be processed.
Subsection 2. Every person holding an operating license shall give notice to the
compliance official within five (5) business days after any change of this
information. Notice of transfer of ownership shall be as described in section 10.
Section 6. Resident Agent Required: No operating license shall be issued or renewed for
a nonresident owner of rental dwelling units unless such owner designates in writing to
the compliance official the name of his resident agent who is responsible for maintenance
and upkeep and who is legally constituted and empowered to receive service of notice of
violation of the provisions of the city ordinances, to receive orders and to institute
remedial action to effect such orders and to accept all service of process pursuant to law.
The compliance official shall be notified in writing of any change of resident agent.
Section 7. Conformance With Laws: No operating license shall be issued or renewed
unless the rental dwelling and its premises conform to the ordinances of the city and the
laws of the state.
Section 8. Inspection Condition: No operating license shall be issued or renewed unless
the owner of the rental units agrees in his application to permit inspections pursuant to
Ordinance #2013-01. The City Council shall from time to time designate one or more
inspectors for purposes of this ordinance. If no such inspector shall have been
designated, the City’s Building Official shall be responsible for conducting the
inspection.
Section 9. Posting Of License: Every licensee of a multiple dwelling shall cause to be
conspicuously posted in the main entryway or other conspicuous location therein the
current license for the respective multiple dwelling.
Section 10. Transferability Of License: Operating licenses issued for a particular property
shall be transferable to the purchaser of such property upon sale. Every person holding
an operating license shall give notice in writing to the compliance official within five (5)
3
business days after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of
any licensed rental dwelling. Such notice shall include the name and address of the
person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rental dwelling or dwellings.
Section 11. Occupancy Register Required:
Subsection 1. Dwellings:
a. Every owner of a licensed rental dwelling containing three (3) or more
dwelling units shall keep, or cause to be kept, a current register of
occupancy for each dwelling unit which provides the following
information:
(1) Dwelling unit address.
(2) Number of bedrooms in dwelling unit.
(3) Names of tenants who have signed the lease.
(4) Dates renters occupied and vacated dwelling units.
b. Such register shall be made available for viewing or copying by the
compliance official at all reasonable times.
Section 12. Conduct On Licensed Premises:
Subsection 1. Prohibited Conduct: It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to
see that persons occupying the licensed premises conduct themselves in such a
manner as not to cause the premises to be disorderly. For purposes of this
subsection, a premises is disorderly at which any of the following activities occur:
a. Violation of laws relating to public nuisances (including, but not limited
to Ordinance #2005-10 of this code).
b. Violation of laws relating to the possession of controlled substances as
defined in Minnesota statutes section 152.01, subdivision 4.
c. Violation of laws relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2
percent malt liquor7.
d. Violation of laws relating to gambling.
e. Violation of laws relating to "prostitution" as defined in Minnesota
statutes section 609.321, subdivision 9, or acts relating to prostitution.
4
f. Violation of laws relating to unlawful use or possession of a firearm
(including, but not limited to, Minnesota statutes sections 609.66,
subdivision 1a, 609.67 and 624.713).
g. Violation of laws relating to disorderly conduct.
h. Violation of laws relating to the possession, sale, or receipt of stolen
property.
i. Violation of laws relating to obstruction of the legal process.
j. Violation of laws relating to fireworks.
k. Acts of violence or threats of violence (including, but not limited to,
discharge of firearms, prostitution, intimidation, or any other act that
otherwise jeopardizes someone's health, safety, or welfare).
Subsection 2. Consequences Of Violations:
a. Upon determination by the zoning administrator that a licensed
premises was used in a disorderly manner, as described in Section 12,
subsection 1of this ordinance, the zoning administrator shall give notice to
the licensee of the violation and direct the licensee to take steps to prevent
further violations.
b. If another instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises occurs
within twelve (12) months of an incident for which a notice in Section 12,
subsection 2 of this ordinance was given, the zoning administrator shall
notify the licensee of the violation and shall also require the licensee to
submit a written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken, by
the licensee to prevent further disorderly use of the premises. This written
report shall be submitted to the zoning administrator within five (5) days
of receipt of the notice of disorderly use of the premises and shall detail all
actions taken by the licensee in response to all notices of disorderly use of
the premises within the preceding three (3) months.
c. If another instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises occurs
within twelve (12) months after any two (2) previous instances of
disorderly use for which notices were given to the licensee pursuant to this
ordinance, the rental dwelling license for the premises may be denied,
revoked, suspended, or not renewed. An action to deny, revoke, suspend,
or not renew a license under this ordinance shall be initiated by the City
Clerk, who shall give to the licensee written notice of a hearing before the
city council to consider such denial, revocation, suspension, or
nonrenewal. Such written notice shall specify all violations of this
ordinance, and shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing.
5
The hearing shall be held no less than ten (10) days and no more than
thirty (30) days after giving such notice. Following the hearing, the
council may deny, revoke, suspend or decline to renew the license for all
or any part of the licensed premises or may grant a license upon such
terms and conditions as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of
this subsection.
Subsection 3. Adverse License Action During Eviction Proceedings: No adverse
license action shall be imposed where the instance of disorderly use of the
licensed premises occurred during the pendency of eviction proceedings
(unlawful detailer) or within thirty (30) days of notice given by the licensee to a
tenant to vacate the premises where the disorderly use was related to conduct by
that tenant or by other occupants or guests of the tenant's unit. Eviction
proceedings shall not be a bar to adverse license action however, unless they are
diligently pursued by the licensee. Further, an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or
not renew a license based upon violations of this subsection may be postponed or
discontinued at any time if it appears that the licensee has taken appropriate
measures which will prevent further instances of disorderly conduct.
Subsection 4. Determination Of Disorderly Conduct: A determination that the
licensed premises have been used in a disorderly manner as described in Section
12, subsection 1 of this ordinance shall be made upon substantial evidence to
support such a determination. It shall not be necessary that criminal charges be
brought in order to support a determination of disorderly use, nor shall the fact of
dismissal or acquittal of such a criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license
action under this ordinance.
Subsection 5. Notices: All notices given by the city under this ordinance shall be
personally served on the licensee, sent by registered mail to the licensee's last
known address or, if neither method of service effects notice, by posting on a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
Subsection 6. Enforcement Actions Not Exclusive: Enforcement actions provided
in this ordinance shall not be exclusive, and the city council may take any action
with respect to a licensee, a tenant, or the licensed premises as is authorized by
this code or state law.
Section 13. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: Every operating license issued under
the provisions of this ordinance is subject to suspension or revocation by the city council
should the licensed owner or his duly authorized resident agent fail to operate or maintain
licensed rental dwellings and units therein consistent with the provisions of the
ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. In the event that an operating license is
suspended or revoked by the city council for just cause, it shall be unlawful for the owner
or his duly authorized agent to thereafter permit any new occupancies of vacant or
thereafter vacated rental units until such time as a valid operating license may be restored
by the city council. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
6
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. In
addition, the City may seek civil enforcement of this ordinance.
Section 14. Effective Date: This ordinance shall be effective upon its passage and
publication.
Passed this ________ day of January, 2013.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By:______________________________
B. J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
William R. McCabe, City Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2013-04
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 60 OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA’S ZONING
CODE TO ALLOW ALL PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES OF THE BUSINESS DISTRICTS
AS A PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USE WITHIN THE
I-1, LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Section One. Ordinance Amendment. Section 60.06, A (1) of the City of St. Augusta’s City
Zoning Code is amended to allow all permitted conditional uses of the Business Districts as a permitted
conditional use within the I-1, Limited Industrial District as follows. The double underlined text shows
the additions and the strikethrough text shows the deletions.
60.06 Conditional Uses: The following are conditional uses in the I-1 District (Requires a conditional
use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Section 4.02
and 4.024 of this Ordinance).
A. Accessory, enclosed retail, rental, or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or
conditional use within this Section, provided that:
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use or a conditional use in a Business District.
2. Such use does not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the
principal building.
Section Two. Findings. In amending Section 60.06, A (1) of the City Zoning Code to allow all
permitted conditional uses of the Business Districts as a permitted conditional use within the I-1, Limited
Industrial District, the City Council of the City of St. Augusta has found that the amendment is required
for a public good, is in the interest of public health, safety and welfare, and is compatible with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan.
Section Three. Effective Date. This Ordinance amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its
publication as provided by law.
Passed in regular session of the City Council on April 2nd, 2013.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _____________________________
BJ Kroll, Mayor
Attest:
By: ________________________________
William R. McCabe, Clerk/Administrator
STATE OF MINNESOTA
COUNTY OF STEARNS
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
ORDINANCE No. 2013-05
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO CONSTRUCTION NOISE, AND IMPOSING
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA DOES ORDAIN:
SECTION 1. Construction Activities.
No person shall engage in or permit construction activities involving the use of hammers
or the use of any kind of air, electric, diesel, or gas powered machine or other power
equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
SECTION 2. Exceptions for Special Events.
The City Council shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant exceptions
from the requirements of any section of this ordinance for special events. Any person
seeking an exception shall file an application at City Hall with the City Clerk or his/her
designee on a form prescribed by the City. The application shall state the dates during
which the application is proposed, the location of the noise source and time of operation,
the nature of the noise source, reasons why the exception is sought, steps taken to
minimize the noise level, and such other information as is required by the City.
SECTION 3. Exception for Emergency Work.
Noise created exclusively in the performance of emergency work to preserve the public
health, safety, or welfare, or in the performance of emergency work necessary to restore a
public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be exempt from the provisions of this
ordinance for a period not to exceed 24 hours after the work is commenced. Persons
responsible for such work shall inform the police department, Building Inspector and
City Administrator of the need to initiate such work or, if the work is commenced during
non-business hours of the City, at the beginning of business hours of the first business
day thereafter. Any person responsible for such emergency work shall take all reasonable
actions to minimize the amount of noise.
SECTION 4. Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Any
1
person who violates any provision of this ordinance may also be subject to an
administrative fine of $100 per violation pursuant to City ordinance No. 2005-12,
titled An Ordinance To Provide For Administrative Enforcement Of Code
Regulations. Every day that the offense occurs shall be deemed a separate
violation of this ordinance.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this ordinance or the application of any provision to a particular
situation is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions
of the ordinance and the application of the ordinance to any other situation shall not be
invalidated.
This ordinance shall be effective upon its passage and publication in the official
newspaper of the City.
Passed this 6th day of August, 2013
________________________________
B.J. Kroll
Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________
William R. McCabe
City Clerk
2
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 2013-06
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 2.02 AND SECTION 31 OF THE CITY OF ST.
AUGUSTA’S ZONING CODE PERTAINING TO SIGNS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Section One. Ordinance Amendment. Section 2.02 and Section 31 of the City of St. Augusta’s
City Zoning Code pertaining to signs and definitions of various signs are hereby amended as follows.
The double underlined text shows the additions and the strikethrough text shows the deletions.
Renumbering and formatting will be updated accordingly as a result of the insertions and deletions.
2.02 DEFINITIONS: The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are
defined as follows:
Sign Related:
2. Advertising Sign: Any permanent non-governmental sign advertising products, services,
commodities, entertainment or other activity not offered at the location of the sign or not
exclusively related to the premises on which the sign is located. Billboards are a form of
advertising sign.
20. Electronic Graphic Display Sign: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static
images, static graphics, or static pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small
number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs),
fiber optics, light bulbs, or other illumination devices within the display area where the
message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fading, repixalization,
or dissolve modes. Electronic Graphic Display Signs include computer
programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays.
36. 37. Motion Sign: Any sign which revolves, rotates, has moving parts, or gives illusion of motion.
This includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or animated display and any
display that incorporates rotating panels.
50. Pyrotechnics: Fireworks or similar devices used to ignite a combustible substance or produce
an explosion.
65. Video Display Sign: A sign that changes its message or background in a manner or method
of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not include text,
and depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or
graphics displayed in a progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including but
not limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding
or contracting shapes. Video display signs do not include electronic graphic display signs.
Video display signs do not include images or messages with these characteristics projected
onto buildings or other objects.
31.03 EXEMPT AND PROHIBITED SIGNS:
B. Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited:
1. Motion Signs and Flashing Signs: This includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing,
blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels. Except time
and temperature signs depicting a constant message as contrasted to a moving message.
2. No private sign shall be erected that resembles any official marker or sign erected of a
governmental agency or shall display such words as “stop” or “danger” unless so specified by
this Ordinance or other City regulations.
3. Projecting Signs.
4. Roof Signs.
5. Expired Business Signs: Those signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service
no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located shall be
removed immediately upon termination of use. Where the owner or lessor of the premises is
seeking a new tenant, such sign may remain in place for not more than thirty (30) days from
the date of vacancy.
6. Advertising or Business Signs: Such signs on or attached to equipment such as semi-truck
trailers where signing is a principal use of the equipment on either a temporary or permanent
basis.
7. Signs containing audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics.
8. Video Display Signs.
31.05 GENERAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
C. Commercial/Business and Industrial Zoning Districts as defined by Section 50 of this Ordinance:
7. Message Signs: Temporary message signs, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet on each
side may be allowed by temporary permit under the following provisions:
a. Temporary Message Signs. Temporary message signs, not exceeding thirty-two (32)
square feet on each side may be allowed by temporary permit under the following
provisions:
a. (1) Temporary Mmessage signs may be illuminated, but flashing signs are
prohibited.
b. (2) Temporary Eelectronic changing message/reader boards graphic display signs are
prohibited.
c. (3) A temporary message sign permit shall be valid for a period of ten (10) days and
no more than three (3) permits per property shall be granted during any twelve
(12) month period.
d. (4) In the case of a business center where two (2) or more uses are located within the
same structure or upon the same parcel of land, that center shall be considered
one property.
b. Electronic Graphic Display and Video Display Signs. Electronic graphic display and
video display signs subject to the following provisions:
(1) Electronic graphic display and video display signs may occupy no more than
thirty-five percent (35%) of the actual copy and graphic area of the sign as
allowed and outlined in the Commercial/Business and Industrial Zoning Districts.
The remainder of the sign must not have the capability to have dynamic displays
or video displays even if not used. Only one contiguous electronic graphic
display or video display area is allowed on a sign face.
(2) No part of the matrix elements of the display shall change more than once every
ten (10) seconds, except one for which changes are necessary to correct hourand-
minute, date, or temperature information. Time, date, or temperature
information is considered one dynamic display and may not be included as a
component of any other dynamic display. A display of time, date, or temperature
must remain for at least ten (10) seconds before changing to a different display,
but the time, date, or temperature information itself may change no more often
than once every three (3) seconds.
(3) Electronic graphic display signs shall have messages that change instantaneously,
and do not fade, dissolve, blink, or appear to simulate motion in any way.
(4) The message displayed must be complete in themselves, without continuation in
content to the next image or message or to any other sign.
(5) The matrix elements of the display shall be monochromatic in color.
(6) Each sign shall be located at least one hundred-fifty (150) feet from any other
electronic graphic or video display sign as measured in a straight line from the
base of the sign to the base of any other electronic graphic or video display sign.
(7) The sign must be designed and equipped to freeze the display in one position if a
malfunction occurs. The displays must also be equipped with a means to
immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must
immediately stop the display when notified by the city that it is not complying
with the standards of this ordinance.
(8) Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics are prohibited in association with
and electronic graphic display sign.
(9) No portion of any electronic graphic display sign may fluctuate in light intensity
or use intermittent, strobe or moving light or light that changes in intensity in
sudden transitory bursts, flashes, streams, zooms, twinkles, or sparkles. or in any
manner that creates the illusion of movement.
Section Two. Findings. In amending Section 2.02 relating to definitions of signs and Section 31
relating to signs of the City Zoning Code to allow electronic graphic display signs in the
Commercial/Business and Industrial Zoning Districts, the City Council of the City of St. Augusta has
found that the amendment is required for a public good, is in the interest of public health, safety and
welfare, and is compatible with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
Section Three. Effective Date. This Ordinance amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its
publication as provided by law.
Passed by the City Council of the City of St. Augusta October 1, 2013.
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
By: _____________________________
BJ Kroll, Mayor
Attest:
By: ________________________________
William R. McCabe, Clerk/Administrator
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
STEARNS COUNTY, MINNESOTA
Ordinance # 2013-08
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE. OPTIONAL
APPENDIX CHAPTERS SHALL NOT APPLY UNLESS SPECIFICALLY ADOPTED.
The City of St. Augusta hereby ordains as follows:
FIRE CODE
The 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code, which adopts the 2006 International Fire Code including Appendix
Chapters B,C,D,H, and I, is adopted as the Fire Code for the City of St. Augusta, Minnesota, for the
purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, except such portions as are modified or amended by this ordinance:
APPENDIX B – FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS.
APPENDIX C – FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION.
APPENDIX D – FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS.
APPENDIX H – OPEN FLAME AND FUEL STORAGE PROHIBITED ON
BALCONIES OR PATIOS
APPENDIX I - SPECIAL LOCKING ARRANGEMENTS FOR GROUP I
OCCUPANCIES
Subd. 1. Enforcement.
(a) The Chief of the Fire Department serving the City of St. Augusta, Minnesota, or authorized representative
will enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) The Chief of the Fire Department may detail members of the Fire Department as inspectors as necessary.
The Chief of the Fire Department may recommend the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such
authorization is made, will be selected in accordance with the applicable employment policies of the City of St.
Augusta.
Subd. 2. Definitions.
(a) “Jurisdiction” means the City of St. Augusta.
Subd. 3. Open Burning.
A Minnesota Department of Natural Resources Burning Permit is required for the kindling or maintaining of an
open fire or fire on any public street, alley, road, or other public or private ground. The permit holder must
adhere to all permit instructions and stipulations.
Subd. 4. Prohibited open burning.
Open burning that will be offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous will be prohibited. The Fire Chief or his designee
is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder or the fire department of open burning when it
creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
Exception: Permitted burning within areas zoned Agricultural.
Subd. 5. Open-flame Cooking Devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices will not be
operated on combustible balconies or within 15 feet of combustible construction.
Exception: One and two family dwellings.
Subd. 6. Liquefied-petroleum-gas-fueled cooking devices. LP gas burners will not be located on combustible
balconies or within 15 feet of combustible construction.
Exception: One and two family dwellings.
Subd. 7. Recreational fires. Recreational fires will not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or combustible
material unless the fire is contained in an approved device or method, such as a fireplace, charcoal grill, etc.
located at least 15 feet from any buildings, fences or structures.
Subd. 8. Stop Work Order. Any person who will continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, will be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Subd. 9. Amendments to the 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code and 2006 International Fire Code.
(a) Section 314.9, 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code. Solid Fuel Burning Appliances in Exhibit Halls and
Assembly Occupancies. Use of solid fuel burning appliances for display purposes will not be allowed in
assembly occupancies other than cooking fuel as described in NFPA 101, 2000 Edition, Section 12.7.1.4. Solid
fuel burning appliances may be defined as any appliance that uses decomposition of cellulose material,
hydrocarbon solids, animal fat or proteins to produce heat or leaves an ash residue. This would include plant
products or materials, wood, coal, mesquite, etc.
(b) Section 314.10, 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code. Compressed flammable gas cylinders and flammable or
combustible liquids used for display purposes will be prohibited within exhibit hall and assembly occupancies.
(c) Amendments to Chapter 5 – Fire Service Features
Section 503.4, 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code – Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads is amended to add
the following language:
Parking of motor vehicles in, or otherwise obstructing fire lanes will be prohibited at all times. Any vehicle so
parked is the act of a registered owner as well as the act of the person actually parking the vehicle. For purposes
of this section, registered owner is defined to include motor vehicle leasing agencies and corporate owners. It
will be a defense to any violation if the registered owner shows that on the date of the offense, title has been
transferred to another.
(d) Section 506.1 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code, Key Boxes Where Required is amended to add the
following language: An approved DAMA® brand emergency key-box shall be permanently installed adjacent
to the main entrance of the structure at eye level unless approved otherwise by the fire official.
(e) Section 907.9.1 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code Zoning indicator panel is amended to add the following
language: The fire alarm panel or annunciator shall be located at the main entrance of the structure unless
approved otherwise by the fire official.
(f) Section 907.15 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code Monitoring is amended to add the following language: Fire
alarms requiring electronic monitoring shall be monitored by an alarm service listed for Central Station Service
unless approved otherwise by the fire official.
(g) Section 912.2 Minnesota State Fire Code Fire Department Connection Locations is amended to add the
following language: The fire department connection shall be located adjacent to the main entrance of the
structure unless approved otherwise by the fire official.
(h) Section 3308.2.2 Minnesota State Fire Code Proximate audience displays is amended to add the following
language: Indoor displays of fireworks, pyrotechnics and open flame performances to proximate audiences is
prohibited within the city.
(i) Section 3406.2.4.4 Minnesota State Fire Code Locations where above ground tanks are prohibited is
amended to add the following language: new installations of fuel and storage tanks for flammable and
combustible liquids and gases are prohibited from building rooftops and floors other than the lowest floor of
buildings, unless approved otherwise by the fire official.
(j) Amendments to Appendix D, 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code – Fire Apparatus Access Roads
1. Figure D103.1 – DEAD-END FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD TURNAROUND is amended as
follows:
A Cul-de-sac will have the minimum diameter of 90 feet with posted no parking lane or will have a minimum
diameter of 120 feet where parking is provided.
History: Ord. 2370 9-13-07.
PASSED this 3rd day of August, 2013.
________________________________________
B.J. Kroll, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________________________
William R. McCabe, Administrator/Clerk
STATE OF MINNESOTA
COUNTY OF STEARNS
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
ORDINANCE No. 2013-09
AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING LICENSING FOR RESIDENTIAL SOLID
WASTE HAULERS WITHIN THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA DOES ORDAIN:
SECTION 1. Licensing Requirements
A. License Required
1. It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage, rubbish, or recyclables
without the appropriate license issued by the City under this ordinance
unless the person is hauling from their own residence for disposal at
another location with the approval of that property owner.
2. Haulers collecting garbage, rubbish, or recyclables from any residential
customer must be licensed.
B. Conditions of License: Each license shall be applied for, issued and renewed
and may be suspended or revoked, as provided by this Ordinance, and each
licensee shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
C. Application for License: Any person desiring a license to collect garbage
shall make application for the same to the City Administrator upon a form
prescribed by the City. The applicant shall set forth the following:
1. The name and address of applicant
2. A list of the equipment which the applicant proposes to use in such
collection.
3. The place or places to which the garbage, rubbish, and/or recyclable
materials is to be hauled.
4. The manner in which said garbage, rubbish and/or recyclable materials is
to be disposed of.
D. Liability Insurance: Before a license is issued, the applicant shall file with the
City Administrator evidence that the applicant has in effect public liability
insurance for the hauler’s business and for all vehicles in at least the sum of
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury of one (1) person, one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury of two (2) or more persons in the
same accident and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property
damages.
1
E. Schedule of Rates: When the application is submitted, the applicant shall file
with the City Administrator a schedule of proposed rates to be charged during
the licensed period. Every licensee shall provide thirty (30) days written
notification to the City and the licensee’s customers of any change in rates to
be implemented during the license period.
F. Licensee Fee: Before a license is issued, the applicant shall pay to the City a
license fee to be established along with the City’s Fee Schedule Ordinance.
The fee shall accompany the application.
G. Expiration of License: No license issued shall be for a period longer that one
(1) year, and all licenses shall expire on December 31, of each year.
H. Suspension or Revocation: Licenses may be suspended or revoked by the
City Council, after the licensee has been given a reasonable notice and an
opportunity to be heard, for the violation of any provisions of this Ordinance
or for the violation of any conditions or restrictions in the motion granting the
license or any motion passed by the City Council or upon failure of the
licensee to comply with any conditions, order or direction issued by the City
Council.
SECTION 2. Requirements and Restrictions
A. Collection of garbage and rubbish materials will be provided on a weekly
basis.
B. Hours of Operation: No hauler shall operate in the City of St. Augusta before
7:00am or after 9:00pm.
C. Days of Operation: Collection of garbage, rubbish and recycling materials
shall be restricted to _________ only, except when ____________ is a legal
holiday. In case of a holiday, the collection will occur the following business
day.
D. Vehicle Equipment and Maintenance: Licensees shall have covered
watertight, packer type vehicles or, in the case of recycling, appropriate
container vehicles in good condition and which prevent loss in transit of liquid
or solid cargo. All vehicles shall be kept clean and as free from offensive
odors as possible and shall not be allowed to stand in any street longer than
reasonably necessary to collect garbage, rubbish and recyclable materials.
E. Curbside recycling collection will be made available to all customers. Such
service shall provide a single-sort service and the container shall be equal in
size to the garbage container. Recycling service shall be bi-weekly and on the
same day as garbage and rubbish collection.
2
F. Collection service priced on the basis of volume shall be provided. All
billings shall be itemized so as to show what individual charges are being
levied.
This ordinance shall be effective upon its passage and publication in the official
newspaper of the City.
Passed this 5th day of November, 2013
________________________________
B.J. Kroll
Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________
William R. McCabe
City Clerk
3
STATE OF MINNESOTA
COUNTY OF STEARNS
CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA
ORDINANCE No. 2013-10
AN ORDINANCE RESTRICTING HOURS PARKING IS ALLOWED ON CITY
STREETS DURING WINTER MONTHS
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA DOES ORDAIN:
SECTION 1. Parking Restriction
No vehicles shall be parked or left standing unattended between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) a.m. and seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. of any day in November,
December, January, February, or March of each year on any street, avenue, or
thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the city.
This ordinance shall be effective upon its publication in the official newspaper
of the City.
Passed this 3rd day of December, 2013
________________________________
B.J. Kroll
Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________
William R. McCabe
City Clerk
1

















































3-1
SECTION 3. ADMINISTRATION - AMENDMENTS (TEXT AND MAP)
Subdivision
3.01 Amendments to Zoning Ordinance
3.02 Procedures
3.03 Amendments - Initiation
3.04 Certification of Taxes Paid
3.01 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE: The regulations, restrictions and
boundaries set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented,
changed or repealed; provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties with interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. At least ten (10) days’ notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Any action
taken pursuant to this section shall also be in compliance and accordance with the rules
and regulations of the Department of Natural Resources, State of Minnesota, and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
3.02 PROCEDURE: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, an application for an
amendment shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days from the date of its official
and complete submission unless extended pursuant to Statute or a time waiver is granted
by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or
federal agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty
(60) days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional procedural
requirements are as follows:
A. Requests for rezoning (text or map) shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on
an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as
provided by City Council resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by
fifteen (15) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the
proposed change, development of use and list of property owners located within
one-half (1/2) mile of the subject property. Said property owners list shall be
certified by the County or City. The request for amendment shall be placed on the
agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting. The request shall be
considered officially submitted when all the informational requirements are complied
with.
B. The applicant shall supply proof of title of the property for which the rezoning is
requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently
certified together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioner acquire a
legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written authorization from
the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested rezoning.
3-2
C. Upon receipt of said application, the Zoning Administrator shall set a public hearing
following proper hearing notification. The Planning Commission shall conduct the
hearing and report its findings and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of
said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of the
request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior
to hearing and written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days
prior to all owners of land within one-half (1/2) mile of the subject property.
D. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such
proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.
E. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare
technical reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a
recommendation on the action to the City Council.
F. The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider possible adverse effects
of the proposed amendment. Its judgement shall be based upon (but not limited to)
the following factors:
1. The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific polices
and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with the official City
Comprehensive Plan.
2. The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future land uses
of the area.
3. The proposed use conforms with all performance standards contained
herein.
4. The proposed use will not tend to or actually depreciate the area in which it is
proposed.
5. The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public services and
will not overburden the City’s service capacity.
6. The proposed use is in conformance with the City’s water connection and
assessment policies or is contiguous to existing development of a similar
zoning.
G. The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request
additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain
expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning
operational factors, said information to be declared necessary to establish
performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
3-3
Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information
may be grounds for denial of the request.
H. The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed request.
I. The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request.
J. The City Council shall not act upon an amendment until they have received a report
and recommendation from the Planning Commission or until sixty (60) days after the
first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.
K. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
Zoning Administrator shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for
the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be
entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council
meeting.
L. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and
the City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing
if deemed necessary.
M. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission,
the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and
thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning
Commission, the City Council may, before taking final action, refer the matter back
to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall
provide the Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific
reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular
action.
N. Approval of a proposed amendment shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
Approval of a proposed zoning map amendment which changes all or part of the
existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either business,
industrial, or planned unit development that allows for commercial or industrial uses
shall require a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council.
O. The amendment shall not become effective until such time as the City Council
approves an ordinance reflecting said amendment and after said ordinance is
published in the official newspaper.
P. Whenever an application for an amendment has been considered and denied by
the City Council, a similar application and proposal for the amendment affecting the
same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City
3-4
Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial, unless a decision to
reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.
3.03 AMENDMENTS - INITIATION: The City Council or Planning Commission may,
upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text or the district boundaries of this
Ordinance. The procedural requirements of Sections 3.02.A and 3.02.B of this Ordinance
shall not apply to such proposed amendments except to the extent required by State
Statute. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein, within the
City, may initiate a request to amend the district and map boundaries or text of this
Ordinance as to affect the same real estate.
3.04 CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for an
amendment, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent
property taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the parcel of land to
which the rezoning application relates.
4-1
SECTION 4. ADMINISTRATION - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Subdivision
4.01 Purpose
4.02 Procedure
4.03 Information Requirement
4.04 General Performance Standards
4.05 Lapse of Conditional Use Permit by Non-Use
4.06 Performance Security
4.07 Conditional Use Permits - Initiation
4.08 Certification of Taxes Paid
4.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of a conditional use permit is to provide the City of St.
Augusta with a reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of certain
designated uses upon the general welfare, public health, and safety. In making this
determination, whether or not the conditional use is to be allowed, the City may consider
the nature of the adjoining land or buildings, the effect upon traffic into and from the
premises, or on any adjoining streets, and all other or further factors as the City shall deem
a prerequisite of consideration in determining the effect of the use on the general welfare,
public health and safety.
4.02 PROCEDURE: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, an application for a
conditional use permit shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days from the date of
its official and complete submission unless extended pursuant to Statute or a time waiver is
granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state
or federal agencies extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60)
days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional procedural requirements
are as follows:
A. Request for conditional use permits, as provided within this Ordinance shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such application shall
be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council resolution. Such
application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of detailed written and
graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use and a
list of property owners located within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the subject property,
obtained from and certified by Stearns County or the City. The request for
conditional use permit shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning
Commission meeting. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted
when all the information requirements are complied with.
B. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for
which the conditional use permit is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or
4-2
registered property abstract currently certified together with any unrecorded
documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable
ownership interest or supply written authorization from the owner(s) of the property
in question to proceed with the requested conditional use permit.
C. Upon receipt of said application, the Zoning Administrator shall set a public hearing
following proper hearing notification. The Planning Commission shall conduct the
hearing, and report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council.
Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of
the request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing and written notification of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10)
days prior to all owners of land within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the boundary of the
property in question.
D. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such
proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.
E. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare
technical reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a
recommendation on the action to the City Council.
F. No conditional use shall be recommended by the Planning Commission or granted
by the City Council unless all the following findings are made:
1. That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted.
2. That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property for
predominant uses in the area.
3. That adequate utilities, access streets, drainage, and other necessary
facilities have been or will be provided for the proposed conditional use.
4. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide sufficient offstreet
parking and loading space to serve the proposed conditional use.
5. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control
offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise, and vibration, so that none of these will
constitute a nuisance, and to control lighted signs and other lights in such a
manner that no disturbance to neighboring properties will result from the
4-3
proposed conditional use.
6. That proper facilities are or will be provided which would eliminate any traffic
generation or traffic hazard which may result from the proposed conditional
use.
7. That there is a demonstrated need for the proposed use.
8. That the proposed use is in compliance with any land use plan adopted by
the City.
9. That the affected property does not contain any wetlands or public waters
over which the United States, the State of Minnesota, or their respective
agencies or political subdivisions have control or jurisdiction, or which are
otherwise regulated by the United States, the State of Minnesota, or their
respective agencies or political subdivisions.
G. The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request
additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain
expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning
operational factors, said information is to be declared necessary to establish
performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information
may be grounds for denial of the request.
H. The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed request.
I. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions
or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to carry out the intent
and purpose of the Ordinance.
J. The City Council shall not grant a conditional use permit until they have received a
report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or until sixty (60) days
after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was
considered.
K. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
Zoning Administrator shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for
the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be
entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council
meeting.
L. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed
4-4
necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition
it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
M. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission,
the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and
thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning
Commission, the City Council may before taking final action, refer the matter back to
the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide
the Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for
referral. This procedure shall be followed only one (1) time on a singular action.
N. Approval of a request shall require passage by a majority vote of the entire City
Council.
O. Whenever an application for a conditional use permit has been considered and
denied by the City Council, a similar application for the conditional use permit
affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the
Planning Commission or City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its
denial, unless a decision to reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.
P. If a request for a conditional use permit receives approval of the City Council, the
applicant shall record such with the County Registrar of Titles. The applicant,
immediately upon recording such or as soon as is reasonably possible, shall furnish
the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be
granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.
4.03 INFORMATION REQUIREMENT: The information required for all conditional use
permits shall be as specified in Section 10.06 of this Ordinance.
4.04 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: As may be applicable, the evaluation
of any proposed conditional use permit request shall be subject to and include, but not
limited to, the following general performance standards and criteria:
A. The use and the site in question shall be served by a street of sufficient capacity to
accommodate the type and volume of traffic which would be generated.
B. The site design for access and parking shall minimize internal as well as external
traffic conflicts and shall be in compliance with Section 20 of this Ordinance.
C. If applicable, a pedestrian circulation system shall be clearly defined and
appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachment by parked or
moving vehicles.
4-5
D. Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading shall be provided in compliance
with Sections 20 and 21 of this Ordinance.
E. Loading docks and drive-up facilities shall be positioned so as to minimize internal
site access problems and maneuvering conflicts, to avoid visual or noise impacts on
any abutting residential use or district, and are in compliance with Section 21 of this
Ordinance.
F. Whenever a non-residential use abuts a residential use or district, a buffer area with
screening and landscaping shall be provided in compliance with Section 15.07 of
this Ordinance.
G. General site screening and landscaping shall be provided in compliance with
Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.
H. All exterior lighting shall be so directed so as not to cast glare toward or onto the
public right-of-way or neighboring residential uses or districts, and shall be in
compliance with Section 15.10 of this Ordinance.
I. Potential exterior noise generated by the use shall be identified and mitigation
measures as may be necessary shall be imposed to insure compliance with Section
15.14 of this Ordinance.
J. The site drainage system shall be subject to the review and approval of the City
Engineer.
K. The architectural appearance and functional design of the building and site shall not
be so dissimilar to the existing or potential buildings and area so as to cause
impairment of property values or a blighting influence. All sides of the principal and
accessory structures are to have essentially the same or coordinated, harmonious
exterior finish materials and treatment.
L. Provisions shall be made for an interior location for recycling and trash handling and
storage or an outdoor, enclosed receptacle area shall be provided in compliance
with Section 15.15 of this Ordinance.
M. All signs and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance
with Section 31 of this Ordinance.
N. The use and site shall be in compliance with any federal or state laws or regulations
which are applicable and any related permits are obtained and documented to the
City.
4-6
O. Any applicable business licenses mandated by City regulations are approved and
obtained.
P. The hours of operation may be restricted when there is potential negative impact
upon a residential use or district.
Q. The use complies with all applicable performance standards of the zoning district in
which it is located.
4.05 LAPSE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT BY NON-USE: Whenever within one (1)
year after granting a conditional use permit, the use as allowed by the permit shall not have
been initiated or utilized, then such permit shall become null and void unless a petition for
an extension of time in which to complete or utilize the use that has been granted by the
City Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the Zoning
Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the original conditional use
permit. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension
shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the
conditional use permit. Such petition shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a
recommendation and to the City Council for a decision.
4.06 PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
A. Except in the case of non-income producing residential property (excluding related
structures), upon approval of a conditional use permit the City shall be provided,
where deemed necessary, with an irrevocable letter of credit, cash escrow,
certificate of deposit payable to the City, or cash deposit prior to the issuing of
building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development.
Said security shall be non-cancelable and shall guarantee conformance and
compliance with the conditions of the conditional use permit and the ordinances of
the City.
B. The security shall be in the amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the
City Engineer’s, City Building Official’s, or City Council’s estimated costs of labor
and materials for the proposed improvements or development. Said project can be
handled in stages upon the discretion of the City Engineer and Building Official.
C. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or
development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the
conditional use permit and regulations of the City has been issued by the City
Building Official.
D. Failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit or the regulations
of the City shall result in forfeiture of the security.
4-7
4.07 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS - INITIATION: The City Council or Planning
Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request for a conditional use permit in
conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any person owning real estate or
having documented interest therein, within the City may initiate a request for a conditional
use permit for real estate in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
4.08 CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for a
conditional use permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no
delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the parcel
of land to which the conditional use permit application relates.
5-1
SECTION 5. ADMINISTRATION - INTERIM USE PERMITS
Subdivision
5.01 Purpose and Intent
5.02 Procedure
5.03 General Standards
5.04 Termination
5.05 Certification of Taxes Paid
5.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT: The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:
A. To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is obtained or
while the permanent location is under construction.
B. To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City Council, but that with
anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future or
will be replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the
respective district.
C. To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change to an area and
which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan provided that said use
maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is in keeping with
the architectural character and design standards of existing uses and development.
5.02 PROCEDURE: Uses defined as interim uses which do not presently exist within a
respective zoning district shall be processed according to the standards and procedures for
a conditional use permit as established by Section 4 of this Ordinance.
5.03 GENERAL STANDARDS: An interim use shall comply with the following:
A. Meet the standards of a conditional use permit set forth in Section 4 of this
Ordinance.
B. Conform to the applicable general performance standards of Section 4.04 of this
Ordinance.
C. The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning district.
D. The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty.
5-2
E. The use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on the public.
F. The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deems appropriate for
permission of the use.
5.04 TERMINATION: An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of the
following events, whichever occurs first:
A. The date stated in the permit.
B. Upon violation of conditions, as determined by the City Council and under which the
permit was issued.
C. Upon change in the City’s zoning regulations which renders the use nonconforming.
D. The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a permitted
or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning district.
5.05 CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for an interim
use permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent
property taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of
land to which the interim use permit application relates.
6-1
SECTION 6. ADMINISTRATION - ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS
AND APPROVALS
Subdivision
6.01 Purpose
6.02 Administrative Permits
6.03 Non-Permit Approvals
6.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and procedures
for the processing and consideration of activities allowed by administrative permit, and of
matters requiring the approval of the Zoning Administrator with the goal of protecting the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City.
6.02 ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS:
A. Procedure:
1. Application for an administrative permit shall be filed by the property owner
or designated agent with the Zoning Administrator on forms to be provided
by the City.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as set forth
by a resolution of the City Council. Applications for amending permits shall
be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as set forth by resolution of the
City Council for administrative permits.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and related materials
and shall determine that the proposal is in compliance with all applicable
evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and applicable performance standards
set forth in this Ordinance.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall consider possible adverse effects of the
proposed events or activity. Judgment shall be based upon (but not limited
to) the following factors:
a. Compliance with and effect upon the Comprehensive Plan and public
facilities plans.
b. The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use, event or
6-2
activity will promote and enhance the general public welfare and will
not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals or
comfort.
c. The use, event, or activity will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property
values within the neighborhood.
d. The establishment of the use, event or activity will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district.
e. Adequate public facilities and services are available or can be
reasonably provided to accommodate the use, event or activity which
is proposed.
f. The use, event or activity shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
g. The use, event or activity and site conform to all applicable
performance standards of this Ordinance.
5. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination on approval or denial
of the administrative permit within sixty (60) days from the date of submission
of a complete application.
6. A written permit shall be issued to the applicant when a determination of
compliance has been made. Specific conditions to assure compliance with
applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and the standards of this
Ordinance shall be attached to the permit.
7. Determination of non-compliance with applicable codes, ordinances, and the
standards in this subdivision shall be communicated to the applicant in
writing and the application for the permit shall be considered denied; unless,
within ten (10) days of the date of such notice, the applicant submits revised
plans and/or information with which the Zoning Administrator is able to
determine compliance.
8. Unresolved disputes as to administrative application of the requirements of
this paragraph shall be subject to appeal as set forth within Section 8 of this
Ordinance.
B. Information Requirement: The information required for all administrative permit
applications shall include:
6-3
1. A concise statement describing the proposed use, event or activity, including
the purpose, type of merchandise involved, dates and times of operation,
number of employees involved, provisions for on-site security, provisions for
on-site parking, and other pertinent information required by the Zoning
Administrator to fully evaluate the application.
2. A copy of the approved site plan for the property or an “as built” survey which
accurately represents existing conditions on the site, including entrances and
exits, bona fide parking and driving areas, and which accurately indicates
any proposed temporary structures, including tents, stands, and signs.
3. An accurate floor plan, when in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator,
such a plan is necessary to properly evaluate the location of the event and
the effectiveness of available entrances and exits.
4. A copy of the current sales tax certificate issued by the State of Minnesota, if
applicable.
5. Information identified in Section 10.06 of this Ordinance, as may be
applicable.
C. Performance Standards: All uses, events or activities allowed by administrative
permit shall conform to the applicable standards outlined in the zoning district in
which such use, event or activity is proposed.
D. Administration and Enforcement:
1. The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of applications and
administrative permits.
2. A copy of all administrative permits issued shall be forwarded to appropriate
staff as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Enforcement of the provisions of this paragraph shall be in accordance with
Section 12 of this Ordinance. Violation of an issued permit or of the
provisions of this section also shall be grounds for denial of future permit
applications.
E. Certification of Taxes Paid: Prior to approving an application for an administrative
permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no
delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the
parcel of land to which the administrative permit application relates.
6-4
6.03 NON-PERMIT APPROVALS: In cases where the Zoning Administrator is given
approval authority without a requirement for an administrative permit, determinations shall
be based upon the criteria outlined in Section 6.02.A.4 of this Ordinance.
7-1
SECTION 7. ADMINISTRATION - VARIANCES
Subdivision
7.01 Purpose
7.02 General Provisions and Standards
7.03 Procedures
7.04 Lapse of Variance
7.05 Performance Security
7.06 Certification of Taxes Paid
7.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to provide for deviations from the literal
provisions of this Ordinance in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue
hardship because of physical circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration, and to grant such variances only when it is demonstrated that such actions
will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance.
7.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND STANDARDS:
A. The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
B. Conditions governing considerations of both major and minor variance requests:
1. In considering all requests for a variance and in taking subsequent action,
the City staff, the Planning Commission and the City Council shall make a
finding of fact that the proposed action will not:
a. Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
b. Unreasonably increase the congestion in the public street.
c. Increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety.
d. Unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within
the neighborhood, or in any way be contrary to the intent of this
Ordinance.
e. Violate the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan.
f. Violate any of the terms or conditions of Item 2, below.
2. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted unless it
can be demonstrated that:
7-2
a. Undue hardship will result if the variance is denied due to the
existence of special conditions and circumstances which are peculiar
to the land, structure or building involved:
1) Special conditions may include exceptional topographic or
water conditions or, in the case of an existing lot or parcel of
record, narrowness, shallowness, insufficient area or shape of
the property.
2) Undue hardship caused by the special conditions and
circumstances may not be solely economic in nature, if a
reasonable use of the property exists under the terms of this
Ordinance.
3) Special conditions and circumstances causing undue hardship
shall not be a result of lot size or building location when the lot
qualifies as a buildable parcel.
b. Literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive
the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this Ordinance, or deny the applicant
the ability to put the property in question to a reasonable use.
c. The special conditions and circumstances causing the undue
hardship do not result from the actions of the applicant.
d. Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
e. The request is not a use variance.
f. Variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to accomplish
the intended purpose of the applicant.
3. Application for a variance shall set forth reasons that the variance is justified
in order to make reasonable use of the land, structure or building.
4. Should the City Council find that the conditions outlined heretofore apply to
the proposed lot or parcel, the City Council may grant a variance from the
strict application of this Ordinance so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardships to the degree considered reasonable, provided such relief may be
7-3
granted without impairing the intent of this Ordinance. In the case of major
variance, the Planning Commission, based upon a report and
recommendation by the City staff, shall have the power to advise and
recommend such conditions related to the variance regarding the location,
character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it
may deem advisable in the interest of the intent and purpose of the
Ordinance.
7.03 PROCEDURE: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, an application for a variance
shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete
submission unless extended pursuant to Statute or a time waiver is granted by the
applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal
agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60) days
unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional procedural requirements are as
follows:
A. Minor Variances:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for an expeditious method
of processing variance requests.
2. Qualifications: Requests qualifying as minor variances must meet one of
the following criteria:
a. Cases where hardship to existing buildings or platted property are
created as a result of public action or change in City regulations
(exception: shoreland and wetland regulations).
b. Structure or setback deviations which are characteristics of and
common to neighboring uses and which do not exceed five (5) feet.
3. Processing:
a. Requests for a minor variance shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on an official application form. Such application shall
be accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution.
Such application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of
detailed written and graphic materials necessary for the explanation of
the request.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons
to prepare technical reports when appropriate and provide general
assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City
7-4
Council.
c. The City shall have the authority to request additional information
from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert
testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant
concerning operational factors, said information to be declared
necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all
pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure of any applicant to
supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial
of the request.
d. The City Council shall review the application and may upon its option
conduct a public hearing (no notice or publication required) on the
request. The City Council may also make a determination and require
that the matter be processed as a major variance.
e. The applicant or a representative shall appear before the City Council
in order to answer questions concerning the proposed variance
request.
f. The City Council shall make findings of fact and shall decide whether
to approve or deny a request for variance within forty (40) days after
the public hearing on said request or forty (40) days after the date at
which the matter was first considered.
g. A variance of this Ordinance shall be by a majority vote of the entire
City Council.
h. All decisions by the City Council involving a variance request shall be
final except that an aggrieved person or persons shall have the right
to appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision to the Stearns County
District Court.
i. If a request for variance receives approval of the City Council, the
applicant shall record such with the County Registrar of Titles. The
applicant, immediately upon recording such, or as soon as reasonably
possible, shall furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits
for the property in question will be granted until such proof of
recording is furnished to the City.
B. Major Variances:
1. Classification: All variances which are not classified as “minor” shall be
deemed “major” variances.
7-5
2. Processing:
a. Request for variances, as provided within this Ordinance, shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form.
Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by
City Council resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied
by fifteen (15) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully
explaining the proposed change, development, or use and a list of
property owners located within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the subject
property, obtained from and certified by Stearns County or the City.
The request for variance shall be placed on the agenda of the first
possible Planning Commission meeting. The request shall be
considered as being officially submitted when all the information
requirements are complied with.
b. Upon receipt of said application, the Zoning Administrator shall set a
public hearing following proper hearing notification. The Planning
Commission shall conduct the hearing, and report its finding and
recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall
consist of a legal property description of request, and be published in
the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and
written notification of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10)
days prior to all owners of land within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the
boundary of the property in question.
c. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate
any such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.
d. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons
to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide general
assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City
Council.
e. The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the applicant concerning
operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and
at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said
information to be declared necessary to establish performance
conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
Failure of an applicant to supply all necessary supportive information
may be grounds for denial of the request.
f. The applicant or representative thereof shall appear before the
7-6
Planning Commission to answer questions concerning the proposed
variance.
g. The Planning Commission shall makes findings of fact and
recommend approval or denial of the request. The Planning
Commission shall reach a decision within sixty (60) days after the first
regular meeting at which the variance request was considered by the
Commission. The Commission’s recommendation and the City staff’s
report shall be presented to the City Council.
h. The City Council shall not grant a variance until they have received a
report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or until
sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at
which the request was considered.
i. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Administrator shall place the report and
recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council
meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and
made part of the permanent written record of the City Council
meeting.
j. The City Council shall review the application and may at its option
conduct a public hearing on the request.
k. The City Council shall make findings of fact and approve or deny a
request for variance within sixty (60) days after receipt of the Planning
Commission’s recommendation.
l. A variance of this Ordinance shall be by a majority vote of the entire
City Council.
m. All decisions by the City Council involving a variance request shall be
final except that an aggrieved person or persons shall have the right
to appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision to the Stearns County
District Court.
n. Whenever a variance for an amendment has been considered and
denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for the
variance affecting the same property shall not be considered again by
the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six (6) months
from the date of its denial, unless a decision to reconsider such
matter is made by the City Council.
7-7
o. If a request for variance receives approval of the City Council, the
applicant shall record such with the County Registrar of Titles. The
applicant, immediately upon recording such, or as soon as reasonably
possible, shall furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits
for the property in question will be granted until such proof of
recording is furnished to the City.
7.04 LAPSE OF VARIANCE: If within one (1) year after granting a variance the use as
allowed by the variance shall not have been initiated or utilized, then such a variance shall
become null and void unless a petition for an extension of time in which to complete or
utilize the use has been granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in
writing and filed with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
of the original variance or appeal. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition.
The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or use
the permitted in the variance or appeal. Such petition shall be presented to the City
Council for decision.
7.05 PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
A. Upon approval of a variance, the City shall be provided, where deemed necessary
by the City Council, with an irrevocable letter of credit, cash escrow, certificate of
deposit payable to the City Council, or cash deposit prior to the issuing of building
permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said
security shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the
variance and City Ordinance provisions.
B. The security shall be in the amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the
City Engineer’s, Building Official’s, or City Council’s estimated costs of labor and
materials for the proposed improvements or development.
C. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or
development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the variance
and City regulations has been issued by the Building Official.
D. Failure to comply with the conditions of the variance or appeal and City regulations
shall result in forfeiture of the security.
E. Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the City, the applicant shall be
required to enter into a performance agreement with the City. This agreement is to
provide authorization to the City to utilize the posted security and complete
stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms and conditions of the
permit. Said agreement shall hold harmless the City for completion of the work and
address other matters as may be determined by the City Attorney.
7-8
7.06 CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for a variance,
the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent property
taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the
variance application relates.
8-1
SECTION 8. ADMINISTRATION - APPEALS
Subdivision
8.01 Board Designation
8.02 Applicability
8.03 Procedures
8.04 Stay of Proceedings
8.05 Appeal
8.01 BOARD DESIGNATION: The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals.
8.02 APPLICABILITY: An appeal shall only be applicable to an interpretation of
legislative intent of provisions of this Ordinance. City staff opinions and evaluations as they
pertain to the impact or result of a request are not subject to the appeal procedure.
8.03 PROCEDURES:
A. An appeal from the ruling of an administrative officer of the City shall be made by
the property owner or their agent within thirty (30) days after the making of the order
being appealed.
B. The property owner or their agent shall file with the City a notice of appeal stating
the specific grounds upon which the appeal is made.
C. Any appeal filed shall be comprehensive and include all matters subject to question.
Subsequent appeals filed by the same individual or group which are intended to
cause unjustifiable delay in the decision-making process shall not be accepted by
the City.
D. The filing of an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City
Council resolution.
E. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall make a finding of fact and its decision
by resolution within forty-five (45) days from the date at which the City Council first
considered the appeal.
8.04 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
8-2
action being appealed unless it is certified to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, after
the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would
cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
other than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record on application,
on notice to the City.
8.05 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND
APPEALS: Any person or persons of any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of
the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, shall have the
right to seek review within thirty (30) days of the decision with a court of record of such
decision in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota, and particularly
Minnesota Statutes, Section 462, as such statute may be from time to time amended,
supplemented or replaced.
9-1
SECTION 9. ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
Subdivision
9.01 Purpose
9.02 General Provisions
9.03 Environmental Assessment Worksheets (EAWs)
9.04 Environmental Impact Statements (EISs)
9.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to determine whether certain projects
have or may have the potential for significant environmental effects and should undergo
special procedures of the Minnesota Environmental Review Program.
9.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. No development project shall be approved prior to review by the Zoning
Administrator to determine the necessity for completion of an Environmental
Assessment Worksheet (EAW) or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).
Procedures for EAWs and EISs are set forth in the Minnesota Environmental
Quality Review Board (EQB) regulations for the Environmental Review Program
authorized by Minnesota Statute 116D.04 and 116D.04S and specified in Minnesota
Rules Parts 4410.0200 to 4410.7800.
B. Environmental reviews (EAWs and EISs) shall be conducted as early as practical in
the processing of a development project. Time delays in the normal permit process
caused by the filing and review of the EAW or EIS shall not be considered part of
the permit approval time requirements set forth within this Ordinance. Such delays
shall be considered as additional required time for each required permit. The permit
process for the proposed project may be continued from the point it was interrupted
by the EAW/EIS process. No decision on granting a permit or other approval
required to commence the project may be issued until the EAW/EIS process is
completed.
9.03 ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT WORKSHEETS (EAWs):
A. Purpose: The purpose of an EAW is to rapidly assess, in a worksheet format,
whether or not a proposed action has the potential for significant environmental
effects.
B. Mandatory EAWs: The preparation of an EAW shall be mandatory for those
9-2
projects that meet or exceed the thresholds contained in the State Environmental
Review Program regulations, Minnesota Rules 4410.4300, as may be amended.
C. Discretionary EAWs: A discretionary EAW may be required when it is determined
that, because of the nature or location of a proposed project, the project may have
the potential for significant environmental effects. The Zoning Administrator may
suggest and/or the City Council may require the preparation of a discretionary EAW
if it is determined that a development project may have some significant
environmental impact or when there is a perception of such, provided that the
project is not specifically exempted by Minnesota Rules 4410.4600, as may be
amended.
D. Procedures:
1. Preparation and Distribution:
a. If the Zoning Administrator determines that an EAW shall be
prepared, the proposer of the project shall submit an “Application for
Environmental Review” along with the EAW prepared in draft form.
The applicant shall agree in writing, as a part of the application, to
reimburse the City prior to the issuance of any permits for all
reasonable costs, including legal and consultants’ fees, incurred in
preparation and review of the EAW.
b. Pursuant to Minnesota Rules 4410.1400, within thirty (30) days of
submission of the Application for Environmental Review, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the draft EAW for completeness and
accuracy, add supplementary material if necessary and approve the
EAW for distribution.
c. If the EAW is ordered to be prepared pursuant to the petition process
of Minnesota Rules 4410.1100, the EAW must be prepared within
twenty-five (25) working days of the date of that decision, unless an
extension of time is agreed upon by the proposer of the project and
the Zoning Administrator.
d. Within five (5) days of approving the EAW for distribution, the Zoning
Administrator shall distribute copies of the EAW to the EQB for
publication of the notice of availability of the EAW in the EQB
Monitor. Copies shall be distributed at the same time to the official
EAW distribution list maintained by the EQB staff. Within five (5) days
of submission of the EAW to the EQB, the Zoning Administrator shall
provide a press release to the City’s official newspaper, containing
notice of availability of the EAW for public review.
9-3
2. Neighboring Property Owner Notification:
a. Upon completion of the EAW for distribution, the Zoning Administrator
shall provide mailed notice of the availability of the EAW and date of
the meeting at which the Planning Commission will consider the
matter to all property owners within at least five hundred (500) feet of
the boundaries of the property which is the subject of the EAW. Said
notice shall be mailed at minimum ten (10) days before the date of the
Planning Commission meeting during which the EAW will be
considered.
b. Failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate any
such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.
3. Review by Planning Commission: During the thirty (30) day comment period
that follows publication of the notice of availability of the EAW in the EQB
Monitor, the Planning Commission shall review the EAW. The Commission
shall make recommendations to the City Council regarding potential
environmental impacts that may warrant further investigation before the
project is commenced and the need for an EIS on the proposed project.
4. Decision by City Council: The City Council shall make its decision on the
need for an EIS for the proposed project at its first meeting more than ten
(10) days but not more than thirty (30) days after the close of the comment
period. The Board shall base its decision on the need for an EIS and the
proposed scope of an EIS on the information gathered during the EAW
process and on the comments received on the EAW. Pursuant to Minnesota
Rules 4410,1700, in deciding whether a project has the potential for
significant environmental effects, the following factors shall be considered:
a. Type, extent and reversibility of environmental effects.
b. Cumulative potential effects of related or anticipated future projects.
c. The extent to which the environmental effects are subject to mitigation
by ongoing public regulatory authority.
d. The extent to which environmental effects can be anticipated and
controlled as a result of other environmental studies undertaken by
public agencies or the project proposer, or of EISs previously
prepared on similar projects.
9-4
5. Within five (5) days of City Council’s decision on the need for an EIS, notice
shall be provided to all persons on the EAW distribution list, to all persons
who commented in writing during the thirty (30) days comment period, to the
EQB staff for publication of the decision in the EQB Monitor and to any
person upon written request.
E. Mitigation Measures: Any measures for mitigating that are considered by the City
Council in making their EIS need decision may be incorporated as conditions for
approval of conditional use permits, interim use permits, variances, planned unit
development, and/or site plan requests as required by this Ordinance.
9.04 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS (EISs):
A. Purpose: The purpose of an EIS is to provide information for governmental units,
the proposer of the project and other persons to evaluate proposed projects which
have the potential for significant environmental effects, to consider alternatives to
the proposed projects and to explore methods for reducing adverse environmental
effects.
B. Mandatory EISs: An EIS shall be prepared for any project that meets or exceeds
the thresholds of any of the EIS categories listed in Minnesota Rules 4410.4400, as
may be amended.
C. Discretionary EISs: An EIS shall be prepared when the City Council determines
that, based on the EAW and any comments or additional information received
during the EAW comment period, the proposed project has the potential for
significant environmental effects, or when the City Council and the proposer of the
project agree that an EIS should be prepared.
D. Procedures:
1. All projects requiring an EIS must have an EAW on file with the City, which
will be used to determine the scope of the EIS. All EISs shall be prepared
according to the procedures and requirements of the State Environmental
Review Program, Rules 4410.2100-4410.3000, as may be amended. The
costs of preparation of an EIS shall be assessed to the project proposer in
accordance with Minnesota Rules Parts 4410.6000 to 4100.6500, as may be
amended.
2. Any proposal, project or use on which an EIS is required shall be considered
a conditional use as defined in Section 2.02 of this Ordinance and shall
comply with the procedure for approval of a conditional use permit.
Mitigating measures identified in the EIS shall be incorporated as conditions
9-5
of issuance of the conditional use permit.
10-1
SECTION 10. SITE PLAN REVIEW
Subdivision
10.01 Purpose
10.02 Exceptions to Review
10.03 Procedures
10.04 Certification of Taxes Paid
10.05 Evaluation Criteria
10.06 Information Requirement
10.07 Plan Modifications
10.08 Lapse of Approval
10.09 Site Improvement, Performance Agreement, and Security
10.10 Building and Other Permits
10.11 Inspections During Development
10.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to establish a formal site plan review
procedure and provide regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site design standards
consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance.
10.02 EXCEPTIONS TO REVIEW: The following shall be excepted from the foregoing
requirements:
A. Agricultural developments in the A-1 and A-2 Zoning Districts.
B. Single family detached dwellings.
10.03 PROCEDURES: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, an application for site plan
approval shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and
complete submission unless extended pursuant to Statute or a time waiver is granted by
the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal
agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60) days
unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional City requirements are as
follows:
A. Application: An application for site plan approval shall be filed with the City for all
developments (except for agricultural developments in A-1 and A-2 Zoning Districts
and single family dwellings) within the City. Such application shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator on an official application form and shall be accompanied by a
fee as provided for by the City Council resolution. The proposed site plan shall be
placed on the agenda of the first possible new business Planning Commission
meeting occurring after fourteen (14) days from the date of official submission. The
10-2
plan shall be considered as officially submitted only when all of the information and
fee requirements are complied with.
B. Preliminary Site Plan:
1. Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary site plan is to provide a specific
and particular plan upon which the Planning Commission will base its
recommendation to the City Council and with which substantial compliance is
necessary for the preparation of the final plan.
2. Schedule.
a. The developer shall meet with the Zoning Administrator and/or City
staff to discuss the proposed development.
b. The developer shall submit to the Zoning Administrator the necessary
application data in site plan form as required herein, and filing fee at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting on
which the proposal is tentatively scheduled to be heard.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons
to prepare technical reports where appropriate and provide general
assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City
Council.
d. The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the applicant concerning
operational factors or to obtain expert testimony with the consent and
at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors; said
information to be declared necessary to establish performance
conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
e. The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the
Planning Commission to present the proposal and answer any
questions concerning the proposed development.
f. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation of approval
or denial on the preliminary site plan to the City Council within sixty
(60) days of the date of the initial Planning Commission meeting at
which the case was heard. If the Planning Commission fails to act
within the time specified herein, it shall be deemed to have
recommended the plan for approval.
g. The Planning Commission shall recommend such actions or
conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to carry out
the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
10-3
h. Such recommendation shall be in writing and be accompanied by the
report and recommendation of the City Engineer.
i. The City Council shall not grant site plan approval until they have
received a report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission and the City Engineer. The City Council shall review all
recommendations and approve or deny the application for site plan
approval within thirty (30) days of the initial City Council meeting at
which the case was heard.
j. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission and the City staff, the City Council shall place the report
and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular meeting.
Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made a
part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
k. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission and the City staff, the City Council shall have the option
to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary and shall make
a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
l. If, upon reviewing said reports and recommendations of the Planning
Commission and City staff, the City Council finds that specific
inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final
recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the
Planning Commission, the City Council may, before taking final
action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further
consideration. The City Council shall provide the Planning
Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reason for
referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular
action.
m. Whenever an application for site plan review has been considered
and denied by the City Council, a similar application affecting
substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the
Planning Commission or City Council for at least six (6) months from
the date of its denial; and a subsequent application affecting
substantially the same property shall likewise not be considered again
by the Planning Commission or City Council for an additional six (6)
months from the date of the second denial unless a decision to
reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.
C. Final Site Plan:
10-4
1. Purpose. The final site plan is to serve as a complete, thorough, and
permanent public record of the manner in which the subject site is to be
developed. It shall incorporate all prior approved plan revisions resulting
from the site plan review process.
2. Schedule. Upon receiving all required final approvals through the site plan
review process, the developer shall prepare a final site plan reflecting all
revisions and conditions of approval. Three (3) copies of this final site plan
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval.
3. City staff shall review the final site plan for consistency with the conditions of
approval outlined by the City Council. If all conditions for approval have
been met, the Zoning Administrator shall grant final site plan approval.
Failure to meet the specific conditions shall result in denial of final site plan
approval.
4. Any modifications of the proposal, not specified as a condition for approval
by the City Council, shall result in review of the proposal by the Planning
Commission and City Council pursuant to the procedures outlined in Section
10.03.B.2 of this Ordinance.
D. If, after one (1) year from being granted site plan approval, the plan as permitted by
the approval shall not have been initiated, then such approval shall become null and
void unless a request by petition for an extension of time has been made to and
granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing thirty (30)
days before the expiration of the original site plan approval. There shall be no
charge for the filing of such petition.
E. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete
or utilize the use permitted in the site plan approval. Such petition shall be
presented to the City Council for a decision.
10.04 CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for a final site
plan, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent
property taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of
land to which the site plan application relates.
10.05 EVALUATION CRITERIA: The Planning Commission and City Council shall
evaluate the effects of the proposed site plans. This review shall be based upon, but not
be limited to, compliance with the City Comprehensive Plan and provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.
10-5
10.06 INFORMATION REQUIREMENT: The information required for all site plan
applications generally consists of the following items, and shall be submitted when
requested and specified by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Site Plan:
1. Name and address of developer/owner.
2. Name and address of architect/designer.
3. Date of plan preparation.
4. Dates and description of all revisions.
5. Name of project or development.
6. Scale of plan (engineering scale only, at one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or
less).
7. North point indication.
8. Lot dimension and area.
10. Required and proposed setbacks.
11. Location, setback and dimension of all buildings on the lot including both
existing and proposed structures.
12. Location of all adjacent buildings, wells and septic systems located within
one hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property in question.
13. Location, number, and dimensions of existing and proposed parking spaces.
14. Location, number, and dimensions of existing and proposed loading spaces
15. Curb cuts, driveways.
16. Vehicular circulation.
17. Sidewalks, walkways.
18. Location and type of all proposed lighting.
19. Location of recreational and service areas.
10-6
20. Location of rooftop equipment and proposed screening.
21. Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage, and recyclables.
22. Location of proposed well and sewage treatment systems.
B. Grading/Storm Water Drainage Plan:
1. Existing contours at two (2) foot intervals.
2. Proposed grade elevations, two (2) foot maximum intervals.
3. Drainage plan including configuration of drainage areas and calculations.
4. Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevations, type of castings, and type of
materials.
5. Spot elevations.
6. Proposed driveway grades.
7. Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
8. Erosion control measures.
9. Wetland boundaries.
C. Landscape Plan:
1. Planting Schedule (table) containing:
a. Symbols.
b. Quantities.
c. Common names.
d. Botanical names.
e. Sizes of plant material.
f. Root specification (bare root, balled and burlapped, potted, etc.)
g. Special planting instructions.
10-7
2. Location, type and size of all existing significant trees to be removed or
preserved.
3. Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature crown diameter or
spread for local hardiness zone).
4. Typical sections in details of fences, tie walls, planter boxes, tot lots, picnic
areas, berms and the like.
5. Other existing or proposed conditions which could be expected to affect
landscaping.
D. Other Plans and Information: (May be submitted in combination pursuant to
approval by the Zoning Administrator)
1. Legal description of property under consideration.
2. Proof of ownership of the land for which a site plan approval has been
requested.
3. Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings (type, color,
and materials used in all external surfaces).
4. “Typical” floor plan and “typical” room plan.
5. Extent of and any proposed modifications to land within the Shoreland,
Wetland, or Floodplain Overlay Districts as described and regulated in
Sections 64, 65 and 66 of this Ordinance.
6. Type, location and size (area and height) of all signs to be erected upon the
property in question.
7. Restrictive covenants.
10.07 PLAN MODIFICATIONS:
A. Minor Changes: Proposed minor structural additions involving ten (10) percent or
less of the total existing floor area and proposed minor site expansions or
modifications involving ten (10) percent or less of the total existing site area which
meet all ordinance requirements may be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior
to a building permit being issued and shall not require Planning Commission or City
Council review, subject to the following:
1. This Section shall apply in the cases of new developments which have
received City Council plan approval, but for which building permits have yet
to be taken; and this Section shall apply to existing developments on file
10-8
which have City Council approved site plans.
2. Compliance with all Ordinance requirements shall be construed to include all
adopted policies and codes.
3. Any major variances from Ordinance and policy requirements shall be
subject to the established review and hearing procedures for site plan and
variance approval.
4. Plans submitted for minor structural additions or minor site alterations under
the terms of this Section shall be the same as those required for site plan
approval.
5. A copy of the plans approved under this Section shall be appropriately
certified by the Zoning Administrator and placed on file with the City Council
approved plans.
B. Major Changes:
1. Plans not qualifying as minor shall be classified as major.
2. An amended site plan involving major changes shall be applied for and
administered in a manner similar to that required for a new site plan.
10.08 LAPSE OF APPROVAL:
A. Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Administrator or City Council as may be
applicable, the site plan approval shall become null and void one (1) year after the
date of approval, unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started
the construction of any building, structure, addition or alteration, or use requested as
part of the approved plan. The property owner or applicant shall have the right to
submit an application for time extension in accordance with this section.
B. An application to extend the approval of a site plan for up to an additional one (1)
year shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator not less than thirty (30) days
before the expiration of said approval. Such an application shall state the facts of
the request, showing a good faith attempt to utilize the site plan approval, and it
shall state the additional time being requested to begin the proposed construction.
The request shall be heard and decided by the Zoning Administrator prior to the
lapse of approval of the original request. A request pertaining to a major project
involving a longer period of time than one (1) year or a second request for a time
extension shall be presented to the Planning Commission for recommendation and
to the City Council for a decision.
10-9
C. In making its determination on whether an applicant has made a good faith attempt
to utilize the site plan approval, the Zoning Administrator or the City Council, as
applicable, shall consider such factors as the type, design, and size of the proposed
construction, any applicable restrictions on financing, or special and/or unique
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant which have caused the delay.
10.09 SITE IMPROVEMENT PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT AND SECURITY:
A. Upon City Council approval of a site plan and prior to the issuance of building
permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvement or development, the
developer shall execute a performance agreement setting out site improvement
items and terms of completion of said items. The performance agreement shall be
approved by the City Attorney.
B. Except in the case of non-income producing residential property (excluding
relocated structures), upon approval of the site plan, the City shall be provided,
where deemed necessary, with an irrevocable letter of credit, cash escrow,
certificate of deposit payable to the City, or cash deposit prior to the issuing of
building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development.
Said security shall be non-cancelable and shall guarantee conformance and
compliance with the conditions of the site plan approval and the ordinances of the
City.
C. The security shall be in the amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the
City Engineer’s or City Building Official’s estimated cost of labor and materials for
the proposed improvements or development. Said project may be handled in
stages upon the discretion of the City Engineer or Building Official.
D. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or
development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the
conditional use permit and regulations of the City have been issued by the City
Building Official.
E. Failure to comply with the conditions of the site plan approval or the regulations of
the City shall result in forfeiture of the security.
10.10 BUILDING AND OTHER PERMITS: Except as otherwise expressly provided
herein, upon receiving notice from the Zoning Administrator that the final site plan has
been approved and a properly executed performance agreement has been received, and
upon application of the applicant pursuant to the applicable ordinances of the City, all
appropriate officials for the City may issue building and other permits to the applicant for
development, construction, and other work in the area encompassed by the final site plan
provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued unless the appropriate official is first
10-10
satisfied that the requirements of all codes and ordinances which are applicable to the
permit sought, have been satisfied.
10.11 INSPECTIONS DURING DEVELOPMENT:
A. Site Improvements:
1. Following preliminary site plan approval by the City Council and final site plan
approval by the Zoning Administrator, the City Engineer shall specify those
site improvement items requiring inspections and approval by the City.
2. Within thirty (30) days of such notice, the Board shall revoke the site plan
approval or shall take such steps as it shall deem necessary to compel
compliance with the final site plan as approved or shall require the landowner
or applicant to seek an amendment of the final site plan.
B. Compliance with Overall Plan: Following final plan approval of a site plan, or a
stage thereof, the Building Official shall, periodically until the completion of the
development, review all permits issued, and construction undertaken and compare
actual development with the approved site plan.
1. If the Building Official finds that development is not proceeding in
accordance with the approved plan, he or she shall immediately notify the
City Council.
2. Within thirty (30) days of such notice, the City Council shall either by the
provisions of the Ordinance revoke the site plan approval or shall take such
steps as it shall deem necessary to compel compliance with the final site
plan as approved; or shall require the landowner or applicant to seek an
amendment of the final site plan.
11-1
SECTION 11. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Subdivision
11.01 Certificate Required
11.02 Application
11.01 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED: Except for farm and residential buildings, no building or
structure hereafter erected or moved, or that portion of an existing structure of building
erected or moved shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever
until a certificate of occupancy of zoning shall have been issued by the City Building Official
stating that the building or structure complies with all of the provisions within this Ordinance
and applicable state building code sections.
11.02 APPLICATION: Said certificate shall be applied for coincident with the application
for a building permit, conditional use permit, interim use permit, and/or variance and shall
be issued within ten (10) days after the City Building Official shall have found the building
or structure satisfactory and given final inspection. Said application shall be accompanied
by a fee as established by City Council resolution.
12-1
SECTION 12. ADMINISTRATION - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Subdivision
12.01 Administration
12.02 Violations
12.03 Application to City Personnel
12.04 Additional Equitable Remedies
12.05 Enforcement Procedures
12.01 ADMINISTRATION: This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Administrator who is appointed by the City Council or his or her designee as
approved by the City Council.
12.02 VIOLATIONS: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than the maximum penalty for a
misdemeanor prescribed under state law. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
12.03 APPLICATION TO CITY PERSONNEL: The failure of any officer or employee of
the City to perform any official duty imposed by this Ordinance shall not invalidate this
Ordinance.
12.04 ADDITIONAL EQUITABLE REMEDIES: In the event of a violation of the
threatened violation of any provision of this Ordinance, or any provision or condition of a
permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator in the name of St.
Augusta may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or
abate such violation or threatened violation.
12.05 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Upon receipt of complaint, identification of a violation of this Ordinance, or by the
direction of the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall investigate said violation
to determine its validity.
B. If it is determined that a condition or provision of this Ordinance or a permit issued
12-2
pursuant to this Ordinance has been violated, the investigator shall submit a report
to the City Council and the Building Official identifying the violation, the location, and
the property owner(s) responsible for the violation.
C. Upon submission of the report, the City Building Official shall, on behalf of the City,
send the property owner(s) a letter of citation informing them of said violation and
ordering compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The letter of citation
shall include a time frame in which the property owner(s) must bring the property in
compliance with this Ordinance.
D. The City Building Official shall inspect the property for compliance with this
Ordinance upon expiration of the time frame outlined in the letter of citation. If the
violation has not been corrected, the City Building Official shall notify the City
Council.
E. Upon notification by the City Building Official of failure to comply with this
Ordinance, the City Council shall instruct the City Attorney to begin legal
proceedings for enforcement of this Ordinance.
14-1
SECTION 14. NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS
Subdivision
14.01 Purpose
14.02 General Provisions
14.03 Non-Conforming Uses
14.04 Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures
14.05 Non-Conforming Lots
14.06 Special Protection Districts
14.01 PURPOSE: It is the purpose of this section to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
buildings, structures, uses, and lots, and to specify those requirements,
circumstances, and conditions under which non-conforming buildings, structures, uses, and
lots will be operated, maintained, and regulated. It is necessary and consistent with the
establishment of this Ordinance that non-conforming buildings, structures, uses, and lots
not be allowed to continue without restriction. Furthermore, it is the intent of this section
that all non-conformities shall be eventually brought into conformity.
14.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Conditional Uses: Any established use, building or lot legally existing prior to
October 7, 2003 and which is herein classified by this Ordinance as requiring a
conditional use permit may be continued in like fashion and activity and shall
automatically be considered as having received conditional use permit approval.
Any change to such a use or building shall however require a new conditional use
permit be processed according to this Ordinance.
B. Interim Uses: Any established use, building or lot legally existing prior to October 7,
2003, and which is herein classified by this Ordinance as requiring an interim use
permit may be continued in like fashion and activity and shall automatically be
considered as having received interim use permit approval. Any change to such a
use or building shall, however, require a new interim use permit be processed
according to this Ordinance.
C. Threats to General Welfare: Non-conforming buildings, structures, and/or uses,
which based upon documented study and evidence, pose a danger and/or threat to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, shall:
1. Be legally declared a nuisance by the City Council.
2. Upon being identified by the City Council and upon the owner being notified
in writing by the Zoning Administrator, the owner shall provide to the City
14-2
Council a documented time schedule and program with rationale to support
the proposed amortization of the building, structure, or use investments
which will result in the termination or correction of the non-conformity.
a. The termination/correction time schedule shall be based upon, but not
be limited to factors such as the initial investment and the degree of
threat or danger being posed.
b. The acceptability of the time schedule shall be determined by the City
Council with right of appeal.
c. In no case shall a time schedule exceed two (2) years.
14.03 NON-CONFORMING USES:
A. Effective Date: The lawful use of buildings or land existing at the effective date of
this Ordinance which does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance may be
continued; provided, however, that no such non-conforming use of land shall be
enlarged or increased, nor shall any such non-conforming use be expanded to
occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by such use at the time of the
adoption of this Ordinance, nor shall any such non-conforming use be moved to any
other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was conducted at the time of
the adoption of this Ordinance.
B. Continued Use: A lawful, non-conforming use shall not be enlarged, but may be
continued at the same size and in the same manner of operation as it existed on the
date it became legally non-conforming except as hereinafter specified.
C. Changes to Non-Conforming Uses:
1. When a lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has
been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any
non-conforming use.
2. A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed
to lessen the non-conformity of use. Once a non-conforming structure or
parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter be so altered to
increase the non-conformity.
D. Discontinuance: In the event that a non-conforming use of any building or premises
is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the use of the same shall thereafter
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
14-3
E. Normal Maintenance: Maintenance of a building or other structure containing or
used by a non-conforming use will be permitted when it includes necessary nonstructural
repair and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming
use.
14.04 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Restoration: No lawful non-conforming building or structure which has been
damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or a public enemy, to the extent of more
than fifty (50) percent of its value, as determined by the City Building Official, shall
be restored, except in conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance.
B. Alterations: Alteration and normal maintenance to a lawful non-conforming building
or structure may be made provided:
1. The alterations do not expand the building size.
2. The alterations do not change the building occupancy capacity or parking
demand.
3. The alteration does not increase the non-conformity of the building or the
use.
C. Expansion of Non-Conforming Buildings or Structures:
1. Administrative Approvals: The following expansions of lawful non-conforming
building and structures may be approved through the administrative permit
process by the Zoning Administrator subject to provisions of Section 6 of this
Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination that the
building expansion will have not external negative impacts upon adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way.
a. Expansion of buildings found to be non-conforming only by reason of
height, yard setback, or lot area may be permitted provided the
structural non-conformity is not increased and the expansion complies
with the performance standards of this Ordinance.
b. Lawful non-conforming single family and two family units may be
expanded to improve the livability provided the non-conformity of the
structure is not increased.
2. Conditional Use Permit: Lawful non-conforming commercial, industrial,
public, semi-public, and multiple family structures may be expanded on the
14-4
same lot by conditional use permit provided:
a. The expansion will not increase the non-conformity of the building or
site.
b. The new building expansion will conform with all the applicable
performance standards of this Ordinance. A conditional use permit
shall not be issued under this section for a deviation from other
requirements of this Ordinance unless variances are also approved.
c. The request for conditional use permit shall be evaluated based on
standards and criteria set forth in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
14.05 NON-CONFORMING LOTS:
A. Vacant or Redeveloped Lots:
1. Lot Combination: If an owner has an interest in more than one (1) lot of
record contiguous to other lots of record, all such lots shall be combined to
meet the requirements of this section or the applicable zoning district
standards. If sufficient contiguous property is held in one ownership to
comply with the standard of the applicable zoning district, then those more
restrictive provisions will apply. In no circumstances will there be approval of
any proposal for multiple lot developments based upon lots of record, and
not conforming with the provisions of the existing zoning district.
2. Single Family Detached Dwellings: Legal non-conforming, vacant,
substandard sized lots of record may be developed for single family
detached dwellings upon approval of an administrative permit by the Zoning
Administrator, provided that:
a. The lot in question was legally established in accordance with
Ordinance requirements existing at the time of its creation and is a
separate, distinct tax parcel with a parcel identification number.
b. The lot is properly zoned for single family land uses.
c. Minimum Lot Size.
(1) Sewered Lots: A lot of record having direct access to
municipal sewer and water shall be considered buildable
provided measurements for lot area and/or width are within
seventy (70) percent of the requirements of the base zoning
district.
14-5
(2) Unsewered Lots: A lot of record not having access to
municipal sewer and water shall be considered buildable
provided it can be demonstrated by means satisfactory to the
City that no ground water, soil or other contamination will
result.
d. The lot in question has frontage on a public street.
e. Public health concerns (potable water and sewage collection and
treatment) can be adequately provided.
f. The setback and yard requirements of the applicable zoning district or
Section 16.04 of this Ordinance can be achieved while simultaneously
resulting in development which complies with the character and
quality of the immediate area and the objectives of the City’s
Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
g. The lot in question and related potential development is evaluated
based upon criteria outlined in Section 4.02.F and is found to be
acceptable per these standards.
B. Developed Lots: An existing conforming use on a lot of substandard size and/or
width may be expanded or enlarged if such expansion or enlargement meets all
other provisions of this Ordinance.
14.06 SPECIAL PROTECTION DISTRICTS: Non-conforming buildings and uses within
the special protection districts as described in Section 64 through 67 of this Ordinance shall
be subject to the applicable regulations and standards relating to such buildings and uses
in that section.
























16-1
SECTION 16. GENERAL YARD, LOT AREA AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Subdivision
16.01 Purpose
16.02 Height
16.03 Building Type and Construction
16.04 Yards
16.05 Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit
16.06 Minimum Floor Area; Commercial and Industrial Structures
16.07 Single Family Dwellings
16.08 Two Family, Townhouse, Quadraminium, Manor Home, Multiple Family Uses
16.01 PURPOSE: This section identifies yard, lot area, building size, building type and
height requirements in each zoning district.
16.02 HEIGHT:
A. Allowable Increases: Building heights in excess of those standards contained in
the district provisions and any other sections of this Ordinance may be allowed
through a conditional use permit, provided that:
1. Demonstrated need is established for the increase in height and said
increase will not violate the intent and character of the zoning district in which
the structure is located.
2. The site is capable of accommodating the increased structure size.
3. The potential increased intensity and size of use does not cause an increase
in traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.
4. Public utilities and services are adequate.
5. For each additional story over the district limitation or for each additional ten
(10) feet above the maximum allowed per district, front and side yard setback
requirements shall be increased by ten (10) percent.
6. The construction does not limit solar access to abutting and/or neighboring
properties.
7. The provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and
satisfactorily met.
16-2
B. Exceptions: Building height limits established for the respective zoning districts
shall not apply to the following:
1. Belfries.
2. Chimneys or flues.
3. Church spires.
4. Cooling towers.
5. Cupolas and domes which do not contain usable floor space.
6. Elevator penthouses.
7. Flag poles.
8. Monuments and statues - public and semi-public only.
9. Parapet walls extending not more than three (3) feet above the limiting height
of the building.
10. Poles, towers and other structures for essential services.
11. Necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenances.
12. Farm buildings.
13. Wind energy conversion system towers as regulated by Section 30 of this
Ordinance.
14. Antennas and antenna support structures as regulated by Section 29 of this
Ordinance.
C. No excluded roof equipment or structure element extending beyond the limited
height of a building may occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of
such roof nor exceed ten (10) feet unless otherwise noted.
16.03 BUILDING TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION:
A. General Provisions:
16-3
1. Metal Buildings: No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalum or unfinished
aluminum buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to
have a corrosive designed finish such as corten steel or engineered
designed roofs of less than two-twelve (2/12) pitch shall be permitted in any
zoning district, except in association with farming operations or as allowed by
this subdivision.
2. Quality: Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of
architectural and aesthetic compatibility and harmony with surrounding
properties to ensure that they will not adversely impact the property values of
the abutting properties as intended by this Ordinance or adversely impact the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
3. Finishes: Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable in
grade and quality to the following:
a. Brick.
b. Natural stone.
c. Decorative concrete block.
d. Cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete panels.
e. Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood of
proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood, cypress.
f. Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum (non-structural,
non-load bearing), provided such panels are factory fabricated and
finished with a durable non-fade surface and their fasteners are of a
corrosion resistant design.
g. Glass curtain wall panels.
h. Stucco.
i. Vinyl.
j. Other materials as determined by the City Building Official but not
including galvanized or unfinished metal.
B. Business and Industrial Uses and Zoning Districts:
1. For all uses within the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-W Zoning Districts, all principal
buildings which abut public rights-of-way, residential uses, and/or public
areas, shall have a decorative front on such exposure which is comprised of
at least fifty (50) percent of materials specified in Section 16.03.A.3.a-e. Any
metal finish utilized in the building shall be a minimum of twenty-six (26)
gauge steel. The roof slope shall be limited to a minimum slope of onequarter
(1/4) inch per foot.
2. Within the I-1 Zoning District, exterior finish of all buildings shall comply with
Subd. 16.03.A.3 of this Ordinance.
16-4
3. In the I-2 Zoning District, all buildings constructed of curtain wall panels of
finished steel, aluminum or fiberglass shall be required to be faced with brick,
wood, stone, architectural concrete cast in place, pre-cast concrete panels,
or concrete block on wall surfaces abutting a public right-of-way, residential
uses, or public areas. The required wall surface treatment may allow a
maximum of fifty (50) percent of the metal or fiberglass wall to remain
exposed if it is coordinated into the architectural design.
4. The City may grant a deferment to the requirements of Subd. 16.03.B.2 and
16.03.B.3 of this Ordinance when a building or building addition will be
constructed in more than one (1) phase. Any such deferment shall be
processed as a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 4 of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to the following:
a. The deferment shall be until the completion of construction or five (5)
years, whichever is less.
b. Property owner shall provide the City with an irrevocable letter of
credit for an amount one and one-half (1-1/2) the City Building
Official's estimated cost of the required exterior wall treatment. The
bank and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council. The letter of credit shall assure compliance with this section
of this Ordinance.
C. Exceptions to the provisions of Subd. 16.03 of this Ordinance may be granted as a
conditional use permit pursuant to Section 4 of this Ordinance, provided that:
1. The proposed building maintains the quality and value intended by the
Ordinance.
2. The proposed building is compatible and in harmony with other existing
structures within the district and immediate geographic area.
3. The provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and determined
to be satisfied.
16.04 YARDS: No lot, yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so
as to make such lot, yard or open space less than the minimum required by this Ordinance.
No required open space provided about any building or structure shall be included as part
of any open space required for another structure.
A. The following shall not be considered as encroachments on yard setback
requirements:
1. Cantilevers up to ten (10) feet in width, and chimneys, window wells and
16-5
covers, flues, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices,
eaves, gutters, and the like, provided they do not project more than two and
one-half (2-1/2) feet into a required yard setback.
2. Terraces, steps, decks, uncovered porches, stoops or similar features
provided they do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the
principal structure or to a distance less than five (5) feet from a side or rear
lot line. No encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required drainage
and utility easements.
3. In rear yards, recreational equipment (non-vehicular), laundry drying
equipment, arbors and trellises, detached outdoor living rooms and gazebos
not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet, and air conditioning or heating
equipment not exceeding established state noise levels, provided they are at
a distance not less than ten (10) feet from any lot line. No encroachment
shall be permitted in existing or required drainage and utility easements.
B. Where adjacent structures have front yard setbacks different from those required,
the minimum front yard setback shall be no less than the average setback of the
two (2) adjacent principal structures. If only one (1) adjacent lot is occupied by a
structure, the minimum front yard shall be the average of the adjacent principal
structure and the district minimum setback, but in no case shall a setback greater
than the minimum established for the respective zoning district be required.
16.05 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA PER DWELLING UNIT: Except as otherwise specified in
the zoning district provisions or allowed as a conditional use permit, single family homes as
classified below shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit.
A. Single Family Dwelling Units: Except as otherwise specified in the zoning district
provisions or allowed as a conditional use permit, single family homes as classified
below shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit.
One Bedroom 720 square.
Two Bedroom
Three Bedroom
B. Multiple Dwelling Units: Except for elderly housing or as allowed by conditional use
permit, living units classified as multiple dwelling shall have the following minimum
floor areas per unit:
Efficiency Units 500 square feet
One Bedroom Units 700 square feet
More than one bedroom
16-6
units - an additional
80 square feet for each
additional bedroom
C. Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing: Living units classified as elderly (senior citizen)
housing units, except as allowed by conditional use permit, shall have the following
minimum floor areas per unit:
Efficiency Units 440 square feet
One Bedroom 520 square feet
D. Two Family Dwellings, Quadraminiums, Townhouses and Manor Homes: Except as
otherwise specified in the zoning district provisions or allowed as a conditional use
permit, two family dwellings, quadraminiums and townhouses, as classified below,
shall have the minimum floor area per one bedroom unit:
Two Family 650 square feet first floor
Dwellings above grade, plus 100 additional
square feet for each
additional bedroom
Quadraminiums, 600 square feet first floor
Townhouses and above grade, plus 100 add-
Manor Homes tonal square feet for each
additional bedroom
E. Efficiency Apartments: Except for elderly (senior citizen) housing, the number of
efficiency apartments in a multiple dwelling shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the
total number of apartments. In the case of elderly (senior citizen) housing,
efficiency apartments shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total number of
apartments, except by conditional use permit.
16.06 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES:
Commercial and industrial buildings (principal structure) which are to be less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon approval of a
conditional use permit as provided for in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
16.07 SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS: All single family detached homes shall:
A. Be constructed upon a continuous perimeter foundation that meets the
requirements of the State Uniform Building Code.
B. Not be less than thirty (30) feet in length and not less than twenty-four (24) feet in
16-7
width over that entire minimum length. Width measurements shall not take account
of overhang and other projections beyond the principal walls. Dwellings shall also
meet the minimum floor area requirements as set out in this Ordinance.
C. Have a minimum roof overhang of one (1) foot.
D. Have an earth covered, composition, shingled or tiled roof or other comparable
quality materials determined to be appropriate by the City Building Official.
E. Receive a building permit. The application for a building permit in addition to other
information required shall indicate the height, size, design and the appearance of all
elevations of the proposed building and a description of the construction materials
proposed to be used. The exterior architectural design of a proposed dwelling may
not be so at variance with, nor so similar to, the exterior architectural design of any
structure or structures already constructed or in the course of construction in the
immediate neighborhood, nor so at variance with the character of the surrounding
neighborhood as to cause a significant depreciation in the property values of the
neighborhood or adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare.
F. Meet the requirements of the State Uniform Building Code.
16.08 TWO FAMILY, TOWNHOUSE, QUADRAMINIUM, MANOR HOME, MULTIPLE
FAMILY USES:
A. No single townhouse structure shall contain more than eight (8) dwelling units.
B. Minimum unit lot frontage for townhouses shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
C. Subdivision of Two-Family Double Bungalows, Townhouse or Quadraminium Lots:
The subdivision of base lots containing two-family dwellings, townhouses, or
quadraminiums to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling within
such a structure is acceptable upon the approval of a conditional use permit,
provided that:
1. Two family, townhouses, and quadraminiums intended for owner occupancy
shall be subdivided on an individual unit lot basis subject to approval of a
conditional use permit.
2. Prior to subdivision, such units shall fully comply with applicable provisions of
the Uniform Building Code.
3. Prior to a two-family double bungalow dwelling, townhouse, or quadraminium
subdivision, the base lot must meet all the requirements of the zoning district.
16-8
4. Permitted accessory uses as defined by the zoning districts are acceptable
provided they meet all the zoning requirements.
5. A property maintenance agreement must be arranged by the applicant and
submitted to the City Attorney for review and subject to the Attorney's
approval. The agreement shall ensure the maintenance and upkeep of the
structure and lots to meet minimum City standards. The agreement is to be
filed with the County Recorder's Office as a deed restriction against the title
of each unit lot.
6. Separate public utility service shall be provided to each subdivided unit and
shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
7. The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in conformance to
requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City.
D. Subdivision of multiple family, two family duplex dwellings, manor homes and other
such units:
1. The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in conformance with the
requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City as applicable.
2. The subdivision shall comply with applicable cooperative or condominium
laws of the State of Minnesota.
17-1
SECTION 17. PUBLIC PROPERTY/RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Subdivision
17.01 Coverage
17.02 Liability
17.01 COVERAGE: Excepting newsstands, the erection and/or placement of any
structure in the public right-of-way or on City property by any person, or group other than a
governmental unit shall be in compliance with applicable City regulations and shall require
the processing of a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 4 of this Ordinance.
17.02 LIABILITY: As a condition of approval for the erection or placement of a structure
in the public right-of-way, or on City property by any party other than a governmental unit,
the applicant shall be required to demonstrate a significant need for such structure
placement and that it will not interfere or conflict with the public use and/or purpose of the
right-of-way. Additionally, the applicant shall hold harmless the City for any potential
liability and shall demonstrate to the Zoning Administrator proof of adequate liability
insurance.
18-1
SECTION 18. BUILDING RELOCATION
Subdivision
18.01 Review Process
18.02 Exemptions
18.03 Performance Standards
18.04 Performance Security
18.01 REVIEW PROCESS: The relocation of any building or structure onto a lot within the
City shall be subject to the requirements, regulations and conditions of Section 4,
conditional use permit of this Ordinance as well as Section 18.02 of this section.
18.02 EXEMPTIONS: The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
A. Relocations which occur solely within the confines of a single lot or parcel.
B. Manufactured homes within manufactured home parks.
C. Prefabricated and industrialized/modular buildings as defined by the State Building
Code being relocated to their first permanent building site.
18.03 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: The following performance standards shall apply:
A. Upon relocation, the building shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
State Building Code.
B. The proposed relocated building shall comply with the character of the
neighborhood in which it is being relocated as determined by the City Council.
C. The relocated use will not result in a depreciation of neighborhood or adjacent
property values.
D. The relocated structure shall be similar to the market valuation of adjacent principal
structures.
E. The relocated structure shall be ready for occupancy within six (6) months from the
date of location on the site.
18.04 PERFORMANCE SECURITY: A performance security shall be provided to the City
18-2
as specified in Section 4.06 of this Ordinance.
19-1
SECTION 19. MODEL HOMES/TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE OFFICES
Subdivision
19.01 Purpose
19.02 Procedure
19.03 Special Requirements
19.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to provide for the erection of model
homes and temporary real estate offices in new subdivisions without adversely affecting
the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods or creating a general nuisance. As
model homes represent a unique temporary commercial use, special consideration must
be given to the peculiar problems associated with them and special standards must be
applied to ensure reasonable compatibility with their surrounding environment.
19.02 PROCEDURE: The erection of a model home(s) and temporary real estate offices
shall require approval of an administrative use permit as may be issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
19.03 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Model homes and temporary real estate offices shall be allowed as provided for in
the applicable zoning district in which they are located.
B. Temporary parking facilities equal to four (4) spaces per model home dwelling unit
or temporary real estate office shall be provided. The overall design, drainage, and
surfacing of the temporary parking facility shall be subject to the approval of the
Zoning Administrator.
C. Access from a temporary parking facility onto a local, residential street shall be
minimized. Where this requirement is physically impractical, access shall be
directed away from residential neighborhoods to the greatest extent possible.
D. No model home or temporary real estate office shall incorporate outside lighting
which creates a nuisance due to glare or intensity, as provided for in Section 15.10
of this Ordinance.
E. All model home and temporary real estate office signage shall comply with the sign
regulations as contained in Section 31 of this Ordinance.
F. The administrative permit shall terminate three (3) years from its date of issuance or
19-2
until eight-five (85) percent of the development is completed, whichever occurs first.
G. No residential occupancy permit shall be issued for a model home until such time as
the structure has been fully converted to a residence. Such conversion shall include
but not be limited to parking lot restoration and the removal of signage and lighting.
H. The restoration of all temporary parking areas with appropriate landscaping shall be
completed by the end of the next growing season.
I. All criteria for interim use consideration but not procedural requirements, as
contained in Section 5 of this Ordinance, shall be considered and satisfactorily met.
20-1
SECTION 20. OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Subdivision
20.01 Purpose
20.02 Scope of Regulations
20.03 General Provisions
20.04 Off-Street Parking Restrictions
20.05 Parking Area Design
20.06 Maintenance
20.07 Location
20.08 Use of Required Area
20.09 Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
20.10 Space Reductions
20.11 Joint Facilities
20.12 Off-Site Parking
20.13 Off-Street Bicycle and Motorcycle Parking
20.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the regulation of off-street parking spaces in these
zoning regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to
promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum
requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of
various parcels of land or structures.
20.02 SCOPE OF PARKING REGULATIONS: The regulations and requirements set forth
herein shall apply to all off-street parking facilities in all of the zoning districts of the City.
20.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Application: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the off-street parking provisions of
this section shall apply to all motorized vehicles including, but not limited to,
passenger automobiles, trucks, vans and motorcycles, unless otherwise specified
herein.
B. Site Plan: All applications for a building or an occupancy permit in all zoning
districts shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension
indicating the location of off-street parking and loading spaces in compliance with
the requirements set forth in this Section. All site plans for single family homes shall
provide for the location of a two (2) stall garage in compliance with this Ordinance,
whether or not construction is intended.
C. Reduction of Existing Off-Street Parking Space or Lot Area: Off-street parking
20-2
spaces and loading spaces or lot area existing upon the effective date of this
Section shall not be reduced in number or size, unless said number or size exceeds
the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
D. Change of Use or Occupancy of Land: No change of use or occupancy of land
already dedicated to a parking spaces, driveways, or loading spaces shall be made,
nor shall any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be made which reduces
area necessary for parking, parking stalls, or parking requirements below the
minimum prescribed by this Section.
E. Change of Use or Occupancy of Buildings: Any change of use or occupancy of any
building or buildings including additions thereto requiring more parking area shall not
be permitted until there is furnished such additional parking spaces as required by
this Section.
F. Disability-Accessible Parking: Disability-accessible parking spaces shall be provided
as applicable pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 168.021, as may be amended.
20.04 OFF-STREET PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Except where otherwise allowed as exterior storage or in a zoning district, or as
provided in Subd. 20.04.C below, trucks of more than twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds in gross vehicle weight or greater than thirty (30) feet in length, and
contracting or excavating equipment may not be parked, stored or otherwise located
on any property within the City unless being used in conjunction with a temporary
service benefiting the premises.
B. No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with
exposed off-street parking facilities, except for minor repairs of vehicles owned by
the occupant or resident of the principal use for which the parking space is
intended. No exterior storage of car parts are allowed at any time.
C. For detached single family uses in residential zoning districts, the off-street parking
of vehicles greater than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds in gross vehicle weight or
greater than thirty (30) feet in length and contracting or excavating equipment may
be allowed as an interim use permit pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance,
provided that:
1. The property fronts on an improved public street which is determined by the
City Engineer to be capable of carrying the vehicles in question without
undue damage.
2. The type of vehicle to be parked does not create an unreasonable safety
20-3
hazard to neighboring residents or the public utilizing the street(s) servicing
the property.
3. The site upon which the vehicle is parked has adequate space to allow
turning movements and parking which does not result in the backing of
vehicles from or onto the public street.
4. The parking of such vehicles does not adversely affect neighboring property
owners as it relates to noise.
5. The parking of such vehicles is screened from neighboring properties and
the public right-of-way to the extent determined as necessary by the City
Council in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.
6. The provisions of Section 5 of this Ordinance are considered and determined
to be satisfied.
20.05 PARKING AREA DESIGN:
A. Calculating Space.
1. Floor Area: The term “floor area” for the purpose of calculating the number
of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined on the basis of the
exterior floor area dimensions of the buildings, structure or use times the
number of floors, minus ten (10) percent except as may be hereinafter
modified, and where a gross floor area calculation is specified.
2. Computation: When determining the number of off-street parking spaces,
any fraction of a number shall constitute an additional space.
3. Places of Public Assembly: In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other
places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches,
pews or other similar seating facilities, each eighteen (18) inches of such
seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of
determining parking requirements.
4. Snow Storage in Parking Stalls: Provision shall be made in the parking area
for adequate snow storage or removal in order to ensure that the required
number of spaces are available at all times during the year.
5. Use of Required Area: Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any
district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, or
20-4
storage of inoperable vehicles unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Design.
1. Circulation: Traffic circulation systems shall be designed to accommodate
anticipated traffic demands. Vehicular traffic generated by a use shall be
channeled and controlled in a manner which will avoid congestion or
interference with other vehicular transportation systems and pedestrians and
which will avoid creating traffic hazards or excessive traffic. The adequacy of
any proposed traffic circulation system to accomplish these objectives shall
be determined by the City, which may require additional measures for traffic
control as it may deem necessary, including but not limited to the following:
directional signage, channelization, standby turn lanes, sidewalks,
illumination and other facilities within the site to prevent a backup of vehicles
on public streets.
2. Parking Space Size: All required off-street parking spaces shall comply with
the minimum dimension requirements of Section 20.05.B.5 of this Ordinance.
3. Pedestrian Provision: All off-street parking areas shall be designed with due
regard to pedestrian circulation. Off-street parking areas shall be designed
such that vehicle and pedestrian circulation is accommodated in a safe,
complementary, and orderly fashion.
4. Compact Car Spaces: Up to twenty (20) percent of the parking spaces in a
parking lot may be permanently marked for compact cars only, provided that:
a. The parking lot contains forty (40) or more off-street parking spaces.
b. All compact car spaces are a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and
sixteen (16) feet in length.
c. Signs and markings, as approved by the City, are placed and
maintained in each compact car space.
d. All required off-street parking aisle widths are maintained.
e. The compact car stalls not displace preferred handicap parking stall
locations.
f. The design, layout, and location of designated compact car spaces
shall not encourage utilization by oversized vehicles and shall be
subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.
5. Dimensional Requirements: Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance,
20-5
stall, aisle and driveway design for required off-street parking shall comply
with the standards provided on page 20-6 of this Ordinance.
6. Street Access: Except as allowed by a conditional use permit or property
subdivision, each off-street lot shall have access directly onto an abutting,
improved and City accepted public street.
7. Within Structures: The off-street parking requirements may be furnished by
providing a space so designed within the principal building or one (1)
structure attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no building
permit shall be issued to convert said parking structure into a dwelling unit or
living area or other activity until other adequate provisions are made to
comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this Ordinance.
8. Lot Circulation: Except in the case of single family dwellings, parking areas
shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs
within the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or
alley. Except in the case of single family dwellings, parking area design
which requires backing into the public street is prohibited.
9. Intersection Separation: No curb cut access shall be located less than sixty
(60) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more street rights-of-way. This
distance shall be measured from the intersection of lot lines.
10. Curb Cut Size: No curb cut access shall exceed twenty-four (24) feet in
width unless approved by the City Engineer.
11. Side Yard Setback: Except with special approval from the Zoning
Administrator, curb cut openings shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from the
side yard property line in all districts.
12. Curb Cut Spacing: Except for single family dwellings, driveway access curb
openings on a public street shall not be located less than forty (40) feet from
one another.
20-6
20-7
13. Grade: The grade elevation of any parking area or driveways shall not
exceed four (4) percent.
14. Driveway Access Minimum: Each property shall be allowed one (1) driveway
access for each one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of street frontage. All
property shall be entitled to at least one (1) driveway access. Single family
uses shall be limited to one (1) driveway access per lot, except when the
property exceeds the required street frontage per zoning district
requirements, a second driveway access may be allowed by approval of the
Zoning Administrator. Except as otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator, single family uses shall not access arterial and collector
streets. In cases where a lot does not have frontage upon a local street and
where driveway access to arterial and collector streets is determined
necessary by the Zoning Administrator, joint access through the use of
shared curb cuts and access easements shall be utilized to the extent
possible.
15. Surfacing.
a. Farmsteads, farming operations, and detached single family
residential uses: Driveways and parking area shall be surfaced with
materials suitable to control dust and drainage.
b. Other Uses:
(1) Except as otherwise determined by the City Council, all uses
other than those specified in Subsection 15.a. above shall
have customer parking areas and driveways which are
surfaced with asphalt, concrete, cobblestone, or paving bricks.
(2) For legal, nonconforming uses existing upon the effective date
of this Ordinance, at any time an improvement is made to
property requiring a conditional use permit, interim use permit,
variance, and/or building permit, all nonconforming design and
surfacing of parking areas or driveways existing on the lot in
question shall be brought into full compliance with this
Subdivision.
(3) Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways and stalls for
parking areas of five (5) or more vehicles shall be submitted to
the City Engineer for review and the final drainage plan shall
be subject to written approval.
(4) For industrial uses which experience frequent heavy
equipment utilization which could be expected to destroy or
20-8
damage required surfacing materials, an exemption to the
surfacing requirements may be allowed by administrative
permit provided that:
(a) General public and employee access driveways and
parking areas shall not be included in the exemption.
(b) At such time as the presence of heavy equipment is
reduced or eliminated, the surfacing of exempted areas
shall be completed in compliance with this Ordinance.
(c) All other performance standards related to parking and
driveways shall be met.
(d) The provisions of Section 6 of this Ordinance are
considered and determined to be satisfied.
16. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be
hooded and so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property,
abutting residential uses, and public rights-of-way, and shall be in
compliance with Section 15.10 of this Ordinance.
17. Required Screening: All open off-street parking areas of five (5) or more
spaces shall be screened and landscaped from abutting or surrounding
residential districts and uses, and the public right-of-way in compliance with
Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.
18. Snow Storage: Adequate space for snow storage shall be provided on the
site so as not to reduce the required minimum number of parking spaces. In
those cases where excessive snow cannot be properly stored on site, it shall
be immediately removed from the site.
19. Driveway Turn Around: In the case of single family dwellings which front on
streets designated as collector, minor arterial, and principal arterial by the
City's Comprehensive Plan, the installation of a vehicle turn-around space,
immediately adjacent to the access driveway is allowed and may be required
by the City Council. Where possible, said space shall be located away from
the principal structure and shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet from the
street surface. Said space shall not to be utilized for parking or storage
purposes.
20. Signs: No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and orderly
operation and traffic movement within any parking lot or driveway. All signs
shall be in conformance with Section 31 of this Ordinance.
20-9
21. Cart Storage: Retail commercial uses exceeding fifty-five thousand (55,000)
square feet in gross floor area may be required to provide ample space for
the storage of customer service carts within off-street parking areas. The
need and specific amount of required cart storage space shall be determined
as part of site plan review. When required, cart storage areas shall not
occupy required off-street parking space, shall be clearly delineated, and
include facilities for cart confinement.
20.06 MAINTENANCE: It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the lessee and
owner of the principal use, uses or buildings to maintain in a neat and adequate manner,
the parking space, access ways, striping, landscaping and required screening.
20.07 LOCATION: All accessory off-street parking facilities as required by this Section
shall be located and restricted as follows:
A. Required accessory off-street parking shall be on the same lot under the same
ownership or lease as the principal use being served, except under the provisions of
Subd. 20.11 and 20.12 of this Section.
B. Except for single family dwellings, head-in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a
public street, with each stall having its own direct access to the public street, shall
be prohibited.
C. There shall be no off-street parking within fifteen (15) feet of any street surface.
D. The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall not be used for parking.
E. Required accessory off-street parking for non-residential uses shall not be provided
in front yards (or in side yards in the case of a corner lot) in any residential district,
except as allowed for model homes and temporary real estate offices by Section 19
of this Ordinance.
F. In the case of single family dwellings, parking shall be prohibited in any portion of
the front yard, except designated driveways leading directly into a garage or one (1)
open, surfaced space located on the side of a driveway, away from the principal
use. Said extra space shall be surfaced with either concrete, asphalt or in cases of
existing gravel driveways, gravel may be used for such additional parking. At any
time an improvement is made to property requiring a building permit, all nonconforming
surfacing of parking areas or driveways existing on the lot in question
shall be brought into full compliance with this Section.
G. With the exception of seasonal recreational equipment of limited size and weight,
the same parking standards for seasonal recreational equipment shall apply as
20-10
outlined herein. In cases of seasonal recreational equipment of limited size and
weight, the surfacing required herein shall not apply and the equipment may be
parked over what is traditionally grass. Seasonal recreational equipment of limited
size and weight may include boats, campers designed to be mounted on automotive
vehicles, snowmobiles, boat trailers, motorcycle trailers and tent or travel trailers.
H. Violations may be enforced through tagging.
20.08 USE OF REQUIRED AREA: Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any
district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, repair work, storage of
inoperable vehicles, and/or storage of snow.
20.09 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED: The following
minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by
ownership, easement, and/or lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter
set forth.
USE
NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
REQUIRED
Subd. 1. Residential:
Single Family Dwellings
Two (2) spaces.
Subd. 2. Institutional/Educational/Cultural:
Auditoriums, Theaters, Religious
Institutions, Sports Arenas
One (1) space for each four (4) permanent
seats based on the design capacity of the main
assembly hall. Facilities as may be provided in
conjunction with such buildings or uses shall be
subject to additional requirements which are
imposed by this Ordinance.
Community Center, Physical Culture
Studio, Libraries, Museums
One (1) space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of floor area.
Nursing Homes, Rest Homes
One (1) space for each four (4) beds.
Private or Private Non-Profit
Baseball
Fields
One (1) space for each eight (8) seats of design
capacity.
20-11
School, Elementary and Junior High
(Public or Private)
Three (3) spaces for each classroom. This
requirement may be reduced at the Zoning
Administrator’s discretion to reflect facility use
and/or parking policy. Adequate space shall be
allowed for the dropping off and/or picking up of
students as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
School, High School (Public or
Private)
One (1) space for each two (2) students based
on the design capacity. This requirement may
be reduced at the Zoning Administrator’s
discretion to reflect facility use and/or parking
policy. Adequate space shall be allowed for
the dropping off and/or picking up of students
as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 3. Non-Residential:
Animal Hospitals or Kennels
Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for each five
hundred (500) square feet of floor area over
one thousand (1,000) square feet.
Automobile Washes:
Shall be determined by the type of automobile
wash as listed below:
Automatic Drive
Through Service
Five (5) spaces or one (1) per employee on
maximum shift, whichever is greater.
Self-Service Car Wash
One (1) space per bay.
Motor Fuel Station
Automobile Washes
One (1) space in addition to that required for
the station.
Beauty or Barber Shops
Two (2) spaces for each beauty or barber chair.
Bowling Alleys
Five (5) spaces for each lane or alley, plus
additional spaces as may be required herein for
related uses contained within the principal
structure.
Drive-In Convenience Food
Establishment
One (1) space for each two and one-half (2.5)
seats plus one (1) space for each fifteen (15)
square feet of public service and counter area.
Drive-In Banks
One (1) space for every three hundred fifty
(350) square feet of floor area.
Furniture Sales
One (1) space for each four hundred (400)
square feet of floor area for the first twenty-five
thousand (25,000) square feet, plus one (1)
space for each six hundred (600) square feet
thereafter.
20-12
Group Day Care Centers
One (1) space for each employee, plus one (1)
space for each four (4) children of licensed
capacity.
Manufacturing
One (1) space for each employee on the major
shift or one (1) space for each three hundred
fifty (350) square feet, whichever is greater,
plus one (1) space for each company motor
vehicle on the premises.
Medical, Chiropractic, or Dental
Offices or Clinics
One (1) space for every two hundred (200) feet
of floor area.
Motels, Hotels, Lodging or Boarding
Houses
One (1) space per sleeping unit, plus one (1)
space per day shift employee plus one (1)
space for each forty (40) square feet devoted to
meeting or banquet rooms.
Motor Fuel Stations
Four (4) spaces plus two (2) spaces for each
service stall. Those facilities designed for sale
of other items than strictly automobile products,
parts or service shall be required to provide
additional parking in compliance with other
applicable sections of this Ordinance.
Office Buildings and Professional
Offices, Other Than Any Area for
Doctors, Chiropractors, or Dentists;
Banks, Public Administration Offices
One (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of floor area.
Restaurants, Private Clubs, Lodges,
Food Dispensing Establishments
(Except Drive-In Restaurants)
One (1) space for each forty (40) square feet of
floor area of dining and bar area and one (1)
space for each eighty (80) square feet of
kitchen area.
Retail Commercial Uses, Except as
Prescribed Herein
One (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of floor area.
Retail Sales and Service Business
with 50 Percent or More of Gross
Floor Area Devoted to Storage,
Warehouses, and/or Industry
Eight (8) spaces or one (1) space for each two
hundred (200) square feet devoted to public
sales or service plus one (1) space for each five
hundred (500) square feet of storage area.
Shopping Center
One (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of leasable floor area.
Truck Wash
Three (3) spaces plus one (1) space per bay.
Warehousing
One (1) space for each two (2) employees of
the largest shift or one (1) space for each two
thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Subd. 4. Non-Specified Uses:
20-13
For uses not specifically listed above, off-street parking requirements shall be
computed by the Zoning Administrator on the same basis as required for the most
similar listed uses. In such cases, the Zoning Administrator shall also consult off-street
parking reference materials including, but not limited to, manuals prepared by the
American Planning Association, and Institute of Transportation Engineers.
20.10 SPACE REDUCTIONS: Subject to the review and processing of an interim use
permit as regulated by Section 5 of this Ordinance, the City may reduce the number of
required off-street parking spaces and/or loading spaces when the use can demonstrate in
documented from a demand which is less than required by this Ordinance. In such
situations, the City may require land to be reserved for parking development should the use
or needs change.
20.11 JOINT FACILITIES: The City Council may, after receiving a report and
recommendation from the Planning Commission, approve an interim use permit for one (1)
or more businesses to provide the required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one
(1) or more sites where the total number of spaces provided are less than the sum of the
total required for each business should they provide them separately. Such a permit shall
not be granted except when the following conditions are found to exist:
A. Entertainment Uses: Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required for a
theater, bowling alley, or other commercial recreational facilities may be supplied by
the off-street parking facilities provided by type of uses specified as primarily
daytime uses in Subd. 20.12.D.
B. Night Time or Sunday Uses: Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking
facilities required for any use specified under Subd. 20.12.D below, as primarily
daytime uses may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following
uses which typically have their major parking demand occurring during night time or
weekends; auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling
alleys, theaters, or apartments.
C. Schools, Auditorium and Church Uses: Up to eighty (80) percent of the parking
facilities required by this section for a church, or an auditorium incidental to a public
or parochial school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by
uses specified under Subd. 20.12.D below as primarily daytime use.
D. Daytime Uses: For the purpose of this section, the following uses are considered as
primary daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service
shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair, service
shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses.
20-14
E. Additional Criteria for Joint Parking: In addition to the preceding requirements, the
following conditions are required for joint parking usage:
1. Proximity: The building or use which application is being made to utilize the
off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be
located within three hundred (300) feet of such parking facilities, excluding
public rights-of-way.
2. Conflict in Hours: The applicant shall demonstrate in documented fashion
that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two
(2) buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is
proposed.
3. Written Consent and Agreement: A legally binding instrument, executed by
the parties concerned, for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly
approved as to title of grantors or lessors, and in a form and manner of
execution approved by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk and
recorded with the Stearns County Recorder or Registrar of Titles, and a
certified copy of the recorded document shall be filed with the City within
sixty (60) days after approval of the joint parking use by the City or the
interim use permit shall be considered null and void.
20.12 OFF-SITE PARKING:
A. Any off-site off-street parking which is used to meet the requirements of this
Ordinance shall be an interim use as regulated by Section 5 of this Ordinance.
B. Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all
requirements and standards of this Ordinance.
C. The parking lot is to be used only for the parking of passenger automobiles of
employees, customers or guests of the person or firm controlling and operating the
lot, said person to be responsible for its maintenance.
D. The parking lot is not to be used for sales, repair work or servicing of any kind.
E. Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use being served shall be
provided.
F. No advertising sign or material is to be located on the property where the parking lot
is located.
G. All parking is to be kept back of the setback building line by barriers unless
otherwise specifically authorized by the City Council.
20-15
H. Except as provided below, the site used for meeting the off-site parking
requirements of this Section shall be under the same ownership as the principal use
being served or under public ownership.
I. Except as provided below, off-site parking for non-residential uses shall not be
located more than three hundred (300) feet from the main public entrance of the
principal use being served.
J. Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this
Section shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the off-site location until
such time as on-site parking is provided or a site in closer proximity to the principal
use is acquired and developed for parking.
K. Compliance with off-street parking requirements provided through leased off-street
parking may be approved by the City Council, subject to the following conditions:
1. The lease shall specify the total number and location of parking spaces
under contract and this number, when added to any on-site parking required,
must be equal to the total number of parking spaces required.
2. The lease instrument shall legally bind all parties to the lease and provide for
amendment or cancellation only upon written approval from the City.
3. The lease agreement shall incorporate a release of liability and any other
provisions, as recommended by the City Attorney that are deemed necessary
to ensure compliance with the intent of this Section.
L. Any such other conditions as may be deemed necessary by the City Council to
protect the welfare and character of the nearby land uses.
20.13 OFF-STREET BICYCLE AND MOTORCYCLE PARKING: Provisions shall be
made for the off-street parking of bicycles and motorcycles in all multiple family and nonresidential
developments and uses. Plans for such facilities shall be reviewed and
evaluated on an individual project or use basis as part of site plan review provisions of
Section 10 of this Ordinance.
21-1
SECTION 21. OFF-STREET LOADING
Subdivision
21.01 Purpose
21.02 Design
21.03 Number of Loading Spaces Required
21.04 Landscaping and Screening of Loading Spaces
21.05 Location
21.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the regulation of loading spaces in these zoning
regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way so as to promote
the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for offstreet
loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the specific and
appropriate utilization of various parcels of land or structure.
21.02 DESIGN:
A. Dimensional Requirements:
1. Non-Residential Uses: Required off-street truck loading or unloading spaces
for non-residential uses shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width, fourteen
(14) feet in height, and sixty (60) feet in length, in accordance with the
requirements of Subd. 21.02.2.B of this Ordinance. Where a loading space
parallel to a building is to be utilized, such area shall not be less than twelve
(12) feet in width nor less than sixty-five (65) feet in length. In no instance
shall any designated side loading space encroach upon a fire lane or driving
aisle or parking spaces.
2. Reductions: Reductions to loading space size may be granted by the Zoning
Administrator upon demonstration of facility need.
B. All maneuvering for off-street loading shall be accomplished on private property.
C. In addition to the required loading space, all loading spaces shall include a
maneuvering area. The maneuvering area shall not use any of that portion of the
site containing parking stalls or customer service areas. Maneuvering areas shall
be of such size as to permit the backing of truck tractors and coupled trailers into
the loading space, without blocking the use of other loading spaces, drives, parking
spaces, or maneuvering areas on public right-of-way.
D. The construction and setback standards listed in Section 20 of this Ordinance shall
apply to all loading spaces.
21-2
E. Customer drop off spaces shall not constitute off-street loading spaces as may be
required by Section 20 of this Ordinance.
21.03 NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES REQUIRED: The number of required off-street
loading spaces shall be as follows:
GROSS FLOOR AREA OF
NON-RESIDENTIAL USE
(SQUARE FEET)
REQUIRED
NUMBER OF
LOADING
SPACES*
Less than 10,000
10,001 to 20,000
20,001 to 50,000
50,001 to 75,000
75,001 to 100,000
For each additional 50,000 over 100,000
1
2
3
4
5
1
* Reductions to loading space quantity requirements may be granted by
the Zoning Administrator upon determination of facility need.
21.04 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING OF LOADING SPACES: Loading spaces shall
be screened from all property lines. Said screening shall be accomplished by a solid wall
or fence and shall be so designed as to be architecturally harmonious with the principal
structure and in conformance with Section 15.06 of this Ordinance. Screening plantings
may be substituted, provided such plantings are in conformance with Section 15.07 to this
Ordinance.
21.05 LOCATION:
A. Off-Street: All required loading spaces for a non-residential use shall be off-street
and located on the same lot as the building or use to be served.
B. Distance from Intersection: All loading space curb cuts shall be located at minimum
fifty (50) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more street rights-of-way. This
distance shall be measured from the property line.
C. Distance from Residential Use: Loading areas established after _____________
shall be prohibited within three hundred (300) feet of residentially zoned or guided
property excluding public rights-of-way, unless completely screened by an
21-3
intervening building. Loading areas not requiring screening by an intervening
building shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned or property or property
designated for such use by the Comprehensive Plan by the use of berms, fences, or
walls to provide one hundred (100) percent opacity to a height of at least ten (10)
feet.
D. Pedestrians: Loading spaces shall not conflict with pedestrian movement.
E. Visibility: Loading spaces shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from
off-street parking access.
F. General Compliance: Loading spaces shall comply with all other requirements of
this section.
G. Traffic Interference: Each loading space shall be located with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will cause the least
interference with traffic.
H. Accessory Use, Parking, and Storage: Required loading spaces shall not be used
for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or snow and shall not be included as
part of the space requirements to meet off-street parking requirements.

















24-1
SECTION 24. ANIMALS
Subdivision
24.01 General Regulations
24.02 Domestic Animals
24.03 Dog Kennels and Cat Shelters
24.04 Farm Animals
24.05 Commercial Stables
24.06 Wild or Exotic Animals
24.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. The size, number, species, facilities for and location of animals kept shall be
maintained so as not to cause a nuisance or endanger the health, safety, or general
welfare of the community and shall be in compliance with this Ordinance and all
other applicable City regulations.
B. Animals may only be kept for commercial purposes if such activities are authorized
in the zoning district where the animals are to be located.
C. Facilities for housing animal(s) shall be:
1. Constructed of such material as is appropriate for the animal(s) involved.
2. Maintained in good repair.
3. Controlled as to temperature, ventilated and lighted compatible with the
health and comfort of the animal(s).
4. Of sufficient size to allow each animal to make normal postural and social
adjustments with adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may
be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition of debility, stress or
abnormal behavior patterns.
5. Cleaned as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the animal(s)
contained therein and to minimize disease hazards and reduce odors.
6. Excepting farm related facilities, subject to approval of a building permit by
the City Building Official.
7. In accordance with applicable Humane Society or State requirements
regarding the leasing of animals.
D. Animals kept in pet shops or kennels shall be kept in accordance with regulations
for pet shops and kennels in addition to the regulations provided by this Ordinance.
24-2
24.02 DOMESTIC ANIMALS: The keeping of domestic animals, as defined in Section 2.2
of this Ordinance, is an allowed use in all zoning districts.
24.03 DOG KENNELS AND CAT SHELTERS:
A. No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a license.
B. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for operation of a
kennel or shelter.
C. Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to prevent
the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
D. Both dog kennels or cat shelters shall be open for inspection by the City authorities
at any time.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep four (4) or more dogs and/or cats
(excluding farm cats) over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this Section.
24.04 FARM ANIMALS:
A. The keeping and maintaining of farm animals, including livestock and horses, shall
be an allowed use within the A-1 Zoning District and on sites qualifying as farms in
all other zoning districts.
B. The keeping and maintaining of farm animals, including livestock and horses, shall
be allowed by administrative permit in the A-2 Zoning District, provided:
1. The provisions of Section 6 of this Ordinance are considered and determined
to be satisfied.
2. The minimum lot size upon which animals are to be located shall be two and
one-half (2 ½) acres.
3. Farm animals may not be confined in a pen, feedlot, or building within two
hundred (200) feet of any residential structure not owned or leased by the
operator.
24-3
4. The keeping and care of animals is provided by City regulations.
5. The density per acre of farm animals specifically allowed must not exceed
the maximum densities, as specified below, unless permitted by conditional
use permit:
Animals Number/Acre
a. Cattle, horses mules, donkeys 1
b. Goats, sheep 5
c. Swine 10
d. Turkeys, ducks, geese 25
e. Chickens, rabbits, guinea
pigs, hamsters, pigeons 50
6. A shelter or stabling facility shall provide a minimum of one hundred (100)
square feet per acre of enclosed area per animal, or fractions thereof, as
based upon the number of animals per acre listed above (example: 100
square feet divided by five goats/acre = 20 square feet of enclosed area per
goat).
C. Manure application and stockpiling activities shall comply with applicable provisions
of Section 23.07 of this Ordinance.
D. No manure or waste shall be deposited, stored, kept, or allowed to remain in or
upon any site without reasonable safeguards adequate to prevent the escape or
movement of such manure, waste, or a solution thereof from the site which may
result in pollution of any public waters or any health hazard.
E. All regulations imposed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) relating
to the keeping of farm animals shall be adhered to and animal feedlots shall comply
with the applicable provisions of Section 23.07 of this Ordinance.
24.05 COMMERCIAL STABLES:
A. Commercial stables (operations involving the boarding and care of ten (10) or more
horses) shall be allowed only in the City’s A-1 Zoning District by conditional use
permit.
B. The minimum lot size for a commercial stable shall be ten (10) acres.
C. The density of equine allowed on a commercial riding stable shall be in accordance
with Section 24.04.B.5.
D. Manure and other waste materials shall be removed and distributed so as to
24-4
minimize unsightly odors, insect, and rodent problems or any condition which
otherwise operates as a public or private nuisance. The storage of manure and
other waste materials must be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from
the property line of any residential structure, or any lake, pond, river, stream, or
other body of water, well, or property line.
E. All areas designated for equine sheltering shall be located at least two hundred
(200) feet from the property line. Any agricultural building or shelter which was
being used in a commercial stable prior to the effective date of this Section is not
required to comply with the requirements of this subparagraph, provided, however,
that such agricultural building or shelter does not constitute a public nuisance as
determined by the City Council.
F. Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance shall be constructed and
maintained so as to adequately and safely contain equine at all times.
G. One (1) agricultural building upon the commercial stable property shall be permitted
to contain no more than one (1) caretaker’s unit, subject to a demonstrated need
and to the approval of a conditional use permit as regulated by Section 4 of this
Ordinance.
H. All equine shall be provided shelter sufficient to protect against potentially injurious
weather. All such shelters shall be structurally sound, provide sufficient ventilation,
and be maintained in good repair.
I. Equine stalls shall provide sufficient space for the equine to lie or roll with a
minimum danger of injury to itself. Stalls shall be cleaned and kept dry to the extent
that the animal is not required to lie or stand in fluids. Bedding shall be provided in
all stalls, kept reasonably clean, and periodically changed. The nature of the
bedding shall not pose a health hazard to the animal.
J. The Zoning Administrator shall inspect every commercial stable as frequently as the
City may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Section and
any conditions of the license for such commercial stable. Any person who operates
a commercial stable shall, upon request of the Zoning Administrator and/or City
Building Official, permit access to all parts of the commercial stable for the purpose
of inspection. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a report of every inspection of
a commercial stable. A copy of such report shall be mailed to the person operating
the commercial stable and forwarded to the City Council.
24.06 WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS:
A. Conditional Use Permit.
24-5
1. Other than may be herein exempted, wild or exotic animals, as defined in
Section 2.2 of this Ordinance shall require a conditional use permit prior to its
being kept in the City.
2. Determination of acceptability shall include but not be limited to:
a. The potential health or safety hazard posed.
b. The provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
3. Conditions and limitations governing wild or exotic animals shall include but
not be limited to:
a. Full compliance with State Statutes and federal regulations governing
such species.
b. Provisions for the adequate and safe confinement of such animal, as
may be warranted by the potential adverse impact upon neighboring
properties and by safe consideration of the property residents and
neighboring uses.
c. Adequate screening, noise, and visual controls as deemed necessary
by the City Council to maintain compatibility and protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
d. Additional requirements and limitations as may be deemed necessary
by the City Council so as to insure compatibility and maintain the
health, safety and general welfare of the public.
B. Zoological Programs. Wild or exotic animals being kept as part of the Minnesota
Zoological Gardens, St. Paul Como Zoo, or similar institutional teaching programs
are an allowed use in all zoning districts by administrative permit. Prior to permit
issuance, the participant in the program shall notify the Zoning Administrator in
writing of their participation in the program and identify all animals being kept.

25-1
SECTION 25. HOME OCCUPATIONS
Subdivision
25.01 Purpose
25.02 Application
25.03 Procedures and Permits
25.04 Requirement; General Provisions
25.05 Non-Conforming Uses
25.06 Inspection
25.07 Revocations
25.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this Section is to provide a means through the
establishment of specific standards and procedures by which home occupations can be
conducted without jeopardizing land use harmony and compatibility, and the health, safety
and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. In addition, this Section is intended
to provide a mechanism enabling the distinction between permitted home occupations and
interim or customarily "more sensitive" home occupations, so that permitted home
occupations may be allowed through an administrative process rather than a legislative
hearing process.
25.02 APPLICATION: Subject to the Non-Conforming Use Section and other applicable
provisions of this Ordinance, all occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance. This Section shall not be construed, however, to apply to
home occupations related to farming.
25.03 PROCEDURES AND PERMITS:
A. Permitted Home Occupations:
1. “Permitted home occupations”, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be
considered permitted accessory uses in the City’s agricultural and residential
zoning districts and shall comply with the provisions of Section 25.04.A and
25.04.B of this Ordinance.
B. Interim Home Occupations:
1. Qualification: Any home occupation which does not meet the specific
requirements for a “permitted home occupation” as defined in this Section
shall require an "interim home occupation permit" which shall be applied for,
reviewed and disposed of in accordance with the procedural provisions of
25-2
Section 5 of this Ordinance.
2. Declaration of Conditions: The City Council may impose such conditions on
the granting of an "interim home occupation permit" as may be necessary to
ensure compatibility and to carry out the purpose and provisions of this
Section.
3. Effect of Permit: An "interim home occupation permit" may be issued for a
period of one (1) year after which the permit may be reissued for periods of
up to three (3) years each. Each application for permit renewal shall be
processed and subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator, except in
cases where written complaints have been received concerning the operation
or where there has been a change in conditions or violation, a renewal shall
be processed in accordance with the procedural requirements of the initial
interim home occupation permit.
4. Transferability: Home occupation permits shall not run with the land and
shall not be transferable.
5. Renewal of Permit: An applicant shall not have a vested right to a permit
renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. In applying for and
accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees that the monetary investment in
the home occupation will be fully amortized over the life of the permit and
that a permit renewal will not be needed to amortize the investment. Each
application for the renewal of a permit will be reviewed without taking into
consideration that a previous permit has been granted. The previous
granting or renewal of a permit shall not constitute a precedent or basis for
the renewal of a permit.
25.04 REQUIREMENT; GENERAL PROVISIONS: All home occupations shall comply
with the following general provisions and according to definition, the applicable requirement
provisions.
A. General Provisions:
1. No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, fumes, odor, or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
2. No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be used
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
25-3
receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the
premises.
3. Except in the case of State licensed day care facilities, any home occupation
shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the
premises, not more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be permanently set aside to be used in the conduct of the home
occupation. The home occupation shall not change the residential character
of the premises nor result in incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding
residential uses.
4. No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve
construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
5. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the
home occupation, except personal vehicles used in the home occupation
which comply with applicable provisions of this Ordinance may be parked on
the site.
6. The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes.
7. There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or
interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception of
directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by the
provisions of Section 31 of this Ordinance.
8. All home occupations shall comply with all City regulations related to
nuisances.
9. No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 PM and
7:00 AM unless approved by the City Council.
10. Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that which
can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is parked
closer than fifteen (15) feet from the curb line or edge of paved surface.
11. No home occupation (permitted or interim) shall involve any of the following:
body shops, welding, ammunition manufacturing, flea markets, motor vehicle
sales or repairs, massage or escort business or other sexually oriented
25-4
businesses as defined by this ordinance, or other objectionable uses as
determined by the City Council.
12. Excepting incidental materials, no commodities shall be sold on the
premises.
B. Requirements, Permitted Home Occupation:
1. No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises shall be
employed.
2. On-street parking facilities shall not be utilized to accommodate parking
demand.
3. Examples of permitted home occupations include: art studio, dressmaking,
secretarial services, family day care, foster care, offices, teaching with
musical, dancing and other instructions which consist of no more than two (2)
pupils at a time, and similar uses.
4. The permitted home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair
service or manufacturing which requires equipment other than customarily
found in a home; teaching which customarily consists of more than two (2)
pupils at a time; over the counter sale of non-residential merchandise
produced off the premises.
C. Requirements, Interim Home Occupation:
1. A maximum of one (1) full time employee or equivalent, other than those
persons who customarily reside on the premises, shall be employed. This
provision shall not apply where the interim home occupation is a meeting
place for employees and the work is done off-premises.
2. Examples of interim home occupations include: massage therapy, barber
and beauty services, day care, group nursery, photography studio, lessons,
saw sharpening, small appliances, and small engine repair and the like.
3. The interim home occupation may involve any of the following: stock-in trade
incidental to the performance of the service, repair service or manufacturing
which requires equipment other than customarily found in a home, the
teaching with musical, dancing and other instruction of more than two (2)
pupils at a time.
4. Interim home occupations may be allowed to accommodate their parking
25-5
demand through utilization of on-street parking. In such cases where onstreet
parking facilities are necessary, however, the Zoning Administrator
shall maintain the right to establish the maximum number of on-street spaces
permitted and increase or decrease that maximum number when and where
changing conditions require additional review.
25.05 NON-CONFORMING USE: Existing home occupations lawfully existing on June 2,
1998 may continue as non-conforming uses. Any existing home occupation that is
discontinued for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or is in violation of
the provisions of the Ordinance under which it was initially established, shall be brought
into conformity with the provisions of this Section.
25.06 INSPECTION: With reasonable cause and documentation, the City hereby reserves
the right to inspect any home occupation during reasonable hours, with reasonable notice,
the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with and
provisions of this Section or any conditions additionally imposed.
25.07 REVOCATIONS:
A. Permitted and interim home occupations may continue to exist until:
1. Such time as the business is not in compliance with any portion of this
ordinance, any other applicable City ordinance, or any applicable state or
federal statute, rule or regulation.
2. Such time as there is any violation of the terms and conditions of permit
approval.
3. Such time as there is any change in the conditions of operation of the
business as it was originally approved; including any change in the nature of
the business, any substantial change in the extent of business, any
substantial change in the extent of business operations, any significant
expansion of business facilities, or any other circumstances related to the
business which have the potential to significantly effect surrounding
properties, or which may pose a threat to the health, welfare or safety of the
general public.
4. Such time as License Expires: At such time that the City has cause to
believe that any of the events listed in 1, 2 or 3 above have taken place, the
City shall immediately notify the permit holder of the allegations of violation
and the necessary corrections required to bring the license into compliance.
25-6
26-1
SECTION 26. DAY CARE NURSERY FACILITIES
Subdivision
26.01 Purpose
26.02 Application
26.03 Declaration of Conditions
26.04 General Provisions
26.05 Inspection
26.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the regulation of day care nursery facilities in this
section is to establish standards and procedures by which day care facilities can be
conducted within the City without jeopardizing the health, safety and general welfare of the
day care participants and/or the surrounding neighborhood. This section establishes the
City’s minimum requirements for the establishment and operation of day care facilities
which are not defined as permitted uses by State Statute or which are not located in single
family homes. Day care facilities other than those defined as permitted uses by State
Statutes which operate in a single family dwelling as an accessory use shall be subject to
Section 25 of this Ordinance and processed as a home occupation.
26.02 APPLICATION: Day care nursery facilities shall be considered a permitted
conditional use within all residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts of the City
and shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of Section 4 of this Ordinance. In
addition to the City regulation, all day care facility operations shall comply with the
minimum requirements of the Minnesota Department of Human Services, as may be
amended.
26.03 DECLARATION OF CONDITIONS: The Planning Commission and City Council
may impose such conditions on the granting of a day care facility conditional use permit as
may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this section.
26.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS: Day care facilities shall be allowed as a principal use or
as an accessory use, provided that the day care facilities meet all the applicable provisions
of this section.
A. Lot Requirements and Setbacks: The proposed site for a day care facility as a
principal use shall have a minimum lot area as set forth in the respective zoning
district. The City Council may increase the required lot area in those cases where
such an increase is considered necessary to ensure compatibility of activities and
26-2
maintain the public health, safety and general welfare. The day care facility shall
meet the setback requirements of the respective zoning district.
B. Sewer and Water: All day care facilities shall have access to municipal sewer and
water or have adequate private sewer and water to protect the health and safety of
all persons who occupy the facility.
C. Buffering: Unless exempted by the Zoning Administrator, where an outdoor play
area of a day care facility which abuts any commercial or industrial use or zone, or
public right-of-way, the day care facility shall provide screening along the shared
boundary of such uses, zones, or public rights-of-way. All of the required fencing
and screening shall comply with the fencing and screening requirements of Section
15.07 of this Ordinance.
D. Parking:
1. There shall be adequate off-street parking which shall be located separately
from any outdoor play area and shall be in compliance with Section 20 of this
Ordinance. Parking areas shall be screened from view of surrounding and
abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.
2. When a day care facility is an accessory use within a structure containing
another principal use, parking for each use shall be calculated separately for
determining the total off-street parking spaces required. An exception to this
requirement may be granted by the Zoning Administrator in instances where
no increase in off-street parking demand will result.
E. Off-Street Loading: Off-street loading space in compliance with Section 21 of this
Ordinance shall be provided.
F. Signage: All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with Section 31 of this Ordinance.
G. Compliance with State Requirements: The structure and operation shall be in
compliance with State of Minnesota Department of Human Services regulations and
shall be licensed accordingly.
26.05 INSPECTION: The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any day care facility
conditional use permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted
to insure compliance with the provisions of this section or any conditions additionally
imposed.
27-1
SECTION 27. SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES
Subdivision
27.01 Purpose
27.02 Sexually Oriented Use-General
27.03 Sexually Oriented Use-Principal
27.04 Sexually Oriented Use-Accessory
27.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this subdivision is to establish provisions for the
opportunity as well as controls of sexually oriented uses within St. Augusta.
27.02 SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE - GENERAL: Sexually oriented uses, as defined in
this Ordinance, shall be subject to the following general provisions:
A. Activities classified as obscene under Minnesota State Law are not permitted and
are strictly prohibited.
B. Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from
locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.
C. Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from
locating in any place which is also used to dispense or consume alcoholic
beverages.
D. Sexually oriented uses-principal which are defined in this Ordinance as sexually
oriented stores, and which deal solely in the retail sales of novelties, shall be
exempt from the requirements of Subd. 27.03 of this Ordinance.
E. A sexually oriented use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be
classified as an sexually oriented use-principal.
27.03 SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES - PRINCIPAL:
A. Sexually oriented use-principal shall be located at least two hundred (200) radial
feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the
building upon which the sexually oriented use-principal is located to the property line
of:
1. Residentially zoned property.
2. Residential uses within Agricultural Zoning Districts.
27-2
3. A licensed day care center.
4. A public or private educational facility classified as an elementary, junior high
or senior high.
5. A public library.
6. A public park.
7. Another sexually oriented use-principal.
8. An on-sale liquor establishment.
B. Sexually oriented use-principal activities, as defined by this Ordinance, shall be
classified as one use. No two (2) sexually oriented uses-principal shall be located in
the same building or upon the same property and each use shall be subject to
Subd. 27.03.A of this Ordinance.
27.04 SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES - ACCESSORY:
A. Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall:
1. Comprise no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the
establishment in which they are located; and
2. Comprise no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area in
total; and
3. Comprise no more than twenty (20) percent of the gross receipts of the entire
business operation; and
4. Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise.
B. Sexually oriented business-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit access to
minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general public
access:
1. Movie Rentals: Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall
be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view and
under the control of the persons responsible for the operation or shall be in
catalogs under the direct control and distribution of the operator.
2. Magazines: Publications classified or qualifying as sexually oriented shall
not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or
27-3
other means to prevent display of any material other than the publication
title.
C. Sexually oriented business-accessory activities shall be prohibited at any public
show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition
presented to the general public where minors are admitted.

28-1
SECTION 28. ESSENTIAL SERVICES
Subdivision
28.01 Purpose
28.02 Special Permit Required
28.03 Conditional Use Permit Required
28.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to provide for the installation of essential
services such as telephone lines, pipelines, electric transmission lines and substations in
such a manner that the health, safety, and welfare of the City will not be adversely
affected. Essential services shall also be installed in recognition of existing and projected
demands for such services.
28.02 SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED: All underground communication lines, pipelines for
distribution to individual properties within the City, and all, underground electric
transmission lines, overhead utility lines, electric transmission lines, and substations less
than 33 KV, when installed in any location in the City, shall require a permit subject to
review by the City Engineer and approval by the City Council and shall be processed
according to the following:.
A. Prior to the installation of any of the essential services defined above, the owner of
such service shall file with the City Engineer, all maps and other pertinent
information as deemed necessary by the City Engineer for review the proposed
project.
B. The City Engineer shall document in writing the findings as to the compliance of the
proposed project with the Comprehensive Plan and any other applicable City
regulations.
C. In considering applications for the placement of essential services, as regulated in
this section, the aforesaid City Engineer and City Council shall consider the effect of
the proposed project upon the health, safety and general welfare of the City, as
existing and as anticipated, and the effect of the proposed project upon the
Comprehensive Plan.
D. Upon approval of the City Council, a permit for the installation and operation of the
applicant’s essential services shall be issued. If the City Council denies the permit,
the applicant may appeal said decision to Stearns County District Court under the
rules and procedures set forth in Section 8 of this Ordinance.”
28.03 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED: All transmission pipelines (i.e., pipelines
28-2
not required for the St. Augusta local distribution network), and overhead and underground
transmission and substation lines in excess of 33 KV shall require a conditional use permit.
29-1
SECTION 29. ANTENNAS
Subdivision
29.01 Purpose and Intent
29.02 General Standards
29.03 Tower Design
29.04 Co-Location Requirement
29.05 Setbacks
29.06 Accessory and Secondary Use Antennas
29.07 Personal Wireless Service Antennas
29.08 Satellite Dishes
29.09 Commercial and Public Radio and Television Transmitting Antennas,
and Public Utility Microwave Antennas
29.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT: The purpose of this section is to establish predicable,
balanced regulations for the siting and screening of wireless communications equipment in
order to accommodate the growth of wireless communicating systems within St. Augusta
while protecting the public against any adverse impacts on the City's aesthetic resources
and the public welfare. The provisions of this Ordinance are intended to maximize the use
of existing towers, structures, and buildings to accommodate new wireless
telecommunication antennas in order to minimize the number of towers needed to serve
the community or area.
29.02 GENERAL STANDARDS: The following standards shall apply to all personal
wireless service, public utility, microwave, radio and television broadcast transmitting, radio
and television receiving, satellite dish and short-wave radio transmitting and receiving
antenna.
A. All obsolete and unused antenna shall be removed within twelve (12) months of
cessation of operation at the site, unless an exemption is granted by the Zoning
Administrator.
B. All antenna shall be in compliance with all City building and electrical code
requirements and as applicable shall require related permits.
C. Structural design, mounting and installation of the antenna shall be in compliance
with manufacturer’s specifications and as may be necessary, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be verified and approved by a professional engineer.
D. When applicable, written authorization for antenna erection shall be provided by the
property owner.
29-2
E. No advertising message shall be affixed to the antenna structure.
F. The height of the antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily,
as verified by an electrical engineer or other appropriate professional.
G. Antennas shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by law or by a
governmental agency to protect the public’s health and safety.
H. When applicable, proposals to erect new antenna shall be accompanied by any
required federal, state, or local agency licenses.
I. If a new tower is to be constructed, it shall be designed structurally, electrically, and
in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable
antennas for at least one (1) additional user, including but not limited to other
cellular communication companies, local police, fire and ambulance companies.
Towers shall be designed to allow for future re-arrangement of antennas upon the
tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
J. Antenna support structures under two hundred (200) feet in height shall be painted
a non-contrasting color consistent with the surrounding area, such as blue, gray,
brown or silver, or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual impact.
K. Except as may be applicable in cases where a conditional use permit is required,
antennas and support structures for federally licensed amateur radio stations and
used in the amateur radio service are exempt from sub-paragraphs C, F, and I
above, and must comply with Subd. L. below.
L. Amateur radio towers must be installed in accordance with the instructions furnished
by the manufacturer of that tower model. Because of the experimental nature of the
amateur radio service, antennas mounted on such a tower may be modified or
changed at any time so long as the published allowable load on the tower is not
exceeded and the structure of the tower remains in accordance with the
manufacturers specifications.
29.03 TOWER DESIGN: Wireless communication towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the City Council determines that an alternative design requested by the applicant
would better blend into the surrounding environment. This provision does not apply to
amateur radio towers or commercial and public radio or television towers.
29.04 CO- LOCATION REQUIREMENT: A proposal for a new tower shall not be
approved unless the Zoning Administrator finds that the antennas cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved tower, building, or structure within a one mile
search radius (one-half mile search radius for towers under one hundred (100) feet in
29-3
height) of the proposed tower due to one (1) or more of the following reasons:
A. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or
approved tower, building or structure as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced,
modified, or replaced to accommodate planned for equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost.
B. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability
of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a
qualified engineer and interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
C. Existing or approved towers, buildings, or structures within the search radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably
as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
D. Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the antennas upon an
existing or approved tower or structure.
E. Existing or approved towers, buildings, or other structures do not exist in the service
area, or do not meet the needs of the user. Documentation shall be provided at the
time of application clearly demonstrating why existing structures do not meet the
needs of the users.
F. The applicant shall demonstrate that a good faith effort to co-locate on existing
towers or structures was made, but an agreement could not be reached.
29.05 SETBACKS: All towers shall comply with each of the minimum setback requirements:
A. Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district with the exception
of industrial zoning districts, where the tower may encroach into the rear setback
area, provided that the rear property line abuts another industrial zoning district and
the tower does not encroach upon any easements.
B. A tower’s setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied,
at the discretion of the City Council, to allow the integration of the structure into an
existing or proposed structure, such as a light standard, power line support device,
or similar structure.
29.06 ACCESSORY AND SECONDARY USE ANTENNAS: The following standards shall
apply to all accessory and secondary use antennas including radio and television receiving
antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter,
short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic
29-4
equipment including radio receivers, federally licensed amateur radio stations and
television receivers.
A. Accessory or secondary use antennas shall not be erected in any required yard
(except a rear yard) or within public or private utility and drainage easements, and
shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all lot lines.
B. Guy wires or guy wire anchors shall not be erected within public or private utility and
drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all lot
lines.
C. Accessory or secondary use antennas and necessary support structures,
monopoles or towers may extend a maximum of fifteen (15) feet above the normal
height restriction for the affected zoning district, except support structures and
antennas used in the amateur radio service may extend a maximum of seventy (70)
feet for the affected zoning district.
D. The installation of more than one (1) support structure per property shall require the
approval of a conditional use permit.
29.07 PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE ANTENNAS:
A. Agricultural and Residential District Standards:
1. Antennas located upon public structures or existing tower: Personal wireless
service antenna located upon public structures or existing towers shall
require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the
following standards:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/interference
analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a certified engineer that
location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the
frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless system
and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service coverage
and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating
the antennas in a less restrictive district.
b. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment
building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching
equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and
shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.
c. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of
29-5
Section 6 of this Ordinance.
2. Antennas not located upon a public structure or existing tower: Personal
wireless service antenna not located upon a public structure or existing tower
shall require the processing of a conditional use permit and shall comply with
the following standards:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/ interference
analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a certified engineer that
location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the
frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service
system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service
coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served
by locating the antennas in a less restrictive district.
b. If no existing, non-residential structure which meets the height
requirements for the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the
antennas may be mounted on a monopole tower provided that:
(1) The pole not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height.
(2) The setback of the pole from the nearest residential structure
is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such
setback may be granted if a qualified structural engineer
specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will occur
within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
c. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment
building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching
equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and
shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.
d. At the discretion of the City, a security fence not greater than eight (8)
feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be
provided around the support structure.
e. The conditional use permit provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance
are considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Business and Institutional District Standards:
1. Antennas Located Upon An Existing Structure or Tower: Personal wireless
service antenna located upon an existing structure or co-located on an
existing tower shall require the processing of an administrative permit and
29-6
shall comply with the following standards:
a. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment
building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching
equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and
shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.
b. Antennas mounted on public structures shall not extend more than
fifteen (15) feet above the structural height of the structure to which
they are attached.
c. Building-mounted antennas shall not extend more than fifteen (15)
feet above the roof, and shall be set back at least five (5) feet from
the roof edge.
d. Wall or facade mounted antennas may not extend more than five (5)
feet above the cornice line and must be constructed of a material or
color which matches the exterior of the building.
e. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of
Section 6 of this Ordinance.
2. Antennas Not Located Upon An Existing Structure or Existing Tower:
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon an existing structure or
tower shall require the processing of a conditional use permit and shall
comply with the following standards:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/ interference
analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a certified engineer that
location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the
frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service
system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service
coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served
by locating the antennas in a less restrictive district.
b. If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for the
antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be
mounted on a monopole tower provided that:
(1) The pole not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height.
(2) The setback of the pole from the nearest residential structure
is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such
setback may be granted if a qualified structural engineer
29-7
specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will occur
within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
c. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment
building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching
equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and
shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.
d. At the discretion of the City, a security fence not greater than eight (8)
feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be
provided around the support structure.
e. The conditional use permit provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance
are considered and determined to be satisfied.
C. Industrial District Standards:
1. Antennas Located Upon An Existing Structure or Existing Tower: Personal
wireless service antennas located upon an existing structure or co-located on
an existing tower structure shall require the processing of an administrative
permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a. Building-mounted antennas shall not exceed more than fifteen (15)
feet above the roof, and shall be set back at least five (5) feet from
the roof edge.
b. Wall or facade mounted antennas may not extend more than five (5)
feet above the cornice line and must be constructed of a material or
color which matches the exterior of the building.
c. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of
Section 5 of this Ordinance.
2. Antennas Not Located Upon An Existing Structure or Existing Tower:
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon an existing structure or
tower shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall
comply with the following standards:
a. If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for
mounting the antennas, the antennas may be mounted upon a
monopole tower not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet in height.
The tower shall be located on a parcel having a dimension equal to
the height of the tower measured between the base of the tower
located nearest the property line and said property line, unless a
29-8
structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of the tower
will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
b. An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of
Section 5 of this Ordinance.
3. Temporary Mobile Towers: Personal wireless service antennas located upon
a temporary mobile tower used on an interim basis until a permanent site is
constructed shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall
comply with the following standards:
a. Temporary mobile towers are exempt from co-location and permanent
tower structure design standards contained in Sections 29.03 and
29.04 of this Ordinance.
b. The termination date of the permit shall not exceed one hundred
twenty (120) days. Temporary mobile towers located on a site longer
than one hundred twenty (120) days shall require the processing of an
interim use permit subject to the standards contained in Section 5 of
this Ordinance.
c. Guyed towers are prohibited.
d. Mobile units shall have a minimum tower design wind load of eighty
(80) miles per hour, or be set back from all structures a distance equal
to the height of the tower.
e. All towers shall be protected against unauthorized climbing.
f. The height of the tower shall not exceed ninety (90) feet.
29.08 SATELLITE DISHES:
A. Agricultural and Residential District Standards: Single satellite dish TVROs greater
than two (2) meters in diameter may be allowed as a conditional use within the
agricultural and residential zoning districts of the City and shall comply with the
following standards:
1. All accessory and secondary use provisions of Sections 29.02 and 29.03 of
this Ordinance are satisfactorily met.
2. The lot on which the satellite dish antenna is located shall be of sufficient
size to assure that an obstruction-free receive window can be maintained
29-9
within the limits of the property ownership.
3. Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the antenna
height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all sides of
the satellite dish antenna in a manner in which growth of the landscape
elements will not interfere with the receive window.
4. The satellite dish antenna is not greater than three and one-half (3.5) meters
in diameter.
5. The conditional use permit provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are
considered and determined to be satisfied.
B. Business District Standards: Satellite dish antennas within the business zoning
districts of the City shall be limited to those listed as permitted accessory and secondary
uses in the applicable zoning district subject to the provisions of Subd. 29.02 and Subd.
29.03 of this Ordinance.
C. Industrial District Standards: Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting
or receiving antennas in excess of three and one-half (3.5) meters may be allowed
as a conditional use within industrial districts of the City and shall comply with the
following standards:
1. All accessory and secondary use provisions of Sections 29.02 and 29.03 of
this Ordinance are satisfactorily met.
2. The lot on which the satellite dish antenna is located shall be of sufficient
size to assure that an obstruction free transmit-receive window or windows
can be maintained within the limits of the property ownership.
3. Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the antenna
height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all sides of
the satellite dish antenna in a manner in which growth of the landscape
elements will not interfere with the transmit-receive window.
4. The conditional use permit provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are
considered and determined to be satisfied.
29.09 COMMERCIAL AND PUBLIC RADIO AND TELEVISION TRANSMITTING
ANTENNAS, AND PUBLIC UTILITY MICROWAVE ANTENNAS: Commercial and public
radio and television transmitting and public utility microwave antennas shall comply with the
following standards:
A. Such antenna shall be considered an allowed conditional use within the I-1 and I-2
29-10
Districts of the City and shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of
Section 4 of this Ordinance.
B. The antennas, transmitting towers, or array of towers shall be located on a
continuous parcel having a dimension equal to the height of the antenna,
transmitting tower, or array of towers measured between the base of the antenna or
tower located nearest a property line and said property line, unless a registered
structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of any antenna or tower will
occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
C. Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, at the discretion of the City,
a fence not greater than eight (8) feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50)
percent shall be provided around the support structure and other equipment.
30-1
SECTION 30. WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS)
Subdivision
30.01 Purpose
30.02 Application
30.03 Declaration of Conditions
30.04 Site Plan Drawing
30.05 Compliance with State Building Code
30.06 Compliance with National Electrical Code
30.07 Manufacturer Warranty
30.08 Design Standards
30.09 Ornamental Wind Devices
30.10 Building Permit Required
30.11 Inspection
30.12 Abandonment
30.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of this Section is to establish standards and procedures
by which the installation and operation of WECS shall be governed within the City.
30.02 APPLICATION: Wind conversion systems may be allowed as an accessory or
conditional use within any zoning district of the City, subject to the regulations and
requirements of this Section, and provided the property upon which the system is to be
located is agricultural, commercial or industrial or is constructed and maintained on any
parcel of land of at least five (5) acres in size.
30.03 DECLARATION OF CONDITIONS: The City Council may impose such conditions
on the granting of WECS conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the
purpose and provisions of this Section and to maintain compatibility.
30.04 SITE PLAN DRAWING: All applications for WECS conditional use permit shall be
accompanied by a detailed site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned, displaying the
following information:
A. Lot lines and dimensions.
B. Location and height of all buildings, structures, above ground utilities, and trees on
the lot, including both existing and proposed structures and guy wires anchors.
C. Locations and height of all adjacent buildings, structures, above ground utilities and
30-2
trees located within three hundred (350) feet of the exterior boundaries of the
property in question.
D. Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures located on the property in question.
E. Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed WECS and its
relationship to structures on adjacent lots.
30.05 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE BUILDING CODE: Standard drawings of the structural
components of the wind energy conversion system and support structures, including base
and footings shall be provided along with the engineering data and calculations to
demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the State Building Code
especially with regards to wind and icing loads. Drawings and engineering calculations
shall be certified by a registered engineer.
30.06 COMPLIANCE WITH NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE: WECS electrical equipment
and connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the National Electrical
Code as adopted by the City.
30.07 MANUFACTURER WARRANTY: The applicant shall provide documentation or
other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the WECS has been successfully
operated in atmospheric conditions similar to the conditions within the City. The WECS
shall be warranted against any system failures reasonably expected in severe weather
operation conditions.
30.08 DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Height: The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be determined in one of
two ways. In determining the height of the WECS, the total height of the system
shall be included. System height shall be measured from the base of the tower to
the highest possible extension of the rotor.
1. A ratio of one (1) foot to one (1) foot between the distance of the closest
property line to the base of WECS to the height of the system.
2. A maximum system height of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
30-3
The shortest height of the two above mentioned methods shall be used in
determining the maximum allowable height of a WECS system. The height of a
WECS must also comply with FAA Regulation Part 77 “Objects Affecting Navigable
Air Space” and/or MnDOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015 “Criteria for Determining
Obstruction to Air Navigation.”
B. Setbacks: No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be located within
or above any required front, side or rear yard setback and no part of the system
shall be within ten (10) feet of any property line, whichever is greater. WECS
towers shall be setback from the closest property line one foot for every one foot of
system height. WECS shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of an above ground
utility line.
C. Rotor Size: All WECS rotors shall not have rotor dimensions greater than twenty-six
(26) feet.
D. Rotor Clearance: Blade-arcs created by the WECS shall have a minimum of thirty
(30) feet of clearance over any structure or tree within a two hundred (200) foot
radius.
E. Rotor Design: The blade design and materials are to be designed and constructed
to ensure safe operation in an urban/rural area.
F. Rotor Safety: Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic
braking device capable of stopping WECS operation in high wind (40 MPH or
greater) or in conditions of imbalance.
G. Lightning Protection: Each WECS shall be grounded to protect against natural
lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the
City.
H. Component Compatibility: The Wind turbine and wind turbine tower are to be
designed and constructed to be compatible.
I. Tower Access: To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must comply with
one of the following provision:
1. Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within twelve (12) feet of the
ground.
2. A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower.
3. Tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked, protective
fence at least eight (8) feet high.
J. Signs: WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet at the base of
30-4
the tower and said sign shall contain the following information:
1. Warning high voltage.
2. Manufacturer’s name.
3. Emergency phone number.
4. Emergency shutdown procedures.
K. Lighting: WECS shall not have affixed or attached any lights, reflectors, flashers or
any other illumination, except for illumination devices required by FAA Regulations
Part 77 “Objectives Affecting Navigable Air Space” and Lighting.”
L. Electromagnetic Interference: WECS shall be designed and constructed so as not
to cause radio and television interference.
M. Noise Emissions: Noises emanating from the operation of WECS shall be in
compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control
Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended.
N. Utility Company Interconnection: No WECS shall be interconnected with the local
electrical utility company until the utility company and the City Engineer have
commented upon such proposal. The interconnection of the WECS with the utility
company shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
30.09 ORNAMENTAL WIND DEVICES: Ornamental wind devices that are not a WECS
shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section and shall conform to other applicable
provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable City regulations.
30.10 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED: A building permit shall be required for the
installation of a WECS in the City.
30.11 INSPECTION: The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any WECS
conditional use permit to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located. If a WECS
is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety hazard, the owner
shall upon written notice from the City, take expeditious action to correct the situation.
30.12 ABANDONMENT: Any WECS or tower which is not used for twelve (12) successive
months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the
property at the expense of the property owner or upon approval of an extension by the
Zoning Administrator.
30-5
31-1
SECTION 31. SIGN REGULATIONS
Subdivision
31.01 Purpose
31.02 General Provisions
31.03 Exempt and Prohibited Signs
31.04 Non-Conforming Signs
31.05 General District Regulations
31.06 Special Use Regulations
31.07 Inspection and Removal
31.08 Permits and Variances
31.01 PURPOSE:The purpose of this Section is to achieve the following objectives:
A. To establish standards which permit reasonable and equitable opportunity for
business identification.
B. To preserve and promote civic beauty and prohibit signs which would detract from
this objective because of size, shape, height, location, condition, cluttering or
illumination.
C. To insure that signs do not create safety hazards.
D. To preserve and protect property values.
31.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building until all necessary
wall and roof attachments have been approved by the City Building Official.
B. No signs, guys, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or maintained on
rocks, fences, or trees, nor interfere with any electric light, power, or communication
wires or the supports thereof, with the exception of signs necessary for security, or
to preserve public safety, as determined by the City Council.
C. No signs, other than those of governmental jurisdictions, shall be permitted within
public right-of-way or street easements.
D. No sign shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or
opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress of any building or structure.
31-2
E. No sign or sign structure, unless otherwise noted in this Section, shall be closer to
any lot line than a distance equal to one-half (1/2) the minimum required yard
setback. No sign shall be placed within any drainage or utility easement.
F. The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the State's Electrical Code.
Electrical service to such sign shall be underground.
G. Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being directed onto
residential property, or at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision
of the driver. Nor shall such signs interfere with or obscure an official traffic sign or
signal. This includes indoor signs which are visible from public streets and
highways.
H. The use of banners, pennants, and similar devices shall require a permit to be
issued by the Zoning Administrator. The permit shall be valid for no more than ten
(10) consecutive days. No more than three (3) permits per property shall be
granted during any twelve (12) month period. A multiple occupancy building or
buildings on the same parcel of land shall be considered one property.
I. Landscaping which accompanies signage, such as area identification signs, shall be
approved by the Zoning Administrator with regards to installation, design and
maintenance.
J. Signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a safe condition.
Sign or sign structures which are rotted, unsafe, deteriorated or defaced, as
determined by the City Building Official or Zoning Administrator, shall be removed,
repainted, repaired, or replaced by the permit holder, owner or agent of the property
upon which the sign stands.
K. The owner, lessee or manager of any ground sign and the owner of the land on
which the same is located shall keep grass or weeds and other growth cut and
debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on which a sign is located.
31.03 EXEMPT AND PROHIBITED SIGNS:
A. Exempt Signs: The following signs are allowed without a permit:
1. Public Signs: Signs of non-commercial nature and in the public interest,
erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his or her
public duty, such as directional signs, regulatory signs, warning signs, and
informational signs and all warning signs posted by public utilities whether or
not such signs are in the public rights-of-way.
2. Informational Signs: Informational signs not exceeding four (4) square feet.
31-3
3. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs announcing any public, charitable,
educational or religious event or function, located entirely within the premises
of that institution and setback no less than ten (10) feet from the property line
with a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. Such signs shall be
allowed no more than twenty-one (21) days prior to the event or function and
must be removed within three (3) days after the event or function. Such
signs may be illuminated in accordance with the restrictions set forth in
Section 31.02 of this Ordinance. If building mounted, these signs shall be
flat wall signs and shall not project above the roof line. If ground mounted,
the top shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.
4. Integral Signs: Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations,
commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or
similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type
construction and made an integral part of the structure.
5. Real Estate Signs: Temporary real estate signs not exceeding eight (8)
square feet in area in residential zoning districts, and sixteen (16) square feet
in agricultural, business and industrial districts, may be located on the
subject property and limited to one (1) such sign for each property frontage.
Two (2) signs shall be permitted in situations where the lot frontage exceeds
five hundred (500) feet in length. These signs shall have a maximum height
of six (6) feet. Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the sale.
Temporary real estate directional signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in
area and four (4) in number showing a directional arrow and placed back of
the property line shall be permitted on approach routes to an open house.
The maximum height of such signs shall not exceed three (3) feet. These
directional signs shall be erected and removed on the same day as the open
house.
6. Campaign Signs:
a. State General Election Years: In a state general election year, the
size and duration of campaign sign display shall comply with the
provisions of Minnesota Statute 211.B.045, as amended. These
signs shall be confined within private property and shall not be less
than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest edge of the pavement and one
hundred (100) feet from the nearest curb intersection of any street.
b. Other Election Years: In years when no state general election is to
take place, signs announcing candidates seeking public political office
and other data pertinent thereto shall be permitted up to a total area
of nine (9) square feet for each premise in a residential zone and
31-4
thirty-two (32) square feet in an agricultural, commercial or industrial
zone. These signs shall be confined within private property and shall
not be less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest edge of the
pavement and one hundred (100) feet from the nearest curb
intersection of any street. These signs may be displayed sixty (60)
days prior and seven (7) days after the election for which intended. In
cases where a final election follows within seventy-five (75) days of a
primary election, those candidates who won in the primary election
may continue to display their signs during the interim period and up to
seven (7) days after the final election.
7. Single Family Residential Name and Street Address Signs: Two single
family residential name/address signs not exceeding two (2) square feet
each in area shall be permitted per single family dwelling. Such signs shall
be allowed on mailboxes, but shall otherwise be setback at least six (6) feet
from the nearest property line and a maximum height of six (6) feet when
ground mounted.
8. Farm Identification Signs: One (1) sign identifying the farm name and/or the
type of farming activities practices upon the subject property. Such sign shall
not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall be solely for the
purpose of displaying the name and/or type of farming activity on the
property. No advertising is allowed. These signs when ground mounted
shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.
9. Historical Signs: One (1) sign commemorating original family farmsteads or
other places of local, state or national historical significance shall be
permitted on the subject property and shall not exceed eight (8) square feet.
10. Crop Demonstration Signs: Signs identifying agricultural products utilized
upon the subject property not exceeding four (4) square feet in size.
11. Holiday Signs: Signs or displays which contain or depict a message
pertaining to a religious, national, state or local holiday and no other matter,
and which are displayed for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days in any
calendar year. Such signs may be illuminated but may not be flashing.
12. Rummage (Garage) Sale Signs: Rummage sale signs shall not be posted
more than one (1) day prior to the date(s) of sale and shall be removed
within one (1) day after the end of the sale and the total of all such signs
shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Rummage sale signs shall not be
located in any public rights-of-way. The City Building Official, Zoning
Administrator or other designated City staff shall have the right to remove
and destroy signs not conforming to this provision and assess costs related
to such enforcement against the property owner conducting the sale.
31-5
13. Window Signs: Where allowed, window signs shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) percent of the total area of the window in which they are displayed.
14. Construction Signs: A non-illuminated construction sign confined to the site
of the construction, alteration or repair. Such sign must be removed within
two (2) years of the date of issuance of the first building permit on the site or
upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or when the particular project
is completed, whichever first occurs. One sign shall be permitted for each
street the project abuts. No sign may exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area and six (6) feet in height, except signs abutting principal arterial streets
which may not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area and fifteen (15) feet
in height.
15. Contractor’s Storage Yard Identification Signs: One (1) sign identifying the
name of the operation and/or the type of activities practices upon the subject
property. Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and
shall be solely for the purpose of displaying the name and/or type of activity
on the property. No advertising is allowed. These signs, when ground
mounted, shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.
B. Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited:
1. Motion Signs and Flashing Signs: Except time and temperature signs
depicting a constant message as contrasted to a moving message.
2. No private sign shall be erected that resembles any official marker or sign
erected of a governmental agency or shall display such words as "stop" or
"danger" unless so specified by this Ordinance or other City regulations.
3. Projecting Signs.
4. Roof Signs.
5. Expired Business Signs: Those signs which advertise an activity, business,
product or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon
which the sign is located shall be removed immediately upon termination of
use. Where the owner or lessor of the premises is seeking a new tenant,
such signs may remain in place for not more than thirty (30) days from the
date of vacancy.
6. Advertising or Business Signs: Such signs on or attached to equipment such
as semi-truck trailers where signing is a principal use of the equipment on
either a temporary or permanent basis.
31-6
31.04 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS:
A. General Provisions Governing Non-Conforming Signs:
1. Any legal non-conforming on-premise sign lawfully existing upon the effective
date of this Ordinance may be continued at the size and in the manner
existing upon such date.
2. A non-conforming sign may not be:
a. Structurally altered except to bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this Section.
b. Enlarged.
c. Re-established after its removal or discontinuance.
d. Repaired or otherwise restored, unless the damage is to less than fifty
(50) percent of sign structure value.
e. Replaced. (Applies to structure only and not message.)
3. Non-Conforming Sign Maintenance and Repair: Nothing in this Section shall
be construed as relieving the owner or user of a legal non-conforming sign or
owner of the property on which the legal non-conforming sign is located from
the provisions of this Section regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of
signs, provided, however, that any repainting, cleaning, and other normal
maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign
structure or copy in any way which makes it more non-conforming or the sign
shall lose its legal non-conforming status. Illegal, non-conforming signs shall
be removed by the property owner within ten (10) days of notice from the
City.
B. Non-Conforming Uses: When the principal use of land is legally non-conforming
under the Zoning Ordinance of St. Augusta, all existing or proposed signs in
conjunction with that land, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance or other City
regulations, shall be considered conforming if they are in compliance with the sign
provisions for the most restrictive zoning district in which the principal use is
allowed.
31.05 GENERAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
A. Agricultural Zoning District as defined by Section 50 of this Ordinance:
31-7
1. Permitted Signs: All signs, as outlined in Subd. 31.03.A of this Ordinance.
2. No other signs shall be permitted in these districts unless deemed essential
by a governmental agency.
B. Residential Zoning Districts as defined by Section 50 of this Ordinance:
1. All signs permitted in the Agricultural Zoning Districts.
2. Residential Area Identification Sign: Two (2) signs for each entrance to an
identifiable area or subdivision from major collector or arterial streets and
consistent with the following provisions:
a. Each sign face shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area
with a maximum height of eight (8) feet for freestanding signs.
b. Signs shall be located on outlots of sufficient size and area to
accommodate said structure. A homeowners or neighborhood
association or other form of deed restriction and ownership deemed
acceptable by the City Council and involving all the properties within
the designated area shall be required which shall own and be
responsible for the upkeep, perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance,
utilities, and other costs associated with the sign(s) and the outlot
upon which it is located. The association rules or by-laws or similar
legal document shall specify how the aforementioned sign
responsibilities will be delegated and paid for. Such legal document
shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney.
c. Outlots for signs shall be considered and planned for at the time of
preliminary plat application and be included in the final plat. The
subdivision development contract between the City and the developer
shall specify the designated use of the outlot, its ownership and the
respective responsibilities regarding the outlot.
d. Signs shall be located no less than ten (10) feet from a property line.
e. Lighting of signs shall be permitted, provided that glare or light from
such lighting does not illuminate any adjacent properties, buildings,
structures, or public rights-of-way. The electric costs and
maintenance of such lighting shall be the responsibility of the
homeowners or neighborhood association or other legal entity of the
area identified by the sign(s) and said responsibility shall be clearly
defined in the applicable legal contract.
31-8
f. The outlot area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner
to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the
natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall
be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject to
City Council review and comment.
g. The design and construction of residential area identification signs
shall be done with the highest quality materials and workmanship to
keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize
the potential for vandalism. Residential area identification signs are to
be aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign
shall be compatible with nearby or potential homes and other
structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and a materials list
shall be included with each sign permit application and shall be
subject to City Council review and approval.
h. The City reserves the right to require the removal, at the owner's
expense of any sign when the requirements of this Section are not
completely followed and adhered to or if the sign is not properly
maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The City shall not have
any obligation or liability to replace any sign when removed by the
City.
3. Real Estate Development Project Signs: Signs involving temporary identification
of a new subdivision or development located upon the project site.
a. Each subdivision or development shall be allowed the following signs
by permit:
(1) One (1) sign not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in
surface area and a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, except
signs abutting principal arterial streets which may not exceed
one hundred (100) square feet in surface area and fifteen (15)
feet in height.
(2) Directional signs as authorized by Section 31.05.B.4 of this
Ordinance.
b. The permit shall be renewable annually and conditioned upon
documentation allowing such sign or structure by the property owner
upon which it is to be located, and a vacancy rate of the subdivision
greater than ten (10) percent.
4. Directional Signs: Off-site directional signs for institutions, or subdivisions
may be allowed one (1) double sided sign per major arterial street approach
31-9
to the property with an area not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet on each
side of the sign and shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet, subject to
the approval of a conditional use permit as regulated by Section 4 of this
Ordinance or at the time of subdivision approval.
5. Construction Sign: One (1) temporary, unilluminated sign identifying an
engineer, architect, contractor, or product engaged in or used in the
construction of a building, provided such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16)
square feet in surface area and shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.
6. Identification Sign: One (1) double sided identification sign shall be allowed
for conditional uses unless otherwise restricted. Such signs shall not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in area, and such signs shall be solely for the
purpose of displaying the name of the use and its activities and services. It
may be illuminated, but not flashing. These signs shall have a maximum
height of six (6) feet.
7. Home Occupations: No more than one sign may be displayed per property.
The sign may not exceed two (2) square feet in area nor a height of five (5)
feet above the street grade. Such a sign shall not be illuminated and may be
displayed only upon the property licensed for the home occupation. Lettering
upon the signs hall be limited to the name and/or function of the home
occupation.
C. Commercial/Business and Industrial Zoning Districts as defined by Section 50 of
this Ordinance:
1. Signs as permitted in Agricultural Zoning Districts.
2. Real Estate Signs: Temporary signs pertaining to the lease or sale of a
property or building with the following restrictions:
a. No more than one (1) double sided sign allowed per lot or per building
for sale.
b. The sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of space on
each side.
c. The sign shall not be illuminated.
d. The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
3. Real Estate Development Project Signs: Signs involving temporary identification
of a new subdivision of development located upon the project site.
31-10
a. Each subdivision or development shall be allowed the following signs
by permit:
(1) One (1) sign not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in
surface area and a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, except
signs abutting principal arterial streets which may not exceed
one hundred (100) square feet in surface area and twenty (20)
feet in height.
(2) Directional signs as authorized by Section 31.05.B.4 of this
Ordinance.
b. The permit shall be renewable annually and conditioned upon
documentation allowing such sign or structure by the property owner
upon which it is to be located, and a vacancy rate of the subdivision
greater than ten (10) percent.
4. Business Identification Signs: Total sign area shall not exceed two and onehalf
(2.5) square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage. Signs chosen to
comprise the total gross sign area shall be consistent with the following
provisions:
a. Freestanding: Not more than one (1) double sided freestanding sign.
Sign height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Wall, Canopy or Marquee: Not more than one (1) wall, canopy or
marquee sign per building. However, on corner lots, two (2) such
signs shall be allowed, one (1) per street frontage.
c. Advertising messages shall not comprise more than twenty-five (25)
percent of any freestanding or wall sign.
5. Business Area Identification Signs: One (1) sign for each primary entrance
to the qualifying area from major collector or arterial streets and consistent
with the following provisions:
a. Total sign area, including the sign structure, shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet with a maximum height of twelve (12) feet
for freestanding signs.
b. Each property owner and/or tenant of the area identified shall be
permitted space upon the identification sign for the name of the
business only.
c. Signs shall be located on outlots of sufficient size and area to
31-11
accommodate them. A landowners or tenants association or other
legal mechanism binding the properties or businesses involved shall
own and be responsible for the upkeep, perpetual maintenance,
taxes, insurance, utilities, and other costs associated with the sign(s)
and the outlot property. The association rules or by-laws or other
legally recorded document shall specify how the aforementioned sign
responsibilities will be delegated and paid for. Such legal document
shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney.
d. Outlots for signs shall be considered and planned for at the time of
preliminary plat application and be included in the final plat. The
subdivision development contract between the City and the developer
shall specify the designated use of the outlot, its ownership and the
respective land owners association responsibilities regarding the
outlot.
e. Signs shall be located not less than five (5) feet from a property line.
f. Lighting of signs shall be permitted, provided that glare or light from
such lighting does not illuminate any adjacent properties, buildings,
structures or public rights-of-way. The electric costs and maintenance
of such lighting shall be the responsibility of the land owners or
tenants association of the area identified by the sign(s) and shall be
clearly noted in the association by-laws or rules or other such legal
document.
g. The outlot area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner
to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the
natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall
be included with each sign permit application and be subject to City
Council review and approval.
h. The design and construction of business area identification signs shall
be done with the highest quality materials and workmanship to keep
maintenance and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize the
potential for vandalism. Business area identification signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall
be compatible with nearby or potential homes and other structures in
the area. Detailed construction plans and a materials list shall be
included with each sign permit application and shall be subject to City
Council review and approval.
i. The City reserves the right to require the removal, at the owner's
expense, any sign when the requirements of this Section are not
completely followed and adhered to or if the sign is not properly
31-12
maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The City shall not have
any obligation or liability to replace any sign when removed by the
City.
6. Billboards: Billboards and advertising signs subject to the following provisions:
a. Billboards shall be limited to no more than one (1) sign per facing or a
total of no more than two (2) signs per structure.
b. Billboards shall be limited to not more than twenty-five (25) feet in
total length and a height of thirty (30) feet above the average grade,
or such other height as may be approved by the City Council.
c. Billboards shall be limited to an overall surface area on one (1) side of
seven hundred seventy (770) square feet.
d. No advertising signs shall be located within a distance of one
thousand (1,000) feet from any other billboard located along the same
side of the street nor within five hundred (500) feet of any billboard
located on the opposite side of that street or any other street.
e. No billboard shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a
residential zoning district or within three hundred (300) feet of an atgrade
intersection of any street and railroad. No billboard shall be
located within five hundred (500) feet from any parks, public lands, or
public structures where said land or structures are located in
commercial/business or industrial zoning districts.
f. No billboard shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of a street or
highway right-of-way.
g. Billboards shall be permanently secured to the ground in a manner
sufficient to meet the standards set forth in the State Building Code.
Any billboard not secured shall be deemed a temporary billboard for
purposes of this Ordinance. No temporary billboard shall be placed at
a location for a period of more than five (5) days. All temporary
billboards shall require a permit as provided in Section 31.08 of this
section and all temporary billboards in existence at the time this
Ordinance becomes effective shall be allowed to remain for a period
of five (5) days after which they shall be removed.
7. Message Signs: Temporary message signs, not exceeding thirty-two (32)
square feet on each side may be allowed by temporary permit under the
following provisions:
31-13
a. Message signs may be illuminated, but flashing signs are prohibited.
b. Electronic changing message/reader boards are prohibited.
c. A temporary permit shall be valid for a period of ten (10) days and no
more than three (3) permits per property shall be granted during any
twelve (12) month period.
d. In the case of a business center where two (2) or more uses are
located within the same structure or upon the same parcel of land,
that center shall be considered one property.
D. In a Planned Unit Development District, signing restrictions shall be based upon
the individual uses and structures contained in the complex. Signs shall be in
compliance with the restrictions applied in the most restrictive zoning district in
which the use is allowed.
31.06 SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS:
A. Motor Fuel Station: Signs for motor fuel stations shall be regulated by the sign
provisions for the zoning district in which the station is located. In addition, motor
fuel stations may also display signs which identify current fuel prices and automobile
wash facilities. No more than two (2) such signs shall be allowed and said signs
shall be limited to a total maximum gross area of thirty-two (32) square feet and
shall be limited to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet.
B. Multiple Occupancy Business and Industrial Buildings: When a single principal
building is devoted to four (4) or more businesses, or industrial uses, a
comprehensive sign plan for the entire structure shall be submitted and shall be of
sufficient scope and detail to permit a determination as to whether or not the plan is
consistent with the following regulations. The plan shall be subject to the approval
of the City Council. No permit shall be issued for an individual use except upon a
determination that it is consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan.
1. The maximum individual sign sizes for multiple occupancy structures and
individual uses which may display signs shall not exceed the maximum
provisions for single occupancy structures in the same zoning district.
2. Multiple occupancy structures may display an area identification sign
consistent with the applicable district provisions in Subd. 31.05.C of this
Ordinance. Individual freestanding signs identifying the tenants' business
shall not be displayed.
3. Except as provided in Subd. 31.06.B.4 below, individual tenants of multiple
31-14
occupancy structures shall not display separate wall signs unless the
tenants' business has an exclusive exterior entrance. The number of signs
shall be limited to one (1) per entrance, and each sign shall be limited to the
maximum wall size sign permitted in the district, the total of which shall not
exceed the square footage allowed. The signs shall be located only on
exterior walls which are directly related to the use being identified.
4. In any multiple occupancy structure qualifying as a mall type shopping
center, directory signs shall be permitted for each common public entrance.
Each directory sign area shall not exceed a total of fifty (50) square feet and
shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the common public entrance being
served. The size of individual business identification signing within the
directory shall be established during the site plan review process. Attention
shall be given to the possible number of tenant or occupant bays which may
be served by the common public entrance for which the directory sign is
intended.
C. Institutional, Non-Commercial Public and Semi-Public Uses:
1. The maximum signing allowed for such uses shall be determined on the
basis of the following criteria (whichever provision allows for the largest
amount of signing shall be the provision which applies):
a. Based upon site area:
Up to 5 acres 32 square feet
5.1 acres to 10 acres 64 square feet
10.1 acres to 15 acres 96 square feet
15.1 acres to 25 acres 128 square feet
25.1 acres and above 160 square feet
b. The maximum size of signing allowed per single use in the respective
zoning district in which the site is located.
2. For sites not exceeding twenty-five (25) acres, one (1) sign shall be permitted
for each principal use. The total signing not to exceed the maximum allowed
per site.
3. For sites of greater than twenty-five (25) acres containing one or more
principal uses, two (2) signs not exceeding the maximum amount of signing
allowed per site shall be permitted.
4. Non-electronic reader (message) board space shall not exceed a total of
twenty (20) square feet of the signing permitted or constructed.
31-15
31.07 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL:
A. Inspection: All signs shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator
and/or City Building Official.
B. Removal of Signs:
1. The Zoning Administrator and/or City Building Official shall order the removal
of any illegal non-conforming sign erected or maintained in violation of this
Ordinance. Notice in writing shall be given by the City to the owner of such
sign, or of the building, structure or property on which such sign is located, to
remove the sign or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this
Section within fifteen (15) days from the date of said notice.
2. Upon failure to remove the sign or to comply with this notice, the City may
remove the sign. Any costs of removal incurred by the City shall be
assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is located and may
be collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes and all
costs shall be assessed against the property.
3. The Zoning Administrator and/or City Building Official may order the
immediate removal of any sign without notice, which is in violation of the
following:
a. Signs located within the public right-of-way.
b. Temporary signs that have exceeded the time limits allowed in this
Ordinance.
c. The condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat to
the safety of the public.
31.08 PERMITS AND VARIANCES:
A. Except as provided in Section 31.03.A, no sign or structure shall be erected,
constructed, altered, rebuilt or relocated until a permit has first been issued by the
City Building Official.
B. Sign Application: The following information for a sign permit shall be supplied by an
applicant upon submission of a sign permit application:
1. Name, address and telephone number of person making application.
31-16
2. Name, address and telephone number of person owning sign.
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person owning the property
upon which the sign is to be located.
4. A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building structures,
parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical features.
5. Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and attachment to
the buildings or placement method in the ground.
6. Landscape plans for area around signs.
7. Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be
erected.
8. Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
9. Future maintenance plans.
10. Sign value.
11. Such other information as the City Building Official or Zoning Administrator
shall require to show full compliance with this Ordinance and all other
applicable City regulations.
C. Application Processing and Action:
1. Within five (5) working days of receiving an application for a sign permit, the
City Building Official shall review it for completeness. If the application is
complete, it shall then be processed. If the City Building Official finds that it
is incomplete, the City Building Official shall, within such five (5) working day
period, send to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the
application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections
of this Ordinance and/or other City regulations.
2. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Building Official shall review and
comment upon application and shall either:
a. Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the
application conforms in every respect with the requirements of this
Ordinance and other City regulations.
b. Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the
application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this
31-17
Ordinance and other City regulations.
3. In case of a rejection, the City Building Official shall specify in the rejection
the Section or Sections of this Ordinance and/or other City regulations with
which the sign(s) is inconsistent.
4. If the work authorized under a permit has not been initiated within sixty (60)
days after the date of issuance, the permit shall be null and void.
D. Variances and Appeals: Variances and appeals involving sign issues shall be
subject to the provisions of Sections 7 and 8 of this Ordinance.
E. Fees: Fees for the review and processing of sign permit applications and variance
requests shall be imposed in accordance with the fee schedule established by City
Council resolution.
44-1
SECTION 44. GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
Subdivision
44.01 Establishment of Districts
44.02 Zoning District Boundaries
44.03 Zoning Map
44.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS: In order to classify, regulate and restrict the
location of trade and industry and the location of buildings designated for specific uses, to
protect residential uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter
erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate
and determine the areas of yards, recreation and open space within and surrounding such
buildings, St. Augusta is hereby divided into the following zoning districts.
A. Agricultural Districts:
1. A-1, General Agricultural District
2. A-2, Limited Agricultural District
B. Residential Districts:
1. R-1, Suburban Residential District
2. R-2, Urban Single Family District
3. R-3, Urban Single and Two Family District
4. R-4, Medium Density Residential District
5. R-5, High Density Residential District
C. Business Districts:
1. B-1, Neighborhood Business District
2. B-2, Highway Business District
3. B-3, General Business District
4. B-W, Business/Warehousing District
D. Industrial Districts:
1. I-1, Limited Industrial District
2. I-2, General Industrial District
E. Special Districts:
44-2
1. INS, Institutional District
2. PUD, Planned Unit Development District
3. S, Shoreland Overlay District
4. W, Wetland System District
5. FP, Floodplain District
44.02 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES: Zoning district boundary lines established by
this Ordinance generally follow lot lines, the centerlines of railroad right-of-way lines, street
rights-of-way, water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective
date of this Ordinance.
A. Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning district boundary line shall be
heard by the City Council serving as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals pursuant
to Section 8 of this Ordinance.
B. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the
City, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall
be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in
the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of
the extended districts.
C. All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property in the most
restrictive classification immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways
or railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street, alley, public way or
railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the
abutting property up to such center line.
D. All areas within the corporate limits of the City which are under water and which are
not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all regulations of the zone
which immediately adjoins such water area. If such water area adjoins two or more
zones the boundaries of each zone shall be construed to be extended into the water
area in a straight line until they meet the other district at the half-way point and/or to
the corporation limits.
44.03 ZONING MAP: The location and boundaries of the districts established by this text
are hereby set forth on the Zoning Map entitled "Zoning Map of St. Augusta." Said map
shall be on file with the Zoning Administrator, and hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning
Map." Said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon
shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and thereby made a part of
this Ordinance by reference.




















49-1
SECTION 49. R-2, URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subdivision
49.01 Purpose
49.02 Permitted Uses
49.03 Interim Uses
49.04 Uses Allowed by Administrative Permit
49.05 Accessory Uses
49.06 Conditional Uses
49.07 Lot Area and Setback Requirements
49.08 Lot Coverage and Height
49.09 Water and Sewer Service
49.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the R-2, Urban Residential District is to provide for
single family dwelling units at a relatively dense urban scale upon the availability of public
sanitary sewer service.
49.02 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted uses in the R-2 District:
A. Day care facilities serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.
B. Essential services.
C. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure or existing
tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
D. Public parks, playgrounds, and residential uses.
E. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
F. Single family detached dwellings.
49.03 INTERIM USE: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are
interim uses in the R-2 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
49.04 USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this
section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing
49-2
requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in an R-2 District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Model homes, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.
B. Real estate offices, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.
49.05 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in Sections 49.02,
49.03, and 49.06 of this Ordinance.
B. Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance.
C. Home occupations and home offices as regulated by Section 25 of this Ordinance.
D. Non-commercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200)
square feet in area.
E. Private garages and off-street parking.
F. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, accessory to an existing
principal permitted use on the same lot and which is operated for the enjoyment and
convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.
G. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs two
(2) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of household electronic equipment including radio
receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
H. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
I. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
J. Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies
and equipment.
49.06 CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are conditional uses in the R-2 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based
upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02
and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)
49-3
A. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the
health, safety and general welfare of the City.
B. Personal wireless antennas not located on a public structure or existing tower as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
C. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high
and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels,
temples and synagogues provided that side yards shall be double that required for
the district.
D. Single satellite dish TVROs greater than two (2) meters in diameter as regulated by
Section 29 of this Ordinance.
49.07 LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the R-2 District subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Lot Area Requirements:
1. Lot Area: Not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
2. Lot Width: Not less than seventy-five (75) feet.
3. Lot Depth: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
B. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front Yard:
Setbacks
From Right
of-Way Lines Street Class
35 feet State/Federal Highway
35 feet County Road
35 feet Local Street
35 feet From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or
highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
49-4
2. Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet.
4. Buffer Yard: The side or rear yard setback shall be:
a. Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.
b. Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.
C. Accessory Structures Setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
49.08 LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT: The following requirements shall be observed in
the R-2 District:
A. The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of
thirty (30) percent.
B. All single family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half
(2.5) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
C. Accessory structures as governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
49.09 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE: Each parcel shall be provided connection to
public water and sanitary sewer systems.
50-1
SECTION 50. R-3, URBAN SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subdivision
50.01 Purpose
50.02 Permitted Uses
50.03 Interim Uses
50.04 Uses Allowed by Administrative Permit
50.05 Accessory Uses
50.06 Conditional Uses
50.07 Lot Area and Setback Requirements
50.08 Lot Coverage and Height
50.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the R-3, Urban Single and Two Family Residential
District is to provide for higher density single family dwelling units and to introduce on a
restricted basis, two family dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses in areas
of the City which have publicly controlled sanitary sewer service. This district is only
intended for those portions of the community designated as urban service areas by the
Comprehensive Plan.
50.02 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted uses in the R-3 District:
A. Day care facilities serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.
B. Essential services.
C. Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by
Section 29 of this Ordinance.
D. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.
E. Public parks and playgrounds.
F. Single family detached dwellings.
50.03 INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are interim uses in the R-3 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
50-2
B. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
50.04 USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this
section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing
requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the R-3 District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Model homes, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.
B. Real estate offices, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.
50.05 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 District:
A. Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in Sections 50.02,
50.03, and 50.06 of this Ordinance.
B. Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance.
C. Home occupations and home offices as regulated by Section 25 of this Ordinance.
D. Non-commercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200)
square feet in area.
E. Private garages and off-street parking.
F. Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an
existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the
enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
occasional guests.
G. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, shortwave
radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of household
electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio
stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
H. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
I. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
J Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies
and equipment.
50-3
50.06 CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are conditional uses in an R-3 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based
upon procedures set forth and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)
A. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the
health, safety and general welfare of the City.
B. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
C. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high
and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels,
temples and synagogues provided that side yards shall be double that required for
the district.
D. Manufactured home parks, provided that:
1. The minimum area required for a manufactured home park designation shall
be twenty (20) acres.
2. The following minimum lot requirements are satisfactorily met:
a. Lot Area: Fifteen Thousand (15,000) Square Feet.
b. Lot Width: Seventy-Five (75) Feet.
c. Lot Depth: One Hundred (100) Feet.
3. The following principal structure setbacks are satisfactorily met:
a. Front Yard:
Setbacks
From Rightof-
Way Lines Road Class
35 feet Principal Arterial
35 feet Minor Arterial
35 feet Local Street
35 feet From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more roads or
highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building
shall project beyond the front yard line of either road.
50-4
b. Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet.
d. Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be:
(1) Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.
(2) Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.
4. Accessory buildings, uses and equipment comply with the applicable
provisions of Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
5. The total ground area of all residential buildings not exceed a lot coverage of
thirty (30) percent.
6. All residences be limited to a maximum height of one (1) story or twenty-five
(25) feet.
7. The manufactured home park is developed in accordance with the City’s
Subdivision Ordinance and all public improvement requirements incorporated
therein.
8. A storm shelter is provided in compliance with Minnesota Statutes. The City
may require additional measures as determined necessary to safeguard the
health and safety of persons occupying the manufactured home park. Such
measures may include but shall not be limited to screening and/or landscape
berms. All emergency storm protection measures shall be subject to City
Council approval.
9. The manufactured home park shall comply with Minnesota Statutes 327.20
et seq or all applicable City ordinances whichever is the more restrictive.
E. Single satellite dish TVROs greater than two (2) meters in diameter as regulated by
Section 29 of this Ordinance.
F. Two family detached dwellings, provided that:
1. They are located and designed so as to be compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood.
2. The dwellings conform to all R-3 District setback requirements.
50.07 LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements
50-5
shall be observed in an R-3 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Single Family:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width: Seventy-five (75) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet.
B. Two Family:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Area Per Unit: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
3. Minimum Lot Width: One hundred twenty (120) feet.
4. Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet.
C. Principal Structure Setbacks:
1. Front Yard:
Setbacks
From Right
of-Way Lines Road Class
35 feet Principal/Minor Arterial Street
35 feet Collector Street
35 feet Local Street
35 feet From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets that
bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the
front yard line of either street.
2. Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet.
4. Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be:
a. Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.
50-6
b. Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.
D. Accessory Structure Setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance
50.08 LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT: The following lot coverage and height requirements
shall be observed in an R-3 District:
A. The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of
thirty (30) percent.
B. All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
C. Accessory structures shall be governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.













55-1
SECTION 55. B-1, NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
Subdivision
55.01 Purpose
55.02 Permitted Uses
55.03 Interim Uses
55.04 Uses by Administrative Permit
55.05 Accessory Uses
55.06 Conditional Uses
55.07 Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
55.08 Maximum Building Height
55.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the B-1, Neighborhood Business District is to provide
for the establishment of integrated neighborhood centers for convenient, limited office,
retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or
services are furnished. The B-1 District is further intended to provide for a transition
between residential and commercial development.
55.02 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted uses in the B-1 District:
A. Bakery good sales and baking (for sale on-premise).
B. Barber shops.
C. Beauty parlors.
D. Bicycle sales and repair shops.
E. Books, office supply or stationery stores.
F. Camera and photographic supply stores.
G. Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts, and soft drink sales.
H. Copy services, but not including printing press or newspaper.
I. Dairy stores.
J. Dry cleaning pick up and laundry pick up stations including incidental repair and
assembly but not including processing.
K. Essential services.
L. Funeral homes and mortuaries.
M. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
N. Grocery stores, convenience (not supermarket type and without motor fuel
facilities).
O. Hardware stores.
P. Jewelry stores.
Q. Laundromat, self-service washing and drying.
R. Locksmiths.
S. Offices, commercial and professional.
55-2
T. Personal wireless service antennas located on an existing structure or tower, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
U. Prepared food - delivery and/or take-out only.
V. Sexually oriented use - accessory.
W. Shoe repair.
X. Shoe stores.
Y. Tailoring services.
Z. Tanning salons.
AA. Therapeutic massage.
BB. Other uses of the same general character as the permitted uses listed above as
determined by the City.
55.03 INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are interim uses in the B-1 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
55.04 USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this
Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing
requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the B-1 District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an
allowed principal use provided that:
1. The area so occupied shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the principal
building.
2. No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear,
side or front yards and shall be limited to the area of the customer entrances.
3. The outdoor sales, rental or display area shall be included in the calculations
for parking spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space required
for parking as stipulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, except as may be
exempted for cause by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales provided that:
1. Promotional Events:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes
55-3
grand openings, carnivals, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and
animal rides and displays of materials that are typically not sold or
serviced on the site.
b. The event shall not exceed the period specified in the administrative
permit and in no case shall exceed three (3) consecutive calendar
days per event.
c. There shall be no more than two (2) promotional events per calendar
per year per property.
2. Outdoor Sales:
a. Such activity is directed towards the general public and include
warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation
sales, distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales,
and licensed transient merchant and transient product merchant
sales.
b. The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary
outdoor sales activities allowed by this paragraph and any applicable
business licensing provisions in addition to other applicable building
and safety code requirements as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
(1) The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities
shall be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in
no case, shall exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year per
property.
(2) There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in
the administrative permit and, in no case, shall there be more
than ten (10) sales activities per year per property.
(3) Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard
provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere
with parking, traffic circulation or emergency vehicle access.
Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped areas is prohibited.
c. General Standards.
(1) The event shall be clearly accessory to or promoting the
permitted or conditional use approved for the site. Only
merchandise which is normally manufactured, sold, or stocked
by the occupant on the subject premises on a regular or
55-4
seasonal basis shall be sold and/or promoted.
(2) Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be
utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the submitted
plan and provided that it is determined by the Zoning
Administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity,
emergency access, or the safe and efficient movement of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
(3) The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate
off-street parking for the proposed event can and will be
provided for the duration of the event. Determination of
compliance with this requirement shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator who shall consider the nature of the event and
the applicable parking requirements of this Ordinance.
Consideration shall be given to the parking needs and
requirements of other occupants in the case of multitenant
buildings. Parking on public right-of-way and
streets is prohibited; except that parking on local streets
may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only, provided
that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by
authorized enforcement officers, as approved in writing
by the Zoning Administrator, at the petitioner’s expense.
(4) Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the
temporary sign standards of this Ordinance and shall be
allowed for the duration of the event. Special signage for
purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by
the Zoning Administrator; the erection and removal of such
signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(5) The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for
the duration of the event.
C. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as permitted use in
this district.
55.05 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the B-1 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal
use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of the
principal use.
55-5
B. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.
C. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, but not including
semi-trailer trucks.
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three
and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including
radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
E. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
55.06 CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the B-1 District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set
forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).
A. Convenience Grocery Markets with Prepared Food and/or Motor Fuel Sales.
Grocery, food operations, and/or convenience motor fuel (no vehicle service or
repair) provided that:
1. Convenience/deli food is of the take-out type only and that no provision for
seating or consumption on the premises is provided. Furthermore, that the
enclosed area devoted to such activity, use and merchandise shall not
exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area.
2. The storage, preparation and serving of food items are subject to the
approval of the Zoning Administrator who shall provide specific written
sanitary requirements based upon the applicable State and County
regulations.
3. That the proximate area and location of space devoted to non-automotive
merchandise sales shall be specified in the application and in the conditional
use permit. Exterior sales or storage shall be allowed by administrative
permit.
4. The off-street loading space(s) and building access for delivery of goods
shall be separate from customer parking and entrances and shall not cause
conflicts with customer vehicles and pedestrian movements.
5. The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 AM to 11:00 PM, unless
55-6
extended by the City Council as part of the conditional use permit.
6. Motor fuel facilities shall be installed in accordance with State and City
standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas
pumps and to allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel
storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel
transports and unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation,
access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on
pump islands.
7. A protective canopy located over pump islands may be an accessory
structure on the property and may be located twenty (20) feet or more from
the front lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off site is
maintained.
8. The operation shall be responsible for litter control within three hundred (300)
feet of the premises and litter control is to occur on a daily basis. Trash
receptacles must be provided at a convenient location on site to facilitate
litter control.
B. Day care nursery facilities as a principal or accessory use provided that the use
complies with the provisions of Section 26 of this Ordinance.
C. Personal wireless antennas not located on an existing structure or tower, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
55.07 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the B-1 District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Lot Area: One (1) acre.
B. Lot Width: One Hundred twenty-five (125) feet
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yards:
Setbacks Setbacks
From From Right-
Centerline of-Way Lines Street Class
130 feet 65 feet State/Federal Highway
130 feet 65 feet County Road
65 feet 35 feet Local Street
55-7
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or
highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side Yards: Fifteen (15) feet.
3. Rear Yards: Twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Buffer Yards: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet
if abutting a residential district.
55.08 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet
B. Accessory building: Per Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
62-1
SECTION 62. INS, INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
Subdivision
62.01 Purpose
62.02 Permitted Uses
62.03 Interim Uses
62.04 Uses by Administrative Permit
62.05 Accessory Uses
62.06 Conditional Uses
62.07 Lot Requirements and Setbacks
62.08 Height Requirements
62.01 PURPOSE: The INS District is intended to provide a specific zoning district for
facilities devoted to serving the public. It is unique in that the primary objective of uses
within this district is the provision of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than
the sale of goods or services. It is intended that uses within such a district will be
compatible with adjoining development, and they normally will be located on an arterial
street or thoroughfare.
62.02 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted uses in the INS District:
A. Day care nurseries.
B. Essential services.
C. Nursing homes, residential care facilities, and similar group housing but not
including hospitals, sanitariums, or similar institutions.
D. Parks, and recreational fields and structures.
E. Personal wireless service towers and antennas located on a public structure as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
F. Pre-school, elementary, junior or senior high schools having a regular course of
study accredited to the State of Minnesota.
G. Publicly owned civic or cultural buildings, such as libraries, City offices, auditoriums,
public administration buildings and historical developments.
H. Religious institutions, such as churches, chapels, temples, mosques, and
synagogues.
62-2
62.03 INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are interim uses in the INS District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance:
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
62.04 USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions
of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance and processing
requirements of Section 6, the following uses may be allowed in an INS District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as
required in Section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.
B. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this
district.
62.05 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the INS District:
A. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 62.02,
62.03, and 62.05 of this Ordinance.
B. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.
C. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance.
D. Parks, playgrounds or athletic fields.
E. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three
and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including
radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
F. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
62.06 CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provision of this Ordinance, the
following are conditional uses in an INS District: (Requires a conditional use permit based
upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)
62-3
A. Automobile parking lots as a principal use provided that the use and design is in
conformance with Section 20 of this Ordinance.
B. Cemeteries or memorial gardens provided that:
1. The site is landscaped in accordance with Section 15.07.
2. The use is available to the “public”.
3. The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the
minimum established for the district.
4. The use meets the minimum setback requirements for principal structures.
5. The site accesses on a collector or arterial street.
C. Colleges, seminaries, and other institutions of higher education.
D. Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility
microwave antennas, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
E. Community centers.
F. Correctional facilities and shelters provided that:
1. Facilities shall comply with all applicable codes and regulations and shall
have, current and in effect, the appropriate state licenses.
2. On-site services and treatment shall be for residents and inmates of the
facility only, and shall not be for non-residents or persons outside the facility.
3. All new buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be consistent with the
scale and character of the buildings in the neighborhood. Exterior building
materials shall also be harmonious with other buildings in the neighborhood.
4. No correctional facility shall be closer than one thousand three hundred
twenty (1,320) feet from another licensed correctional facility or from any
property designated on the Land Use Plan as residential and/or designated
on the official zoning map as residential.
5. The conditional use permit is only valid as long as a valid state license is held
62-4
by the operator of the facility where such license is required.
6. Appropriate transition to neighboring property shall be provided by
landscaping and site design consistent with the City ordinances and policies.
G. Day care, social services or other non-directly related worship type activities as an
accessory use within a religious institutional building(s).
H. Hospitals, sanitariums, or similar institutions provided that:
1. Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas. Said area
shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with Section
15.06 of this Ordinance.
2. All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly adhered to and all
required operating permits are secured.
I. Living quarters which are provided as an accessory use to a principal use in Section
62.02 or to a conditional use in this section provided that:
1. The living quarters shall not be used as rental property.
2. A maximum of one (1) such dwelling shall be allowed.
3. There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility (i.e.,
caretaker, security, etc.).
J. Medical, dental and chiropractic offices and clinics, commercial and professional
offices, funeral homes and mortuaries.
K. Other uses of the same general character as those listed in Sections 62.02, 62.04,
and 62.06 of this Ordinance.
L. Outdoor recreational areas including golf courses, country clubs, swimming pools,
and similar facilities.
M. Reduction in lot area requirements.
N. Retail commercial activities and personal services, provided that:
1. Merchandise is sold at retail.
2. Personal services are limited to those uses and activities which are allowed
as a permitted or permitted accessory use within a B-1 Zoning District.
3. The retail activity and personal services are located within a structure whose
62-5
principal use is not commercial sales.
4. The retail activity and personal services shall not occupy more than fifteen
(15) percent of the gross floor area of the building.
5. The retail activity and personal services are not located within a structure
whose principle use is residential.
6. No directly or indirectly illuminated sign or sign in excess of ten (10) square
feet identifying the name of the business shall be visible from the outside of
the building.
7. No signs or posters of any type advertising products for sale or services shall
be visible from the outside of the building.
O. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
62.07 LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an INS District subject to additional requirements, exceptions,
modifications set forth in this Ordinance:
A. Lot Area - Minimum Site Area.
1. Five (5) acres unless otherwise specified or reduced by conditional use
permit.
2. Religious institutions - three (3) acres.
3. Elementary schools - fifteen (15) acres.
4. Junior high schools - thirty (30) acres.
5. Senior high schools - fifty (50) acres.
6. Hospitals - ten (10) acres.
7. Community centers - three (3) acres.
B. Setbacks.
1. Schools, Hospitals, and Public Works Facilities.
a. Front Yard.
62-6
Setbacks
From Rightof-
Way Lines Street Class
65 feet State/Federal Highway
65 feet County Road
50 feet Local Street
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or
highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
b. Side yard: One hundred (100) feet
c. Rear Yard: One hundred (100) feet
2. All Other Institutional Uses:
a. Front Yard: Same as for schools, hospitals, and public works facilities.
b. Side Yard: Fifty (50) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Fifty (50) feet.
62.08 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: The following height requirements shall be observed in
the INS District:
A. All principal structures and their accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum
height of thirty-five (35) feet. .
SECTION 63. PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Subdivision
63.01 Purpose
63.02 Uses
63.03 Requirements, Conditions and Standards for Approving a PUD
63.04 Development Standards
63.05 Sketch Plan
63.06 General Plan
63.07 Final Plan
63.08 PUD Evaluation
63-2
63.09 Plan Modification/Amendment of a PUD
63.10 General Requirements
63.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the PUD, Planned Unit Development District is to
provide comprehensive procedures and standards intended to allow greater flexibility in the
development of neighborhoods and/or non-residential areas by incorporating design
modifications and/or a mixture of uses. The PUD process is intended to encourage:
A. Innovations in development to the end that the growing demands for all styles of
economic expansion may be met by greater variety in type, design, and placement
of structures and by the conservation and more efficient use of land in such
developments.
B. Higher standards of site and building design through the use of trained and
experienced land planners, architects, landscape architects and engineers.
C. More convenience in location and design of development and service facilities.
D. The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural
topography, wetlands, woodlands, and geologic features and the prevention of soil
erosion which are over and above minimum standards and expectations.
E. A creative use of land and related physical development which allows a phased and
orderly development and use pattern.
F. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby
lowering development costs, long term maintenance expenses, and public
investments.
G. A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the St. Augusta
Comprehensive Plan. (PUD is not intended as a means to vary applicable planning
and zoning principles.)
H. A more desirable and creative environment than might be possible through the strict
application of zoning and subdivision regulations of the City.
63.02 USES: All permitted, permitted accessory, conditional uses, interim uses, and uses
by administrative permit contained in Sections 45 through 61 of this Ordinance which are
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan shall be treated as potentially allowable uses
within a PUD District.
63-3
63.03 REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS AND STANDARDS FOR APPROVING A PUD:
A. General Standards:
1. Comprehensive Plan Consistency: The proposed PUD shall be consistent
with the City Comprehensive Plan.
2. Common Open Space: Common private or public open space and facilities
at least sufficient to meet the minimum requirements established in the
Comprehensive Plan and such complementary structures and improvements
as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the
residents/occupants of the PUD may be provided within the area of the PUD
development.
3. Operating and Maintenance Requirements for PUD Common Open Space
Facilities: Whenever common private or public open space or service
facilities are provided within the PUD, the PUD shall contain provisions to
assure the continued operation and maintenance of such open space and
service facilities to a predetermined reasonable standard. Common private
or public open space and service facilities within a PUD may be placed under
the ownership of one or more of the following, as approved by the City
Council:
a. Dedicated to the public, where a community-wide use is anticipated
and the City Council agrees to accept the dedication.
b. Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated.
c. Property owners association, provided all of the following conditions
are met:
1) Prior to the use, occupancy, sale or the execution of contracts
for sale of individual buildings, units, lots, parcels, tracts or
common areas, a declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions or an equivalent document or a document such as
specified by Minnesota Statutes 515, Article 2 and a set of
floor plans such as specified by Minnesota Statutes 515,
Article 2-110 shall be filed with St. Augusta. Said filing with the
City is to be made prior to the filings of said declaration or
document or floor plans with the recording officers of Stearns
County.
2) The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or
equivalent document shall specify that deeds, leases or
63-4
documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, lots,
parcels, or tracts shall subject said properties to the terms of
said declaration.
3) The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall
provide that an owner’s association or corporation shall be
formed and that all owners shall be members of said
association or corporation which shall maintain all properties
and common areas in good repair and which shall assess
individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or
common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the review
and approval of the City Attorney. The intent of this
requirement is to protect the property values of the individual
owner through establishing adequate private control.
4) The declaration shall additionally, amongst other things,
provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to
maintain properties in accordance with the applicable rules and
regulations of St. Augusta or fails to pay taxes or assessments
on properties as they become due and in the event St.
Augusta City incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and
regulations, which said expenses are not immediately
reimbursed by the association or corporation, then the City
shall have the right to assess each property its prorata share of
said expenses. Such assessments, together with interest
thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each
property against which each such assessment is made.
5) Membership must be mandatory for each owner, and any
successive buyer.
6) The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a
limited period of years, unless specifically approved by the
City.
4. Staging of Public and Common Open Space: When a PUD provides for
common private or public open space, and is planned for a staged
development over a period of time, the total area of common or public open
space or land escrow security in any stage of development shall, at a
minimum, bear the same relationship to the total open space to be provided
in the entire PUD as the stages or units completed or under development
bear to the entire PUD.
5. Density: The maximum allowable density in a PUD Zoning District shall be
determined by standards negotiated and agreed upon between the applicant
63-5
and the City. In all cases, the negotiated standards shall be consistent with
the development policies as contained in the St. Augusta Comprehensive
Plan.
6. Principal Buildings: No More than one (1) principal building may be
constructed on each platted lot within a PUD.
7. Land Use/Housing Type: A PUD which involves only one (1) land use or
housing type may be allowed, provided that it is otherwise consistent with the
stated purposes and objectives of this section and the Comprehensive Plan.
8. Ordinance Modifications: The uniqueness of each PUD requires that
specifications and standards for streets, utilities, public facilities and the
approval of land subdivisions may be subject to modifications from the City
ordinances generally governing them. The City Council may therefore
approve streets, utilities, public facilities and land subdivisions which are not
in strict compliance with usual specifications or ordinance requirements
where it is found that such are not required in the interests of the City.
9. Utilities: In any PUD, all utility installations and connections including
telephone, electricity, gas, telecable, public sewer and water, private septic
systems and wells shall conform to the applicable provisions of the St.
Augusta Subdivision Ordinance, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
10. Streets: All streets shall conform to the design standards contained in the St.
Augusta Subdivision Ordinance unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
11. Fencing/Screening/Landscaping: In any PUD, fencing, screening, and
landscaping shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section 15.07 of
this Ordinance.
12. Setbacks:
a. The front, rear and side yard restrictions on the periphery of the
property to which the PUD is applied shall at a minimum be the same
as the setbacks which are common to the area and generally
consistent with this Ordinance.
b. No building shall be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the back of
the curb line along those roadways which are part of the internal
street pattern.
c. No building within the project shall be nearer to another building, than
63-6
one-half (1/2) the sum of the building heights of the two (2) buildings.
13. Height: The maximum building height to be considered within a PUD Zoning
District shall comply with the height standards specified within this Ordinance
in general.
B. Benefit: The proposed PUD shall accomplish one or more of the objectives stated
in Section 63.01 and shall not simply be for the enhanced economic gain of the
applicant. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to demonstrate compliance with
this requirement.
63.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish standards for residential, nonresidential,
and mixed use residential and non-residential PUD Zoning Districts, in
addition to those standards contained elsewhere in this Ordinance for all PUD
projects. All PUD projects shall be developed in accordance with the following
residential area standards:
1. There shall be no minimum lot or area requirement for a tract of land for
which a PUD Zoning District is proposed.
2. There shall be no minimum frontage on a public street required for a tract of
land for which a PUD is proposed.
3. The tract of land for which a PUD is proposed shall have municipal water and
sewer available to it or shall provide approved well locations and comply with
City and/or County septic system requirements.
4. For PUD Zoning District projects, the performance standards, area
requirements and construction limitations of generally comparable
conventional zoning districts shall apply to the project, excepting those
standards to be modified, as determined by the City Council and as provided
above in Section 63.03, Subd. A.1 and A.3.
5. Off-street parking and loading facilities for a residential PUD shall be
provided in accordance with Sections 20 and 21 of this Ordinance.
6. In addition to the above standards, the City Council may impose such other
requirements for individual PUD Districts as are reasonable and as the Board
deems necessary to protect and promote the general health, safety and
welfare of the community and the surrounding area.
63-7
63.05 SKETCH PLAN:
A. Application Procedures and Information Requirements: Prior to the filing of a formal
application, the applicant shall be required to submit a sketch plan of the project to
the Zoning Administrator. Such plan shall be processed according to the information
requirements, standards and procedures for preliminary site plans as established by
Section 10.03.B of this Ordinance.
B. Exemptions: At the request of the applicant and upon the approval of the Zoning
Administrator, minor PUD projects or projects of a non-controversial nature may be
exempt from the sketch plan process and may proceed to the general plan, as
regulated by Section 63.06 of this Section.
63.06 GENERAL PLAN:
A. Application Procedure: PUD zoning applications shall be processed according to
the evaluation criteria and procedures outlined in Section 10.03.C of this Ordinance.
B. Information Requirement:
1. The information required for all PUD general plan applications shall be as
specified in Section 10.06 of this Ordinance.
2. The Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, and/or City Council may
excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or
document required by this section which it finds to be unnecessary to the
consideration of the specific PUD being considered.
C. Zoning Enactment: The formal establishment of the PUD District shall take place in
conjunction with City Council approval of the general plan.
63.07 FINAL PLAN: After approval of a sketch plan for the PUD and approval of a
general plan for all or a portion of the proposed PUD, the applicant shall submit the
following material for review by the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of a building
permit(s).
A. Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to sale of any
land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and activation of any
entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance of any public
or common open space or service facility.
B. All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land and
63-8
recording of documents.
C. Final architectural working drawings of all structures.
D. Any other plans, agreements or specifications necessary for the Zoning
Administrator to review the proposed construction. All work must be in conformance
with the Minnesota State Building Code.
63.08 PUD EVALUATION: If periodic review of a PUD is included as a condition to the
approval of a PUD, such a project shall be reviewed by the City Council. At such times,
the City Council, at its discretion, may take additional testimony on the PUD.
63.09 PLAN MODIFICATION/AMENDMENT OF A PUD:
A. Minor Modifications/Amendment: Plan modifications/amendments qualifying as
minor as defined by Section 10.07.A of this Ordinance may be processed and
approved pursuant to that section.
B. Major Modification/Amendment: The same review procedure shall be followed for a
major/modification/amendment of a PUD as was followed with respect to the
applicant’s general plan, outlined in Section 63.06 and pursuant to Section 10.07.B
of this Ordinance.
63.10 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Records: The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all PUD zones
approved by the City, including information on a project’s allowed uses, all pertinent
project plans, any conditions imposed on a project by the City Council, and such
other information as the Zoning Administrator may deem appropriate.
B. Withdrawal of an Application: Any application under this section may be withdrawn
by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior to final City Council action
thereon.
C. Platting of a PUD: In the event that a PUD is to be subdivided into lots or parcels
for the purpose of separate ownership, such PUD shall be platted under the platting
procedures and according to standards contained in the St. Augusta Subdivision
Ordinance and the related requirements of Stearns County. The preliminary plat
shall be processed in conjunction with the general plan as outlined in Section 63.06.
A separate action on the final plat shall be processed before the City Council prior
to the final stage of the PUD.
D. Conveyance of Property Within a PUD: In the event that any real property within an
63-9
approved PUD is conveyed in total or in part, the buyer(s) thereof shall be bound by
all provisions of the PUD and the general plan for that project. However, nothing in
this Ordinance shall be construed as to make such conveyed property nonconforming
with regard to normal zoning standards as long as the conveyed
property conforms with the approved PUD and the general plan for a project.
E. Development Agreement: Prior to the approval of the general plan, the applicant
shall enter into a development agreement as may be required for site improvements
by the Subdivision Ordinance or this Ordinance for the project in question. Once
approved, the development agreement shall be recorded with Stearns County and
documentation of such action shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.
F. Issuance of Building Permits: Following approval by the City Council of a PUD
general plan and recording of the PUD development contract with Stearns County,
the Building Official may issue a building permit for such structures in compliance
with this Ordinance.
SECTION 67. SCENIC RIVERS DISTRICT
Subdivision
67.01 Adoption of Stearns County Regulations
67.02 Administration and Enforcement
67.01 ADOPTION OF STEARNS COUNTY REGULATIONS: The Stearns County
Mississippi River Scenic River Ordinance, Number 37, regulating the use of bluff lands and
shorelands of the Mississippi River in Stearns County, is hereby adopted by referenced
and attached to this Ordinance as Appendix D.
67.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT: The provisions of this subdivision shall
be administered and enforced by the Stearns County Zoning Administrator.
56-1
SECTION 56. B-2, HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
Subdivision
56.01 Purpose
56.02 Permitted Uses
56.03 Interim Uses
56.04 Uses by Administrative Permit
56.05 Accessory Uses
56.06 Conditional Uses
56.07 Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
56.08 Maximum Building Height
56.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the B-2, Highway Business District is to provide for
and limit the establishment of motor vehicle oriented or dependent high intensity
commercial and service activities.
56.02 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are permitted uses in the B-2 District:
A. Animal hospitals and kennels.
B. Auto accessory stores (not including service).
C. Bakery good sales and baking (for sale on-premise).
D. Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and other financial institutions including
drive-up tellers.
E. Barber shops.
F. Beauty parlors.
G. Bicycle sales and repair shops.
H. Books, office supply or stationery stores.
I. Camera and photographic supply stores.
J. Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts, and soft drink sales.
K. Copy services, but not including printing press or newspaper.
L. Dairy stores.
M. Dry cleaning pick up and laundry pick up stations including incidental repair and
assembly but not including processing.
N. Essential services.
O. Funeral homes and mortuaries.
P. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
Q. Grocery stores, convenience (not supermarket type and without motor fuel
facilities).
R. Hardware stores.
S. Jewelry stores.
T. Laundromat, self-service washing and drying.
56-2
U. Liquor, on and off-sale.
V. Locksmiths.
W. Motels, motor hotels and hotels.
X. Offices, commercial and professional.
Y. Personal wireless antennas located on an existing structure or tower, as regulated
by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
Z. Prepared food - delivery and/or take-out only.
AA. Private clubs or lodges serving food and beverages.
BB. Reception halls.
CC. Recreation, indoor commercial (i.e., sport and health clubs, bowling alleys, roller
rinks, etc.)
DD. Restaurants (not of the drive-in, convenience or drive-through type), cafes, on and
off-sale liquor.
EE. Sexually oriented use - principal and accessory.
FF. Shoe repair.
GG. Shoe stores.
HH. Tailoring services.
II. Tanning salons.
JJ. Therapeutic massage.
KK. Other uses of the same general character as the permitted uses listed above as
determined by the City.
56.03 INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are interim uses in the B-2 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
56.04 USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this
Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing
requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the B-2 District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an
allowed principal use subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.A
of this Ordinance.
B. Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as
required in Section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.
C. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this
district.
56-3
56.05 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the B-2 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the
principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor
space of the principal use.
B. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.
C. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, but not including
semi-trailer trucks.
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three
and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including
radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
E. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
56.06 CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the B-2 District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set
forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).
A. Accessory, enclosed retail, rental or service activity other than that allowed as a
permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that:
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Business District.
2. Such use does not constitute more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area and
not more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.
B. Automobile washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-service), provided that:
1. Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate an appropriate
number of vehicles and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
2. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot landscaped or
covered.
3. The entire area other than occupied by the building or planting shall be
surfaced with blacktop or concrete which will control dust and drainage which
56-4
is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
4. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer.
C. Convenience Store with Gasoline. Grocery and/or food operations, with convenience
gas (no vehicle service or repair), provided that:
1. Convenience/deli food is of the take-out type only and that no provision for
seating or consumption on the premises is provided. Furthermore, that the
enclosed area devoted to such activity, use and merchandise shall not
exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area.
2. That any sale of food items is subject to the approval of the Zoning
Administrator who shall provide specific written sanitary requirements for
each proposed sale location based upon applicable State and County
regulations.
3. That the approximate area and location devoted to non-automotive
merchandise sales shall be specified in general terms in the application and
in the conditional use permit. No exterior sales or storage shall be permitted.
4. The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 AM to 12:00 PM, unless
extended by the City Council.
5. Motor fuel activities shall be installed in accordance with State and City
standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas
pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel
storage tanks shall be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel
transports and unloading operations do not conflict with circulation, access
and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump
islands.
6. A protective canopy located over pump island may be an accessory structure
on the property and may be located twenty (20) feet or more from the front
lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off site is maintained.
7. The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings
shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage
which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
8. Each light standard base shall be landscaped.
9. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic
movement, and shall be subject to the approval of the City.
56-5
10. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and
appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by
parked cars or moving vehicles.
D. Drive-in and convenience food establishments, provided that:
1. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five (5) feet
shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 16 of this
Ordinance.
2. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or
covered.
3. Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous curbs not less
than six (6) inches high above the parking lot or driveway grade.
4. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movements, shall comply with Section 20 of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
5. The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or plantings
shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which is subject to the approval
of the City Engineer.
E. Motor vehicle fuel sales, truck stop, auto repair - minor and tire and battery stores
and services, provided that:
1. Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels
and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the standards
and requirements imposed by this Ordinance for motor fuel stations shall
apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to other
requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property.
2. The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings
shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage
which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
3. Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed.
4. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or
covered.
5. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic
56-6
movement, shall comply with Section 20 of this Ordinance and shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
6. No outside storage, sales, service, or rental shall be permitted.
7. Sale of products other than those specifically mentioned in this sub-section
shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit.
8. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
F. Open and outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use provided that:
1. The area is fenced and screened from view of the neighboring residential
uses or if abutting a residential district in compliance with Section 15.07 of
this Ordinance.
2. Storage is screened from view from the public right-of-way in compliance
with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.
3. Storage area is grassed or surfaced to control dust.
4. Does not take up parking spaces as required to conform to this Ordinance.
G. Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided
that:
1. Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal
use is limited to thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.
2. Outside sales areas are fenced or screened from view of neighboring
residential uses or an abutting residential district in compliance with Section
15.07 of this Ordinance.
3. Sales area is grassed or surfaced to control dust.
4. The use does not take up parking space as required to conform to this
Ordinance.
H. Personal wireless antennas not located on an existing structure or tower, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
56-7
56.07 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the B-2 District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Lot Area: One (1) acre.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yards:
Setbacks Setbacks
From From Right-
Centerline of-Way Lines Street Class
130 feet 65 feet State/Federal Highway
130 feet 65 feet County Road
65 feet 35 feet Local Street
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or
highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side Yards: Twenty (20) feet.
3. Rear Yards: Twenty (20) feet.
4. Buffer Yards: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet
if abutting a residential district.
56.08 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet
B. Accessory building: Per Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
57-1
SECTION 57. B-3, GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Subdivision
57.01 Purpose
57.02 Permitted Uses
57.03 Interim Uses
57.04 Uses by Administrative Permit
57.05 Accessory Uses
57.06 Conditional Uses
57.07 Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
57.08 Maximum Building Height
57.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the B-3 District is to provide specifically for the
regulation of high intensity commercial uses located within the Central Business District of
the community and other intense commercial areas of the City.
57.02 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted uses in the B-3 District:
A. Amusement centers.
B. Animal clinics (with no overnight care).
C. Animal hospitals and kennels
D. Antique or gift shop.
E. Appliance and electronic stores including incidental repair and assembly but not
fabricating or manufacturing.
F. Auto accessory stores (not including service).
G. Bakery good sales and baking (for sale on premise).
H. Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and other financial institutions including
drive-up tellers.
I. Barber shops.
J. Beauty parlors.
K. Bicycle sales and repair shops.
L. Books, office supply or stationary stores.
M. Building supply sales within the principal structure.
N. Cabinet and carpentry shops.
O. Camera and photographic supply stores.
P. Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts, and soft drink sales.
Q. Carpet, rug and tile stores.
R. Coin and philatelic stores.
S. Copy services, but not including printing press or newspaper.
T. Costume, clothes rental.
U. Dairy stores.
57-2
V. Department and discount and warehouse stores.
W. Dry cleaning including plant accessory heretofore, pressing and repairing.
X. Dry good stores.
Y. Employment agencies.
Z. Essential services.
AA. Fabric and notion sales stores.
BB. Finance companies.
CC. Funeral homes and mortuaries.
DD. Furniture stores.
EE. Furriers when conducted only for retail trade on premises.
FF. Garden supply stores.
GG. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
HH. Grocery stores, convenience (not supermarket type and without motor fuel
facilities).
II. Grocery stores, supermarket.
JJ. Hardware stores.
KK. Jewelry stores and luggage stores.
LL. Laundromat, self-service washing and drying.
MM. Leather goods and luggage stores.
NN. Liquor, on and off-sale.
OO. Locksmiths.
PP. Motels, motor hotels and hotels.
QQ. Music shops and sales (instruments, equipment, tapes, compact discs, etc.).
RR. Newspaper, printing or publishing shops.
SS. Offices, commercial and professional.
TT. Personal wireless antennas located on an existing structure or tower, as regulated
by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
UU. Pet shops.
VV. Prepared food - delivery and/or take-out only.
WW. Private clubs or lodges serving food and beverages.
XX. Reception halls.
YY. Recreation, indoor commercial (i.e., sport and health clubs, bowling alleys, roller
rinks, etc.)
ZZ. Restaurants (not of the drive-in, convenience or drive-through type), cafes, on and
off-sale liquor.
AAA. Sewing machine sales and service.
BBB. Sexually oriented use - principal and accessory.
CCC. Shoe repair.
DDD Shoe stores.
EEE. Tailoring services.
FFF. Tanning salons.
GGG. Theaters, not of the outdoor drive-in type.
HHH. Therapeutic massage.
III. Toy stores.
JJJ. Travel bureaus, transportation ticket offices.
57-3
KKK. Upholstery shops.
LLL. Variety stores and stores of similar nature.
MMM. Other uses of the same general character as the permitted uses listed above as
determined by the City.
57.03 INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are interim uses in the B-3 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
57.04 USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this
Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing
requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the B-3 District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an
allowed principal use subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.A
of this Ordinance.
B. Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as
required in Section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.
C. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this
district.
57.05 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are permitted accessory uses in a B-3 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal
use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of the
principal use.
B. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.
C. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, but not including
semi-trailer trucks.
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three
and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including
radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
57-4
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
E. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
57.06 CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the B-3 District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set
forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).
A. Accessory, enclosed retail, rental or service activity other than that allowed as a
permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that:
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Business District.
2. Such use does not constitute more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area and
not more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.
B. Automobile car washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-service), provided that:
1. Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate an appropriate
number of vehicles and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
2. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or
covered.
3. The entire area other than occupied by the building or planting shall be
surfaced with blacktop or concrete which will control dust and drainage which
is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
4. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer.
C. Convenience Store with Gasoline. Grocery and/or food operations, with convenience
gas (no vehicle service or repair), provided that:
1. Convenience/deli food is of the take-out type only and that no provision for
seating or consumption on the premises is provided. Furthermore, that the
enclosed area devoted to such activity, use and merchandise shall not
exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area.
2. That any sale of food items is subject to applicable State and/or County
regulations. Written documentation of compliance with such County and/or
State regulations shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.
57-5
3. That the approximate area and location devoted to non-automotive
merchandise sales shall be specified in general terms in the application and
in the conditional use permit. No exterior sales or storage shall be permitted.
4. The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 AM to 12:00 PM, unless
extended by the City Council.
5. Motor fuel activities shall be installed in accordance with State and City
standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas
pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel
storage tanks shall be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel
transports and unloading operations do not conflict with circulation, access
and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump
islands.
6. A protective canopy located over pump island may be an accessory structure
on the property and may be located twenty (20) feet or more from the front
lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off site is maintained.
7. The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings
shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage
which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
8. Each light standard base shall be landscaped.
9. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic
movement, and shall be subject to the approval of the City.
10. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and
appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by
parked cars or moving vehicles.
D. Drive-in and convenience food establishments, provided that:
1. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five (5) feet
shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 16 of this
Ordinance.
2. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or
covered.
3. Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous curbs not less
57-6
than six (6) inches high above the parking lot or driveway grade.
4. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movements, shall comply with Section 20 of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
5. The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or plantings
shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which is subject to the approval
of the City Engineer.
E. Motor vehicle fuel sales, truck stop, auto repair - minor and tire and battery stores
and services, provided that:
1. Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels
and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the standards
and requirements imposed by this Ordinance for motor fuel stations shall
apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to other
requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property.
2. The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings
shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage
which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
3. Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed.
4. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or
covered.
5. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic
movement, shall comply with Section 22 of this Ordinance and shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
6. No outside storage, sales, service, or rental shall be permitted.
7. Sale of products other than those specifically mentioned in this sub-section
shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit.
8. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the City
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
F. Personal wireless antennas not located on an existing structure or tower, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
57-7
57.07 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the B-3 District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Lot Area: One (1) acre.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yards:
Setbacks
From Rightof-
Way Lines Street Class
35 feet State/Federal Highway
35 feet County Road
35 feet Local Street
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or
highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side Yards: Ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yards: Twenty (20) feet.
4. Buffer Yards: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet
if abutting a residential district.
57.08 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet
B. Accessory building: Per Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
58-1
SECTION 58. B-W, BUSINESS/WAREHOUSE DISTRICT
Subdivision
58.01 Purpose
58.02 Permitted Uses
58.03 Interim Uses
58.04 Uses by Administrative Permit
58.05 Accessory Uses
58.06 Conditional Uses
58.07 Lot Requirements and Setbacks
58.08 Maximum Building Height
58.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the B-W, Business/Warehouse District is to provide for
the establishment of wholesale and retail trade of large volume or bulk commercial items,
storage and warehousing. The overall character of the B-W District is intended to be
transitional in nature, thus industrial uses allowed within this District shall be limited to
those which can compatibly exist adjacent to commercial and lower intensity activities. The
B-W District is intended to be implemented for those areas designated for businesswarehouse
land uses by the Comprehensive Plan.
58.02 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are permitted uses in a B-W District:
A. Automobile repair - major
B. Commercial printing establishments.
C. Commercial/professional offices.
D. Conference centers.
E. Contractor operations.
F. Essential services.
G. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures.
H. Indoor commercial recreation.
I. Laboratories.
J. Lumber yards, building material sales, and similar bulk type retail sales
establishments.
K. Motor vehicle, farm implement, and recreation equipment sales, services and repair
and structures accessory thereto.
L. Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure, as regulated by
Section 29 of this Chapter.
M. Restaurants (not of the drive-in, convenience food or drive-through type), on and
off-sale liquor.
58-2
N. Sexually oriented business - principal and accessory.
O. Truck terminals.
P. Wholesale showrooms/warehousing.
Q. Other uses of the same general character as the permitted uses listed above as
determined by the City.
58.03 INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are interim uses in the B-W District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
B. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
58.04 USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions
of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing
requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in a B-W District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as
required in section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.
B. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this
district.
58.05 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted uses in a B-W District:
A. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses allowed in Sections 58.02 and
58.06 of this Ordinance, but not including outside storage/sales, etc.
B. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, including semitrailer
trucks.
C. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three
and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including
radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
E. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
58-3
58.06 CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in a B-W District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by
Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).
A. Open and outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use provided:
1. The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of
neighboring uses and abutting Residential Districts.
2. Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way.
3. Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced.
4. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be
visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences.
5. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity to this Ordinance.
B. Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use provided
that:
1. Outside sales areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of
neighboring residential uses or an abutting residential district.
2. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be
visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences.
3. Areas are asphalt or concrete surfaced.
4. The use does not take up parking space or loading areas as required for
conformity to this Ordinance.
5. Additional parking, pursuant to Section 20 of this Ordinance is provided for
said space.
C. Manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or storage of
products and materials provided that:
1. The proposed use complies with the performance standards outlined in
Section 15 and all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
D. Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
58-4
58.07 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in a B-W District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Lot Area: One (1) acre.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yards:
Setbacks
From Rightof-
Way Lines Road Class
35 feet State/Federal Highway
35 feet County Road
35 feet Local Street
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets that
bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the
front yard line of either street.
2. Side Yards: Ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yards: Twenty (20) feet.
4. Buffer Yards: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet
if abutting a residential district.
58.08 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet
B. Accessory building: Per Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
59-1
SECTION 59 - RESERVED
60-1
SECTION 60. I-1, LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Subdivision
60.01 Purpose
60.02 Permitted Uses
60.03 Interim Uses
60.04 Uses by Administrative Permit
60.05 Accessory Uses
60.06 Conditional Uses
60.07 Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
60.08 Maximum Site Coverage
60.09 Maximum Building Height
60.01 PURPOSE: It is the intent of the I-1 Limited Industrial District to provide for the
establishment of industrial development which can compatibly exist adjacent to both lower
intensity businesses and high intensity manufacturing uses. The location of such industrial
uses shall be consistent with the general locations shown in the Comprehensive Plan.
60.02 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted uses in the I-1 District:
A. Automobile repair - major.
B. Contractor operations.
C. Dog kennels.
D. Essential services.
E. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
F. Laboratories.
G. Machine shops.
H. Manufacturing or assembly of a wide variety of products that produces no exterior
noise, glare, fumes, obnoxious products, by-products or wastes, or creates other
objectionable impact on the environment, including the generation of large volumes
of traffic. Examples of such uses are:
1. Fabrication or assembly of small products such as optical, electronic,
pharmaceutical, medical supplies and equipment.
60-2
2. Printing and publishing.
I. Mini-storage.
J. Offices related to other allowed uses (limited to fifty (50) percent of the principal
structure).
K. Personal wireless service towers and antennas as regulated by Section 29 of this
Ordinance.
L. Radio and television stations.
M. Sexually oriented businesses, principal and accessory.
N. Trade schools.
O. Warehousing and indoor storage excluding explosives and hazardous waste.
P. Wholesale showrooms.
60.03 INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are interim uses in the I-1 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
60.04 USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions
of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing
requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the I-1 District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this
district.
B. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as
required in Section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.
60.05 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the I-1 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the
60-3
principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor
space of the principal use and shall be of the same material and design as the
principal use.
B. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three
and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including
radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
C. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
60.06 CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the I-1 District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set
forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.02 of this Ordinance).
A. Accessory, enclosed retail, rental, or service activity other than that allowed as a
permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that:
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Business District.
2. Such use does not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor
area of the principal building.
B. Commercial and professional offices within the principal structure in excess of that
which is allowed in this district or as a freestanding principal use.
C. Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility
microwave antennas, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
D. Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in
excess of three and one-half (3.5) meters in diameter, as regulated by Section 29 of
this Ordinance.
E. Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided
that:
1. Outside service areas are fenced and screened from view of the public rightof-
way, neighboring residential uses, or an abutting Residential District in
compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.
2. The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this
Ordinance.
60-4
3. Sales area is hard surfaced to control dust.
F. Open and outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use provided that:
1. The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of
neighboring uses and abutting residential zoning and public rights-of-way.
2. The storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced unless specifically
approved by the City Council.
3. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity to this Ordinance.
60.07 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in a I-1 District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Lot Area: One (1) acre.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yards:
Setbacks
From Rightof-
Way Lines Street Class
35 feet State/Federal Highway
35 feet County Road
35 feet Local Street
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or
highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet
60-5
4. Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet in
abutting a residential district.
60.08 MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE:
A. Building and Structure: Thirty (30) percent
B. Hard surface including buildings and parking/driveway areas: Eighty-five (85)
percent.
60.09 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT: Thirty-five (35) feet.
61-1
SECTION 61. I-2, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Subdivision
61.01 Purpose
61.02 Application of Performance Requirements
61.03 Permitted Uses
61.04 Interim Uses
61.05 Uses by Administrative Permit
61.06 Accessory Uses
61.07 Conditional Uses
61.08 Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
61.09 Maximum Site Coverage by Building
61.10 Maximum Building Height
61.01 PURPOSE: It is the intent of the I-2 General Industrial District to provide areas
suitable for the location of general industrial activities which have adequate and convenient
access to major streets and provide effective controls for “nuisance” and pollution
characteristics. It is further the intent of this District to encourage industrial development in
a compact and orderly manner consistent with the general locations shown in the
Comprehensive Plan providing a compatible relationship with other land uses where a full
complement of urban services are provided.
61.02 APPLICATION OF PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS: All uses provided for
under the I-2 District shall show proof of ability to comply with the performance
requirements of this Ordinance prior to issuance of any construction permit.
61.03 PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted uses in the I-2 District:
A. Appliance assembly and warehousing, machine shops, freight terminals and
classification yards, concrete products plants, building materials production and
clothing or apparel manufacturing and similar uses.
B. Automobile repair - major.
C. Bakeries, wholesale.
D. Contractor operations.
E. Distribution centers.
61-2
F. Essential services.
G. Food processing facilities.
H. Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
I. Laboratories.
J. Machine shops.
K. Manufacturing or assembly of a wide variety of products that produces no exterior
noise, glare, fumes, obnoxious products, by-products or wastes, or creates other
objectionable impact on the environment, including the generation of large volumes
of traffic. Examples of such uses are:
1. Fabrication or assembly of small products such as optical, electronic,
pharmaceutical, medical supplies and equipment.
2. Printing and publishing.
L. Mini-storage.
M. Offices related to other allowed uses (limited to fifty (50) percent of the principal
structure).
N. Personal wireless service towers and antennas, including necessary equipment
buildings, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
O. Radio and television stations.
P. Trade schools.
Q. Truck terminals.
R. Warehousing and indoor storage excluding explosives and hazardous waste.
S. Wholesale showrooms.
61.04 INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following
are interim uses in the I-2 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.
61-3
A. Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
61.05 USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions
of this Ordinance, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing
requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the I-2 District by
administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this
district.
B. Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as
required in section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.
61.06 ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the I-2 District:
A. Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the
principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor
space of the principal use.
B. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.
C. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance including semi-trailer
trucks.
D. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three
and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including
radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
E. Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
61.07 CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the I-2 District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set
forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).
A. Accessory, enclosed retail, rental, service, or processing, manufacturing activity
other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this Section,
provided that:
61-4
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Business District.
2. Such use does not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor
area of the principal building.
B. Commercial and professional offices within the principal structure in excess of that
which is allowed in this district or as a freestanding principal use.
C. Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility
microwave antennas, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
D. Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in
excess of three and one-half (3.5) meters in diameter, as regulated by Section 29 of
this Ordinance.
E. Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided
that:
1. Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal
use is limited to fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.
2. Outside sales areas are fenced and screened from view of neighboring
residential uses or an abutting residential zoning district in compliance with
Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.
3. The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this
Ordinance.
4. Sales area is hard surfaced to control dust.
F. Open and outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use provided that:
1. The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of
neighboring uses and abutting residential zoning districts and public rights-ofway.
2. Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced.
3. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity to this Ordinance.
G. Storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which could decompose
by demolition; refuse and garbage disposal; crude oil; bulk fuel, gasoline or other
liquid storage provided that:
61-5
1. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than twenty-five
(25) feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 16 of
this Ordinance.
2. Each light standard base shall be landscaped.
3. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic
movement, shall comply with Section 20 of this Ordinance and shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
4. No outside storage except as allowed in compliance with Section 61.07.E of
this Ordinance.
5. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the City
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
H. Waste facilities provided that:
1. All applicable federal, state and/or county permits are obtained including, but
not limited to:
a. The Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
b. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
c. The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
2. Any applicable environmental review requirements outlined in Section 9 of
this Ordinance are satisfactorily met.
3. A financial guarantee in a form deemed appropriate by the City Attorney is
provided to ensure the following minimum activities:
a. Completion of site improvements.
b. Emergency clean up and correction.
c. Closure and post closure activities.
4. The facility is subject to periodic monitoring as determined by the City.
5. The facility is provided a minimum of two (2) independent emergency access
escape routes, neither of which may traverse residentially zoned areas.
61-6
6. The facility is set back a minimum one thousand (1,000) feet from all storm
water holding areas, natural drainage facilities and wetlands.
7. All storm water runoff is held on site prior to release into natural drainage
ways and the City’s storm drainage system.
8. The outside storage of materials, containers or disposal facilities involving
hazardous waste is prohibited.
9. The outside storage of materials, containers or disposal facilities involving
non-hazardous materials is enclosed and screened as outlined in Section
15.07 of this Ordinance.
10. The loading and/or unloading of waste materials is conducted within
buildings and upon an impermeable floor surface.
11. All development, operation, maintenance and closure/conversion plans are
subject to City approval.
12. A sign indicating the facility’s inventory of waste materials by type and
location is posted at the main entrance of the site.
13. All hazardous waste materials stored on the site are clearly designated.
14. All facility employees are subject to emergency training programs, the
procedures and techniques of which are subject to City approval.
15. Emergency preparedness plans which:
a. Establish procedures for handling ruptures, spills and the like.
b. Alert applicable agencies and area property owners.
c. Establish provisions for emergency evacuation that are provided to
and approved by the City.
16. All containers used for the outside storage of waste materials are properly
cleaned prior to storage and maintained in a clean manner so as not to
attract vectors or cause objectionable odors.
61.08 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the I-2 District, subject to additional requirements,
61-7
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Lot Area: Two (2) acres.
B. Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet
C. Setbacks:
1. Front yards:
Setbacks Setbacks
From From Right-
Centerline of-Way Lines Street Class
130 feet 65 feet State/Federal Highway
130 feet 65 feet County Road
65 feet 35 feet Local Street
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or
highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
2. Side yard: Twenty (20) feet.
3. Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet in
abutting a residential district.
61.09 MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE BY BUILDINGS: Fifty (50) percent of the total lot
area.
61.10 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT: Thirty-five (35) feet.



i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SECTION 1. GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
1.01 Purpose .............................................................................. 1-1
1.02 Scope of Legal Authority .................................................... 1-1
1.03 Administration ..................................................................... 1-2
1.04 Amendments ....................................................................... 1-2
1.05 Approvals Necessary for Acceptance of Subdivision Plats. 1-2
1.06 Conditions for Recording .................................................... 1-2
1.07 Building Permits .................................................................. 1-2
1.08 Flood Prone Lands ............................................................. 1-2
1.09 Separability ......................................................................... 1-3
1.10 Interpretation....................................................................... 1-3
1.11 Definitions …...................................................................... 1-4
SECTION 2. PROCEDURES FOR FILING AND REVIEW
2.01 Sketch Plan ........................................................................ 2-1
2.02 Preliminary Plat .................................................................. 2-2
2.03 Final Plat ............................................................................ 2-10
2.04 Certification Required ........................................................ 2-14
2.05 Denial of Plat ...................................................................... 2-14
2.06 Administrative Subdivision ………………………………….. 2-15
SECTION 3. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
3.01 Conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and
Zoning Ordinance ............................................................... 3-1
3.02 Land Requirements ............................................................ 3-1
3.03 Blocks ................................................................................. 3-2
3.04 Lots ..................................................................................... 3-2
3.05 Streets ................................................................................ 3-4
3.06 Cul-de-Sacs ........................................................................ 3-6
3.07 Street Design ...................................................................... 3-6
3.08 Alleys .................................................................................. 3-10
3.09 Sidewalks/PedestrianWays.................................................. 3-10
3.10 Public Utilities ..................................................................... 3-11
3.11 Sewage Disposal and Storm Drainage for Areas without
Central or Public Sewer ...................................................... 3-11
3.12 Conditions in Flood Hazard Areas ...................................... 3-12
3.13 Flood Warning Signs in Flood-Prone Areas ....................... 3-12
3.14 Drainage ............................................................................. 3-13
3.15 Easements .......................................................................... 3-13
3.16 Erosion and Sediment Control ............................................ 3-14
Page
ii
3.17 Protected Areas .................................................................. 3-14
3.18 Tree Preservation ............................................................... 3-15
3.19 Park Land Dedication Requirements .................................. 3-15
3.20 Dedication of Storm Water Holding Areas or Ponds .......... 3-18
3.21 Maintenance of Private Open Space .................................. 3-18
3.22 Minimum Design Features .................................................. 3-19
SECTION 4. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
4.01 Monuments ......................................................................... 4-1
4.02 Streets and Alleys ............................................................... 4-1
4.03 Sidewalks ........................................................................... 4-2
4.04 Public Utilities Design ......................................................... 4-2
4.05 Water Supply ...................................................................... 4-4
4.06 Sewage Disposal ................................................................ 4-4
4.07 Drainage ............................................................................. 4-5
4.08 Building Site Improvements for Flood-Prone Areas ............ 4-5
4.09 Utilities Location ................................................................. 4-6
4.10 Street Lighting Requirements ............................................. 4-6
4.11 Inspection ........................................................................... 4-6
4.12 Certificate of Occupancy .................................................... 4-6
SECTION 5. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL
ARRANGEMENT
5.01 Improvements Required ..................................................... 5-1
5.02 Construction Plans, Inspection and Warranty .................... 5-2
5.03 Installation of Improvements ............................................... 5-2
5.04 Development Contract ........................................................ 5-3
5.05 Financial Guarantee ........................................................... 5-4
5.06 Improvements Completed Prior to Approval of the
Final Plat ............................................................................ 5-5
SECTION 6. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6.01 Non-platted Subdivisions .................................................... 6-1
6.02 Variances, City Council Approval, Standards ..................... 6-1
6.03 Violations and Penalty ........................................................ 6-4
6.04 Schedule of Administrative Fees, Charges, and Expenses. 6-5
1-1
SECTION 1. GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
Subdivision
1.01 Purpose
1.02 Scope of Legal Authority
1.03 Administration
1.04 Amendments
1.05 Approvals Necessary for Acceptance of Subdivision Plats
1.06 Conditions for Recording
1.07 Building Permits
1.08 Flood Prone Lands
1.09 Separability
1.10 Interpretation
1.11 Definitions
1.01 PURPOSE: All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted shall fully comply in all respects with the regulations to:
A. Provide for and guide the orderly, economic and safe development of land, urban services and facilities.
B. Encourage well-planned, efficient and attractive subdivisions by establishing adequate and impartial standards for design and construction.
C. Provide for the health, safety and welfare of residents by requiring the necessary services such as properly designed streets and adequate sewage and water supply.
D. Place the cost of improvements against those benefitting from their construction.
E. Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and waters.
F. Set the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
G. Provide common grounds of understanding between prospective subdividers and municipal officials.
1.02 SCOPE OF LEGAL AUTHORITY: The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivision of land contained herein shall apply within the boundaries of St. Augusta. This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or with restrictive covenants running with the land except those specifically repealed by or in conflict with this Ordinance.
1.03 ADMINISTRATION: This Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning
1-2
Administrator who is appointed by the City Council.
1.04 AMENDMENTS: The provisions of this Ordinance shall be amended by the City following a legally advertised public hearing before the Planning Commission and in accordance with the law, including the rules and regulations of any applicable state or federal agency. The City Council shall take action on all proposed amendments.
1.05 APPROVALS NECESSARY FOR ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISION PLATS: Before any plat or subdivision of land shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall be referred to the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council of St. Augusta as having fulfilled the requirements of this Ordinance.
1.06 CONDITIONS FOR RECORDING: No plat or subdivision in St. Augusta shall be entitled to be recorded in the Stearns County Recorder's Office or have any validity until the plat thereof has been prepared, approved, and acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this Ordinance.
1.07 BUILDING PERMITS: No building permits shall be issued by St. Augusta for the construction of any building, structure or improvement to the land or to any lot in a subdivision as defined herein, until all requirements of this Ordinance have been fully complied with.
1.08 FLOOD PRONE LANDS:
A. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability for Flooding: This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside floodplain areas or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of St. Augusta or any officer, employee, or agent thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder. No responsibility or liability shall arise from the design or operation of subdivision drainage facilities dedicated to St. Augusta until the City has accepted such dedication.
B. Subdivision Flooding and Flood Control: No land shall be subdivided if the City Council finds the land unsuitable for subdividing due to flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply, or sewage treatment facilities in accordance with this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. Any building sites on lots within the floodplain district shall be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. All subdivisions shall have water supply and sewer disposal facilities that comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, and any applicable building, health or safety codes, including the Minnesota State Building Code. All subdivisions shall have street access both to
1-3
the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two (2') feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. Each of the above requirements shall take into consideration the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
C. Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, telephone, cable television, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code to an elevation no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, in accordance with state and federal agency regulations and the City's Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District.
D. Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, streets and bridges to be located within the Floodway District shall comply with this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure and interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary railroad tracks, streets, or bridges may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety and as long as such construction is in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Natural Resources, State of Minnesota, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the City Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District.
1.09 SEPARABILITY: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
1.10 INTERPRETATION: The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
B. The present tense includes the past and the future tenses, and the future the present.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
D. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, code, statute, resolution or regulation, the regulations which are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
E. All measured distances shall be expressed in feet and decimals of feet.
1-4
1.11 DEFINITIONS: The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this
Ordinance, shall be interpreted as herein defined.
A. Alley: A public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the
side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street.
Applicant: The owner, their agent, or other person having legal control, ownership
and/or interest in the land proposed to be subdivided.
B. Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or
by streets and the entire boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a
combination of the above with a river or lake.
Boulevard: The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the
property line.
Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattel or movable property of any kind, and includes any structure.
Butt Lot: A lot at the end of a block, located between two corner lots, as illustrated
in Figure 1.1.
C. Certificate of Survey: A document prepared by a
Registered Engineer or Registered Land Surveyor
which precisely describes area, dimensions and
location of a parcel or parcels of land.
City Attorney: The person or firm designated by the City Council to be the City
Attorney for St. Augusta.
City Building Official: The person or firm designated by the City Council to be the
City Building Official for St. Augusta.
City Clerk: The St. Augusta City Clerk.
City Council: The City Council of St. Augusta.
City Engineer: The person or firm designated by the City Council to be the City
Engineer for St. Augusta.
City Planner: The person or firm designated by the City Council to be the City
Planner for St. Augusta.
Comprehensive Plan: A comprehensive plan prepared and approved by the City,
1-5
including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, fiscal guidelines, and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development of the City, including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
Contour Map: A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevations. "Contour interval" shall mean the vertical height between contour lines.
Copy: A print or reproduction made from a tracing.
County: Stearns County, Minnesota.
D. Design Standards: The specifications to landowners or those proposing to subdivide land for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as rights-of-way, blocks, easements and lots.
Development: Acts relating to subdividing land, platting land, building structures and installing site improvements.
Drainage Course: A water course or surface area for the drainage or conveyance of surface water.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached: A dwelling which is designed and constructed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A dwelling designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
E. Easement: A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner.
F. Flood Related:
1. Accessory Use or Accessory Structure: A use or structure in the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
2. Equal Degree of Encroachment: Method of determining the location of encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each side of a stream are reduced by an equal amount when calculating the increases in flood stages due to floodplain encroachments.
3. FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
1-6
4. Flood: A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel.
5. Flood Frequency: The average frequency, statistically determined, for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
6. Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City.
7. Flood Hazard Areas: The areas included in the floodway and flood fringe as indicated on the official zoning map and the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map which have been officially adopted by the City.
8. Flood Insurance Rate Map: The most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the City, and as applicable and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the County of Stearns and dated 1 March 1979, as may be amended.
9. Flood Insurance Study: The most recent Flood Insurance Study prepared for the City by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and, as applicable and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the County of Stearns and dated 1 March 1979, as may be amended.
10. Floodplain: The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study, or in any other officially adopted City flood study.
11. Floodproofing: A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
12. Floodway: The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study, or in any other officially adopted City flood study.
13. Obstruction: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
1-7
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
14. 100-Year Flood: A flood which is representative of large regional floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval as determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study, or in any other officially adopted City flood study.
15. Reach: A hydraulic engineering term used to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by the natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings would be typical of a reach.
16. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: A point not less than one foot (1') above the water surface profile associated with the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study plus any increase in flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this Ordinance are required to be elevated or floodproofed.
17. Structure: Anything erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground or in the ground in the case of earth sheltered buildings. Among other things, structures include buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, walls, fences, billboards, poster panels and other similar items.
G. Grade: The slope of a street, street, or other public way specified in percentage terms.
K. Key Map: A small scale map which definitively shows the area proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical features (e.g., regional feature, community centers, lakes and streets).
L. Lot: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.
Lot Area: The total land area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.
Lot Area, Minimum: Except as may be otherwise expressly allowed in this Ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance, the area of a horizontal plan within the lot lines
1-8
excluding major drainageways, wetlands, waterbodies, street rights-of-way, utility/ pipeline easements, and slopes steeper than three to one (3:1).
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot, Double Frontage: An interior lot having frontage on two streets.
Lot Improvement: Any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or improvement including grading of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
Lot, Interior: A lot, other than a corner lot, including through or double frontage lots.
Lot Line: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership; except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way.
Lot Line, Rear: That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot of Record: A platted lot, metes and bounds parcel, which has been recorded in the office of the Stearns County Recorder prior to the adoption of this Ordinance.
Lot, Reversed Frontage: A lot in which the frontage is at right angles, or approximately right angles, to the general pattern in the area involved. A reversed frontage lot may be a corner lot or an interior lot.
Lot Width: The minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth, at the minimum building setback line. If no setback line is established, the distance between the side lot lines measured along the public right-of-way.
M. Metes and Bounds Description: A description of real property which is not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.
N. Natural Water Way: A natural passageway on the surface of the earth, so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area. The term also shall include all drainage structures that have been constructed or placed for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another.
1-9
O. Outlot: A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open space or other future use, for which no building permit shall be issued.
Owner: An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in the land sought to be subdivided.
P. Parcel: An individual lot or tract of land.
Parks and Playgrounds: Public land and open space in the City dedicated or reserved for recreational purposes.
Pedestrian Way: A public right-of-way or easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the installation of paths or trails.
Percentage of Grade: Along a center line of a street, the change in vertical elevation in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred feet (100') of horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage.
Person: Any individual or legal entity.
Planning Commission: The St. Augusta Planning Commission.
Plat, Final: A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the requirements of the City and in such form as required by Stearns County for the purpose of recording.
Plat, Preliminary: A detailed drawing or map of a proposed subdivision meeting the requirements herein enumerated submitted to the Planning Commission and governing body for their consideration, in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, along with the required supporting data.
Protective Covenants: Contracts entered into between all owners and holders of mortgage constituting a restriction on the use of property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners.
Public Improvement: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water system, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume ownership, responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement, for which local government responsibility is or may be established.
R. Replat: The subdivision of land in accordance with this Ordinance which has previously been platted and which is on file with Stearns County pursuant to State Statutes.
1-10
Reserve Strips: A narrow strip of land placed between lot lines and streets to control access.
Right-of-Way: Land acquired by reservation or dedication intended for public use, and intended to be occupied or which is occupied by a street, trail, railroad, utility lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or other similar uses.
Roadway: The portion of street right-of-way improved for vehicular travel.
S. Setback: The distance between a building and the property line nearest thereto.
Sketch Plan: A drawing showing the proposed subdivision of property. This plan shall be drawn to scale and dimensioned, however, exact accuracy is not a requirement.
Steep Slope: Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available County soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction technique and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over twelve (12) percent, as measured over horizontal distances of fifty (50) feet or more, that are not bluffs.
Streets, Arterial: Those streets carrying larger volumes of traffic and serving as links between various sub-areas of the City. Arterial streets are intended to provide for collection and distribution of traffic between highways and collector streets; hence regulation of direct access to property is critical.
Streets, Collector: Those streets which carry traffic from local streets to the major system of arterials and highways. Collector streets primarily provide principal access to residential neighborhoods, including, to a lesser degree direct land access.
Streets, Cul-De-Sac: A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Streets, Half: A street designated to provide access only to one side of the right-of-way.
Streets, Local: A street whose primary function is to provide direct access to abutting property containing single-family dwellings and which, by design, is usually a two-lane street with parking permitted within the roadway.
Streets, Marginal Access (Frontage Street): Those local streets which are parallel and adjacent to high volume arterial street and highways; and which provide access
1-11
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
Street, Private: A street serving as vehicular access to two (2) or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public and is owned by one or more private parties.
Street, Public: A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, through-way, street, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated, which has been or is proposed to be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
Street, Right-of-Way Width: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street.
Street, Rural Section: A street which utilizes a ditch system for the conveyance of surface water runoff.
Street, Urban Section: A street which does not utilize a ditch system for the conveyance of surface water runoff.
Structure: Anything which is built, constructed or erected; an edifice or building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner whether temporary or permanent in character. Among other things, structures including but not limited to buildings, gazebos, decks, retaining walls, fences, and swimming pools.
Subdividing: The process of effecting subdivision.
Subdivision: The separation of an area, parcel or tract of land under single ownership into two (2) or more parcels, tracts, lots or long-term leasehold interests. This term includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided, except in the case of:
1. Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests shall be twenty (20) acres or larger in size;
2. Creating cemetery lots;
3. Court orders.
Surveyor: A land surveyor registered under Minnesota State laws.
T. Tracing: A plat or map drawn on transparent paper, film, or cloth which can be reproduced by using regular reproduction procedure.
V. Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance where such
1-12
deviation will not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the Comprehensive Plan and this Ordinance, the public interest and where, owing to physical conditions unique to the individual property under consideration and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
W. Waterbody: A body of water (lake or pond) or a depression of land or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed basin that retains water and is surrounded by land.
Watercourse: A stream of water including rivers, brooks, creeks, and tributaries thereof
Wetland Related:
1. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For the purposes of this Ordinance, wetlands shall:
a. Have a predominance of hydric soils.
b. Be inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
c. Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation.
2. A distinct hydrologic feature with characteristics of item (1), surrounded by non-wetland and including all wetland types, except those connected solely by riverine wetlands. “Wetland area” means a portion of “a wetland” or “the wetland”.
3. Wetlands does not include public waters wetlands and public waters that are designated on the public waters inventory maps prepared under Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.201, as may be amended.
Z. Zero Lot Line: The reduction of side yard setback requirements to zero, permitting the placement of a structure near or adjacent to the side yard lot line. With zero lot line, no portion of the structure or accessory appurtenance shall project over the lot line.
Zoning Administrator: The person duly appointed by the City Council as the individual charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing this Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance or resolution controlling the use of land as adopted by the City.
1-13
2-1
SECTION 2. PROCEDURES FOR FILING AND REVIEW
Subdivision
2.01 Sketch Plan
2.02 Preliminary Plat
2.03 Final Plat
2.04 Certification Required
2.05 Denial of Plat
2.06 Administrative Subdivision
2.01 SKETCH PLAN:
A. Procedure: In order to insure that all applicants are informed of the procedural requirements and minimum standards of this Ordinance, and the requirements and limitations imposed by other City ordinances, plans and/or policies prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, all applicants shall present a sketch plan to the Zoning Administrator prior to filing a preliminary plat. Approval of a sketch plan shall not be considered binding in regard to subsequent plat review. The Zoning Administrator, notably in the case of multi-phased projects, shall have the authority to refer the sketch plan to the Planning Commission and/or City Council for review and comment.
B. Submission Requirements:
1. Formal request for subdivision.
2. Five (5) copies of the plat sketch including the following minimum information:
a. Plat boundary.
b. North arrow.
c. Scale.
d. General location of proposed streets, easements, alleys, pedestrian ways, ponds, water detention areas, etc.
e. Designation of land use and current and proposed zoning.
f. Significant topographical or physical features.
g. General lot locations and layout.
3. An eight and one-half by eleven (8½ X 11) inch reduction of the sketch plan.
4. Payment of application fee as established by City Council resolution.
5. Escrow deposit to pay review costs of City staff and consultants.
6. In cases of multi-phased subdivisions, applicable preliminary plat submission
2-2
information as outlined in Section 2.02 of this Ordinance.
2.02 PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Procedure:
1. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, as may be amended, an application for a preliminary plat shall be approved or denied by the City Council within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless notice of extension is provided by the City or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60) days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant.
2. After the pre-application meeting and following City review of the sketch plan, the applicant shall prepare a request for subdivision, as provided within this Ordinance, and shall be filed with the City on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council Resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plat and supportive information in conformity with requirements of this Ordinance. The scale of such materials shall be the minimum necessary to ensure legibility. The request for subdivision shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting.
3. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the subdivision is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest and as applicable, supply documented authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested subdivision.
4. The applicant shall submit any necessary applications for variances from the provisions of this Ordinance, as set out in Section 6.02. The preliminary plat shall be considered as being officially submitted only when all of the information requirements are complied with and the appropriate fees paid.
5. Upon receipt of the completed application as outlined in 2, 3, and 4 above, the Zoning Administrator shall set a public hearing for public review of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission. The hearing shall be within forty-five (45) days of the completed filing of the application. Notice of the hearing may be a legal or display advertisement and shall consist of a legal property description, description of request and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all owners of land within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the boundary of
2-3
the property in question. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding.
6. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Section provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this Section.
7. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the staff as appropriate to prepare technical reports and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council. This may include the City Planner, City Engineer, City Building Official, the City Attorney, or public or private utility departments, among others.
8. The City shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to County, State or other public jurisdictions for their review and comment, where appropriate and when required.
9. The City Council, Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the proposed subdivision and its operational factors or impact, or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors or impacts, when said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
10. The applicant or a designated representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission at the public hearing in order to answer questions concerning the proposed request.
11. The Planning Commission shall report its findings and make its recommendation in writing to the City Council no later than thirty (30) days after the close of public hearing described in 5 above. If the Planning Commission has not acted upon the preliminary plat within thirty (30) days following the close of public hearing, the City Council may act on the preliminary plat without the Planning Commission's recommendation.
12. City Council Action:
a. Upon completion of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the request shall be placed on the agenda of the City Council. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
2-4
b. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
c. If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final decision of the City Council will differ from the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council may before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide the Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular action.
d. Approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council shall require passage by a majority vote of the entire City Council. If the preliminary plat is approved, such approval shall not constitute final acceptance of the design and layout. Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals and other features and requirements as specified by this Ordinance to be indicated on the final plat. The City Council may impose such conditions and restrictions as it deems appropriate or require such revisions or modifications in the preliminary plat or final plat as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety, comfort, general welfare and convenience of the City.
e. If the preliminary plat is not approved by the City Council, the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the City Council and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
f. The City Council reserves the right to decline approval of a preliminary plat if due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural features, such as topography, trees, water courses, scenic points, prehistoric and historical spots, and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development of the property.
g. Following City Council approval of a preliminary plat, the applicant must submit a final plat to the City within one hundred (100) days of preliminary approval unless otherwise specified as part of a Development Agreement. If this procedure is not followed, then approval of the preliminary plat shall be considered void, unless a request for time extension is submitted in writing by the applicant thirty
2-5
(30) days prior to the lapse of approval and subsequently approved by the City Council.
h. Should the applicant desire to amend a preliminary plat as approved, an amended preliminary plat may be submitted. The City may require the applicant to follow the same procedure as a new preliminary plat. No public hearing will be required unless the amendment, in the opinion of the City, is of such scope as to constitute a new preliminary plat. A filing fee as established by the City shall be charged for the amendment processing.
B. Submission Requirements: The applicant shall submit a preliminary plat together with any necessary supplementary information. The preliminary plat shall contain the information set forth in the subsections that follow (upon specific request, the City may exempt an applicant from the submission of data that is not considered relevant to the application):
1. General Requirements:
a. The proposed name of the subdivision; names shall not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the County.
b. Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section, quarter section or quarter-quarter section lines comprising a legal description of the property.
c. Name, address and phone number of the record owner(s), any agent having control of the land, the applicant, land surveyor, engineer and designer of the plan.
d. Graphic scale of one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet, except as specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator.
e. North point and key map of the area, showing well-known geographical points for orientation within a one-half (½) mile radius.
f. Date of preparation.
2. Existing Conditions:
a. Boundary lines to include bearings, distances, curve data, and total acreage of proposed plat, clearly indicated.
b. Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting the subdivision.
2-6
c. Total area of the proposed plat.
d. Location, right-of-way width and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks and other public lands, permanent buildings and structures, easements and section, corporate and school district lines within the plan, to a distance one hundred fifty (150) feet beyond the plat.
e. Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the plat, identified by name and ownership, including all contiguous land owned or controlled by the applicant.
f. A statement certifying the environmental condition of the site including the presence of any hazardous substance as defined by Minnesota Statutes 115B.02, Subd. 8., as may be amended. Such statement may be required to be based upon an environmental assessment of the site by an environmental engineering firm acceptable to the City.
g. For plats where public sanitary sewer and water service are not to be utilized, the applicant shall provide geotechnical data prepared by a qualified soils engineer, showing the location and results of tests to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions and availability, including soil percolation tests.
3. Proposed Design Features:
a. Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths, centerline gradients, roadway widths, typical cross-sections, and proposed names of streets in conformance with City street identification policies. The name of any street heretofore used in the City or its environs shall not be used unless the proposed street is a logical extension of an already named street, in which event the same name shall be used.
b. Locations and widths of proposed alleys and pedestrian ways.
c. Location, dimension and purpose of all easements.
d. Layout, numbers, lot areas and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks, and outlots.
e. Minimum front and side street building setback line.
f. When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building setback line, as defined by the City Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
2-7
g. Building pads intended for construction.
h. Areas, other than streets, alleys, bikeways, pedestrian ways and utility easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of such area or areas in acres.
4. Supplementary Information: Any or all of the supplementary information requirements set forth in this subsection shall be submitted when deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator, consultants, advisory bodies and/or City Council to adequately address the application and site in question.
a. Proposed protective covenants or private restrictions.
b. A tree preservation and protection plan that shows those trees proposed to be removed, those to remain, the types and locations of trees and other vegetation that are to be planted may also be required.
c. Statement revealing the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards, and congestion of population. The applicant may be required to have formal studies performed to the City's satisfaction which show the effect of the proposed development on traffic, fire hazards, or other matters of public concern.
d. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas, including dimensions, shall be shown. Such proposed zoning plan shall be for information only and shall not vest any rights in the applicant.
e. Where the applicant owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision, it shall be required that the applicant submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and the future subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions shall be required to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions and land uses and the provisions of the City’s adopted Comprehensive Plan.
f. Where structures are to be placed on large or excessively deep lots which are subject to potential replat, the preliminary plat shall indicate a logical way in which the lots could possibly be re-subdivided in the future.
g. An environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) shall be submitted if the City Council, Minnesota Environmental Quality Board or other groups or agencies determine that one is required by law. Whenever
2-8
a project that does not require an environmental assessment worksheet is suspected to have the potential for environmental effects, the State, County, or City may require the preparation of a discretionary environmental assessment worksheet in order to determine whether an environmental impact statement is needed.
h. Applications, statements and supporting documentation and plans for rezoning, variances or conditional use permits approvals being sought for the subdivision.
i. Where irregular shaped lots have been proposed, house plans shall be submitted which demonstrate such lots to be buildable and the resulting structure compatible in size and character to the surrounding area.
j. Identification of outlots for the purpose of locating area identification signs, as may be allowed by Section 31 of the Zoning Ordinance.
k. Such other applicable information as may be required by the City.
5. Preliminary Grading Plan: The applicant shall submit a preliminary grading, drainage, and erosion control plan which shall include the following information:
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale of one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet, except as specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator.
c. Lot and block numbers.
d. Building pad locations, proposed building types and proposed elevations.
e. Topography in two (2) foot contour intervals with existing contours shown as dashed lines and proposed contours as solid lines. Existing topography shall extend one hundred (100) feet outside of the tract or a distance necessary to demonstrate the impact of surface drainage upon surrounding properties.
f. Location, size and elevation of all existing natural features, including but not limited to, wooded areas, marshes, water courses, water bodies, areas of steep slope and other significant features.
g. Location of all existing storm drainage facilities including, but not limited to, pipes, manholes, catch basins, ponding areas, swales and drainage channels within one hundred (100) feet of the parcel.
2-9
Existing pipe grades, rim and invert elevations, and ordinary high water mark shall be shown. Also, spot elevations at drainage break points and direction arrows indicating site, swale and lot drainage.
h. The delineation of all wetlands in accordance with criteria established by the Army Corps of Engineers and/or Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. Such wetland delineations shall be performed by a party certified as qualified by the Army Corps of Engineers and/or Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
i. One hundred (100) year floodplain elevations and the regulatory flood protection elevation taking into consideration the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map.
j. Location and elevations of all street high and low points.
k. All street design grades and typical street sections.
l. Phasing of grading.
m. The location of all oversize non-typical easements.
n. A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during construction and after development has been completed. The plan shall include gradients of waterways, design of velocity and erosion control measures, design of sediment control measures, and landscaping of the erosion and sediment control system. Locations and standard detail plates for each measure shall be included on the plan.
o. All re-vegetation measures proposed for the subdivision, including seed and mulch types and application rates shall be included on the plan.
6. Preliminary Utility Plan:
a. Location, dimension, and purpose of all easements.
b. Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or other underground facilities within and extending one hundred (100) feet beyond the proposed subdivision boundary. Such data as grades, invert elevations, and location of catch basins, manholes, and hydrants shall also be shown.
c. Water Supply, Public: Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension of an existing community system wherever feasible. Service connections shall be stubbed into the property line and all necessary fire hydrants shall also be provided. Extensions of
2-10
the public water supply system shall be designed to provide service in accordance with design standards approved by the City Engineer.
d. Water Supply, Private: In areas where public water service is unavailable or not proposed, individuals wells shall be provided on each lot, properly placed in relationship to the individual sewage disposal facilities on the same and adjoining lots. Private water wells designs shall be installed in accordance with the Minnesota Well Code.
e. Sewage Disposal, Public: Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed in accordance with the design standards of the City as approved by the City Engineer.
f. Sewage Disposal, Private: All on-site private septic systems shall be installed in accordance with all applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and Minnesota Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards (Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080), as may be amended, including provision of a second alternative location for an on-site private septic system.
g. Locations, grades, rim and invert elevations, and sizes of all sanitary sewer facilities to serve the proposed subdivision.
h. Location of all proposed hydrants and valves for all proposed water mains.
2.03 FINAL PLAT:
A. Procedure:
1. After the preliminary plat has been approved, a final plat shall be submitted for review as set forth in the subsections which follow. The City may agree to review the preliminary and final plat simultaneously. The final plat shall incorporate all changes, modifications and revisions required by the City. Otherwise, it shall strictly conform to the approved preliminary plat.
2. All final plats shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and requirements of this Ordinance.
3. Review of a Final Plat:
a. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, as may be amended, an application for a final plat shall be approved or denied by the City Council within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless notice of extension is provided by the City or a time
2-11
waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60) days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. If the final plat is not approved, the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the official proceedings of the City and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
b. Ten (10) copies of the final plat shall be submitted by the applicant. The scale of such materials shall be the minimum necessary to ensure legibility. In the event that the final plat is referred to the Planning Commission for recommendation, additional large scale copies of the plat may be required. Upon receipt of a final plat, copies shall be referred to the City Council, Zoning Administrator, and to all applicable utility companies, County, and State agencies. One (1) copy, with Abstract of Title or Registered Property Certificate and opinion title shall be referred to the City Attorney.
c. The City Council may refer the final plat to the Planning Commission for recommendation if they find the proposed final plat is substantially different from the approved preliminary plat or the requirements of the preliminary plat are not resolved. In such cases, the Planning Commission shall submit a report thereon to the City Council within thirty (30) days.
d. The Zoning Administrator receiving final plat copies shall as appropriate submit reports to the City Council within ten (10) working days, documenting and expressing their recommendation on the final plat.
e. Prior to approval of a final plat, the applicant shall have executed a Development Agreement with the City, which controls the installation of all required improvements and assures compliance with all conditions of approval. Said agreement will require all improvements and approval conditions to comply with approved engineering standards and applicable regulations.
f. Approval of a final plat by the City Council shall be by a majority vote of the entire City Council.
g. Upon receiving an approved final plat in conformance with the requirements of the City, the designated representatives of the City shall sign the plat, and the applicant, as a condition of approval, shall record the approved and signed final plat with the County Registrar of Deeds within sixty (60) days, or the approved final plat shall be considered void.
h. The applicant shall, within thirty (30) days of recording, furnish the
2-12
City with three (3) blue or black line prints, one (1) mylar of the final plat showing evidence of the recording and one (1) reduced scale (11 inch by 17 inch) copy of the plat. Failure to furnish such copies shall be grounds for refusal to issue building permits for lots within a plat.
i. Upon receiving approval of a final plat for a portion of an approved preliminary plat, a continuation of the recognition of the preliminary plat is not required to maintain its approval. In the event a Zoning Ordinance amendment is adopted which requires a larger minimum lot size for land not yet platted and recorded, the larger minimum lot size may be required for any additional platting. If the applicant is unable to file a final plat application within the required one hundred (100) days, such person shall file a written request for an extension of the preliminary plat approval with the Zoning Administrator and receive City Council approval prior to the end of the one hundred (100) days. Said applicant's request shall specify and the City Council shall, if approved, determine the length of time for filing and for the preliminary plat to remain in full force and effect.
B. Submission Requirements: The applicant shall submit a final plat together with any necessary supplementary information. The final plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and Stearns County regulations, and such final plat or accompanying submittals shall contain the following information:
1. Name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any existing plat theretofore recorded in the County and which shall be subject to City Council approval.
2. Location by section, City, range, county and state, and including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions.
3. The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat. Locations of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official
monuments on the nearest established street lines, including true angles and distances to such reference points or monuments. The applicant shall
provide coordinating data on all subdivision monumentation in a format
approved by the City Engineer.
4. Location of lots, outlots, streets, public highways, alleys, and parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines.
5. Lots and outlots shall be numbered clearly, blocks are to be numbered, with
2-13
numbers shown clearly in the center of the block.
6. A drawing or listing of total square footage per lot, acreage per block and total acres in the plat.
7. The exact locations, widths and names of all streets to be dedicated.
8. Location, purpose and width of all easements to be dedicated.
9. Name, registration, address and phone number of surveyor making the plat.
10. Scale of the plat to be one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet to be shown graphically on a bar scale, date and north arrow.
11. A current abstract of title or a registered property certificate along with any unrecorded documents and an opinion of title to be reviewed by the City Attorney.
12. The applicant shall submit with the final plat certification to the City that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the subdivision application relates.
13. Deed restrictions and protective covenants which involve a matter of public concern.
14. Statement dedicating all easements as follows: Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved over, under and along the designated areas marked "drainage and utility easements."
15. Statement dedicating all streets, alleys and other public areas not previously dedicated as follows: Streets, alleys and other public areas shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use hereby so dedicated.
16. Final grading, utility and development plans shall be prepared in accordance with current federal, state, county and City specifications.
17. Other Data: Such other information that may be required by the City.
2.04 CERTIFICATION REQUIRED:
A. Certification by registered surveyor in the form required by Section 505.03, Minnesota Statutes, as amended.
B. Execution of all owners of any interest in the land and holders of a mortgage thereon of the certificates required by Section 505.03, Minnesota Statutes, as amended, and which certificate shall include a dedication of the utility easements and other public areas in such form as approved by the City Council.
2-14
C. Space for certificates of approval and review to be filled in by the signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk in the form:
For Approval of the City:
This plat of (name of plat) was approved and accepted by the City of St. Augusta, Minnesota, at a regular meeting thereof held this _____ day of __________, A.D. ______.
CITY COUNCIL OF ST. AUGUSTA, MINNESOTA
BY: Mayor
BY: City Clerk
2.05 DENIAL OF PLAT: The Planning Commission may recommend denial and the City Council may deny the subdivision if it makes any one (1) or more of the following findings:
A. That the proposed subdivision is in direct conflict with adopted applicable general and specific comprehensive plans of the City, County, region, or State of Minnesota.
B. That the physical characteristics of this site, including but not limited to topography, percolation rate, soil conditions, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage, drainage and retention, are such that the site is not suitable for the type of development, design, or use contemplated.
C. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage.
D. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems.
E. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements of record or with easements established by judgment of a court.
F. That the proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the policies and standards of the State defined Shoreland Districts and Wetland Districts.
G. That the proposed subdivision adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the floodway, increases flood stages and velocities, or increases flood hazards within the City.
H. That any lot or block in the proposed subdivision is exceptionally narrow or shallow, or is otherwise of any irregular or unusual shape.
2-15
I. That the subdivision is inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2.06 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION
A. Qualification: This Section applies the following subdivision applications:
1. The division of a lot to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lots such that no additional lots are created and both new lots conform to the minimum lot size requirements of the respective Zoning District.
2. The combination of two (2) existing platted lots.
3. A division of one (1) lot from a larger tract of land resulting in no more than two (2) lots that both conform to the minimum lot requirements of the respective zoning district. The parcel of land from which the new lot is to be divided is not to have been part of an administrative subdivision within the past five (5) years.
4. The division of a platted lot on which a two-family dwelling, townhouse, or quadraminium has been constructed to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling unit of such a structure, where the unit lot conforms to requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance and Uniform Building Code.
B. Submission Requirements:
1. Application form and fee as established by the City Council.
2. Certificate of survey. Applications for administrative subdivision is to be in the form of a certificate of survey prepared and signed by a Minnesota licensed land surveyor, depicting the following:
a. Scale (engineering scale only at 1-inch equals 50-feet or less).
b. North direction indication.
c. Existing boundaries with lot dimensions and area.
d. Existing site improvements.
e. All encroachments.
f. All easements of record.
g. Existing and proposed legal descriptions of the property (ies).
h. Ponds, lakes, springs, rivers, or other waterways bordering on or
2-16
running through the property.
i. The boundary and legal description of any proposed easements on the property.
C. Design Standards:
1. The lot(s) must comply with all applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and Subdivision Ordinance.
2. The lots must have direct access onto an improved public street.
3. Dedication of roadway easements or right-of-way consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and design standards of this Ordinance may be required.
4. A drainage and utility easement at least ten (10) feet wide must be provided along all property lines. A drainage and utility easement must be provided over wetlands, ponds, lakes, drainage channels, and tributaries.
5. The subdivision comply with applicable dedication requirements of this Ordinance, including Park Land Dedication.
6. All basic improvements required by this Ordinance must be installed in accordance with Section 3 of this Ordinance.
D Processing:
1. The Zoning Administrator may approve the following requests, provided that the application complies with all provisions of this Ordinance:
a. Requests involving property that has been previously platted, or the total property area included is greater than ten (10) acres,
b. Requests involving property lying within the Agriculture Preserve-Rural Service Area or Urban Service Reserve Area (defined by the Comprehensive Plan) that has not been previously platted and is less than ten (10) acres in total area.
2. Administrative subdivisions involving property lying within the Urban Service Area or Long Range Urban Service Area (defined by the Comprehensive Plan) that has not been previously platted and is less than ten (10) acres in total area, the request will be processed as a preliminary plat subject to the provisions of Section 2.02 of this Ordinance.
3-1
SECTION 3. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Subdivision
3.01 Conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance
3.02 Land Requirements
3.03 Blocks
3.04 Lots
3.05 Streets
3.06 Cul-de-Sacs
3.07 Street Design
3.08 Alleys
3.09 Sidewalks
3.10 Public Utilities
3.11 Sewage Disposal and Storm Drainage for Areas without Central or Public Sewer
3.12 Conditions in Flood Hazard Areas
3.13 Flood Warning Signs in Flood-Prone Areas
3.14 Drainage
3.15 Easements
3.16 Erosion and Sediment Control
3.17 Protected Areas
3.18 Tree Preservation
3.19 Park Land Dedication Requirements
3.20 Dedication of Storm Water Holding Areas or Ponds
3.21 Maintenance of Private Open Space
3.22 Minimum Design Features
3.01 CONFORMITY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING ORDINANCE: A proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, to related policies adopted by the City, and to the official Zoning Ordinance of the City.
3.02 LAND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. No plan shall be approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes proposed by reason of potential flooding, topography or adverse soil or rock formation.
B. Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property shall not be subdivided until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plan.
C. Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with surrounding jurisdictions and/or neighborhoods, so that the City as a whole may develop efficiently and harmoniously.
3.03 BLOCKS:
3-2
A. Accommodation of Lots: Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by the Zoning Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
B. Block Length: In general, intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals so as to serve cross-traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential subdivisions shall not exceed one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet nor be less than three hundred (300) feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from this minimum. In blocks longer than nine hundred (900) feet, ten (10) foot wide pedestrian rights-of-way and/or easements through the block may be required in locations deemed necessary for the public health, convenience and necessity. Suitable surfacing shall be provided in pedestrian ways.
C. Block Width: The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth as required by the Zoning Ordinance except adjoining a lake, stream, river, railroad or arterial or where one tier or lot is necessary because of topographic conditions. Blocks intended for business or industrial uses shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking, deliveries and loading. Such facilities shall be provided with safe and convenient limited access to the street system.
3.04 LOTS:
A. Area: The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that established by the City Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of the final plat.
B. Side Lot Lines: Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to street lines, radial to curved street lines, or radial to lake or stream shores unless topographic conditions necessitate a different arrangement or the City Engineer finds such deviation acceptable.
C. Building Sites: Each lot shall provide an adequate building site at least eighteen (18) inches above the top of the adjacent curb unless approved by the City Engineer upon the basis of plans submitted showing alternative, acceptable surface drainage measures.
D. Butt Lots: Butt lots in subdivisions are to be discouraged. Where such lots must be used to fit a particular type of design, they shall be platted at least twenty (20) feet wider than the average width of interior lots in the block.
E. Frontage: Every lot shall have the minimum frontage on a City approved public street other than an alley, as required in the City Zoning Ordinance.
3-3
F. Access: Each lot shall directly access a public street. In cases where special conditions require an alternative means of access, it shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Council.
G. Setback Lines: Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots and shall not be less than the setback required by the City Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended.
H. Watercourses: Lots abutting a watercourse, wetland, ponding area, drainageway, channel, or stream shall have additional depth and width, as required to comply with the approved drainage plan for the subdivision and to meet the provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance to assure building sites that are not subject to flooding.
I. Shoreland Frontage Lots: Lots that have frontage along the shorelines of waterbodies and watercourses shall be designed so that the lot lines extended shall maintain the closest approximation to riparian rights.
J. Drainage: Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away from building locations, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. A development plan shall be submitted showing all lot grading and drainage provisions.
K. Features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
L. Irregular Shaped Lots: On lots determined to be irregular in shape (i.e., triangular), the developer shall demonstrate to the City an ability to properly place principal buildings and accessory structures upon the site which are compatible in size and character to the surrounding area.
M. Regular Yard Setback Infringements: All lots should be designed in consideration of potentials for buildings and accommodating three (3) car garages, porches and decks, etc. Said buildings and structures are to be compatible in size and character with the surrounding area.
N. Lot Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size for the respective zoning district in which they are located must be added to abutting lots or lots immediately adjoining. For remnants, separated by a public right-of-way, the lot remnants shall be designated an outlot. Lot remnants may be allowed if a plan for future use is found acceptable by the City Council.
O. Boundaries: Reserved.
P. Frontage on Two Streets:
1. Double-frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2) parallel or non-intersecting streets shall not be permitted except:
3-4
a. Where lots back on arterial streets or highways, or
b. Where topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
2. Such double-frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least ten (10) feet or a reserve strip shall be created in order to allow space for screen planting along the rear lot line.
Q. Turn-Around Access: Where proposed residential lots abut a collector street, they shall be platted in such a manner as to encourage turn-around access and egress on each lot and discourage direct access onto such streets.
R. Access to Arterial Streets: In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway, other major highway, or other arterial street, said streets to be defined by the City's Comprehensive Plan, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to such streets. In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on limited access highways or arterial street where there is no other alternative, a temporary entrance may be granted, subject to terms and conditions defined by the City Council and applicable County or State agencies. As neighboring land becomes subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become possible, such temporary access permits shall become void.
S. Access to Collector Streets: Direct vehicular access from individual lots to collector streets shall be prohibited where possible and subject to the determination of the City Council. In such cases where direct lot access to collector streets is allowed, special traffic safety measures including, but not limited to, provisions for on-site vehicle turn around shall be required.
T. Outlots: The creation of outlots is to be discouraged. In such cases where outlots are created or exist, their area shall not be utilized in calculating minimums for buildable lot area requirements. Said outlots are also prohibited from qualifying for building permits.
3.05 STREETS:
A. Proposed streets shall conform to State, County and City highway/street plans which have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
B. Streets shall be logically related to the topography, so as to produce usable lots and reasonable grades.
C. Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in a subdivision and to adjacent unsubdivided parcels, unless the topography clearly indicates that such connection is not feasible. Reserved strips and land-locked areas shall not be created.
3-5
D. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
E. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations. A temporary turn-around facility shall be provided at the closed end, in conformance with cul-de-sac size requirements. Temporary facilities shall not require curb and gutter and the construction standards shall be established by the City Engineer. Construction of said streets shall be to the boundary of the plat.
F. Local streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic. The arrangement of arterial and collector streets shall be considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public convenience and safety, to their appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of the area to be served and in compliance with the City's Comprehensive Plan.
G. Provisions for Resubdivision of Large Lots and Parcels: When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels which have the potential for further subdivision with the installation of public utilities, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision.
H. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts with temporary cul-de-sacs, or when designed as cul-de-sac streets.
I. Private streets and reserve strips, except in the case of planned unit developments, shall be prohibited and no public improvements shall be approved for any private street. All streets shall be dedicated for public use. If any person applies to subdivide or replat any land or parcels adjoining an existing private street, the private street shall be required to be dedicated for public use and scheduled for improvement to public street standards at the time of final plat.
J. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned arterial or a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such arterial and right-of-way may be required for adequate protection of residential properties and separation of through and local traffic. Such service streets shall be located at a distance from the major arterial or railroad right-of-way suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial and industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances also shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
3-6
K. The street design shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their land and providing convenient access thereto.
3.06 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS
A. Cul-de-sac streets shall only be allowed where one or more of the following criteria have been met:
1. Area topography or other physical site conditions warrant a cul-de-sac, dead-end design.
2. A through street is not physically feasible.
3. Lots on the cul-de-sac turn-around shall exceed the zoning district minimum lot width (frontage) standard by twenty-five (25) percent.
B. Cul-de-sac streets permanently designed as such, shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, including a terminal turn-around which shall be provided at the closed end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than sixty (60) feet. The length shall be measured along the centerline from the nearest intersection to the center point of the cul-de-sac.
C. Where a temporary cul-de-sac is required, the turn-around right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a plat boundary line and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to said property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is extended, the acreage covered by the turn-around outside the boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property owner fronting on the temporary turn-around.
3.07 STREET DESIGN:
A. Widths: Street right-of-way widths shall be as determined in the Comprehensive Plan and official map, and where applicable, shall conform to County and State standards for trunk highways. In cases where no standard is provided, the following minimum standards shall apply:
URBAN SECTION STREETS
Right-of-Way
Functional Classification Width Paving Width
Arterial 100 feet 44 feet
3-7
Collector (Major) 80 feet 44 feet
Collector (Minor) 80 feet 36 feet
Local 60 feet 32 feet
Marginal Access or
Frontage Street-Residential 60 feet 24 feet
Marginal Access or
Frontage Street-Commercial/
Industrial 80 feet 36 feet
Cul-de-sac turnaround 60 foot radius 45 foot radius
Cul-de-sac street 60 feet 32 feet
Municipal State Aid MnDOT Standard MnDOT Standard
RURAL SECTION STREETS
Functional Classification Right-of-Way Roadway Width*
Arterial 120 feet 44 feet
Collector (Major) 84 feet 40 feet
Collector (Minor) 84 feet 32 feet
Local 66 feet 32 feet
Marginal Access or
Frontage Street 66 feet 32 feet
Cul-de-sac 60 foot radius 45 foot radius
* In those cases where a portion of the roadway width is a graveled shoulder surface, the hard service paving shall be determined according to City policy.
B. Street Intersections: In so far as practical, streets shall intersect at right angles. In no case shall the angle formed by the intersection of two (2) streets be less than seventy-five degrees (75). Intersections having more than four (4) corners shall be prohibited. Adequate land for future intersections and interchange construction needs shall be dedicated.
C. Tangents: A tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
D. Deflections: When connecting street lines deflect from each other at one point by more than ten (10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet for arterials, three hundred (300) feet for collectors, and two hundred (200) feet for all other streets. The City Council may allow greater or lesser sight distances.
E. Street Intersection Offsets: Street intersection jogs with centerline offsets of less than two hundred (200) feet shall be prohibited.
F. Centerline Gradients: All centerline gradients shall be at least five-tenths (.5)
3-8
percent and shall not exceed the following:
1. Arterials and collector streets - five (5) percent.
2. Local streets and frontage streets - five (5) percent.
G. Centerline Curvature: The minimum horizontal curvature of streets shall be in accordance with the MnDOT Highway Design Manual for the type of street and design speed. The minimum curvature shall be three hundred (300) feet radius.
H. Access to Limited Access Highways: In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway, there shall be no direct vehicular or pedestrian access from individual lots to such highways. As a general requirement, access to such limited access highways shall be at intervals of not less than one-half (1/2) mile and through existing and established crossroads where possible. Any such proposed access shall be subject to State, County, or City approval as may be applicable.
I. Platting of Small Tracts: In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on a limited access highway where there is no convenient access to existing entrances and where access from such plat would be closer than one-half (1/2) mile from an existing access point, a temporary entrance permit may be granted. Provision shall be made in such plats for the connection of streets to neighboring land. As the neighboring land is platted and developed, and access becomes possible at a preferred location, such temporary entrance permits shall become void at the discretion of the City.
J. Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half street may be permitted. The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the remainder shall be considered in this decision. No permanent street improvement shall be permitted within a half street right-of-way. All lots having frontage or access solely from a half street are prohibited from being eligible for building permits.
K. Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except under conditions accepted by the City Council.
L. Reverse Curves: Minimum design standards for collector and arterial streets shall comply with Minnesota State Aid standards.
M. Dedication: All proposed streets shown on the plat shall be in conformity to City, County and State plans and standards and be offered for dedication as public streets unless otherwise determined by the City Council.
N. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate width, sufficient additional width shall be provided to meet the standards of this Ordinance.
O. Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required by the City Council to
3-9
promote public safety and convenience when special conditions require it.
P. Restriction of Access: Access of local streets onto arterial and collector streets shall be discouraged at intervals of less than five hundred (500) feet.
Q. Corner Radius: Roadways of street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Corners at entrances to the turn-around portions of cul-de-sacs shall be rounded by a radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
R. Curb and Gutter: All urban streets, and all streets in commercial and industrial areas, shall have curb and gutter in compliance with established City standard design detail plates, unless exempted by the City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer that curb and gutter is not necessary to control drainage.
S. Street Designation: Streets shall be designated pursuant to established City standards in compliance with these standards and as approved by the City Council. The following policies may be generally applied when designating awkward street and avenue configurations.
1. Cul-de-sacs less than three hundred feet (300') shall assume the designation of the street or avenue they abut.
2. Street names shall not be used unless approved by the City Council.
3. Loops shall be designated avenues, streets or a combination of both, depending on the depth of the configuration. Generally, the longer the length or depth, the greater the applicability for a separate street and avenue designation. For short loops, the word "circle" shall be used to indicate the configuration.
4. Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names, unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted street. In that event, it shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street. Street names shall conform to the City's Street Naming and Property Numbering System as applicable.
T. Streets in Flood Hazard Area: No street shall be approved if its final surface is at a lower elevation than two feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection elevation. The City Council may require profiles and elevations of finished streets for areas subject to flooding. Fill may be used for streets, provided such fill does not unduly increase flood heights and provided any such fill would not result in a stage increase violating the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Chapters 104 and 105, as such chapters may be amended, supplemented, or replaced from time to time, and any applicable requirements imposed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant to its rules and regulations. Drainage openings shall not restrict the flow of water so as to unduly increase flood heights and provided any such drainage opening would not violate the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Chapters 104
3-10
and 105, as such chapters may be amended, supplemented, or replaced from time to time, and any applicable requirements imposed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant to its rules and regulations.
3.08 ALLEYS:
A. Location Requirements: Alleys or service drives shall be prohibited. In commercial and industrial districts, the City Council may waive this requirement where no other definite and assured provisions are possible for service access. All loading and unloading facilities shall be located wholly within the private property, and no such facilities shall be located on or in such a way as to obstruct the free use of the City streets.
B. Widths: The right-of-way width of any permitted alleys or service drives shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet.
C. Cul-de-Sacs: Cul-de-sac alleys shall be prohibited. If found to be unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end as determined by the City.
D. Grades: All centerline gradients in permitted alleys shall be at least five-tenths (.5) percent and shall not exceed four (4) percent.
E. Prohibited: No alleys shall be permitted in residential areas after (the effective date of this Ordinance).
3.09 SIDEWALKS/PEDESTRIAN WAYS: Adequate provisions for pedestrian movement within the subdivision, along the subdivision, and to adjoining property shall be provided in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and policies established by the City Council. All sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall be designed and constructed according to established City standards.
3.10 PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. All extensions of public utilities, including water and sanitary sewer systems, shall be approved by the City Engineer.
B. Water Supply: Extensions of the public water supply system, when available, shall be designed so as to provide public water service to each lot. All water systems located in flood-prone areas, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
3-11
C. Sewage Disposal: Extension of the public sanitary sewer system, when available, shall be designed so as to provide public sewer service to each lot.
3.11 SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND STORM DRAINAGE FOR AREAS WITHOUT CENTRAL OR PUBLIC SERVICES: In areas being platted without central or public sewers, the on-site sewer system, including the size and relative location of same, shall be in conformance with City, County, State and Federal requirements including specifically any FEMA rules and regulations pertinent to on-site sewer and water. When such requirements conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. In addition to those standards, the following requirements shall also apply unless in conflict with a more restrictive requirement referenced above:
A. The subdivision shall be subject to soil and percolation tests being made to determine whether or not the lot sizes proposed will meet minimum standards of health and sanitation due to limitations of soils as shown on existing soils maps. Such tests shall be made at the expense of the applicant and a sketch map shall be submitted with the preliminary plat to identify the specific locations where tests were made.
B. No cesspools or seepage pits shall be allowed.
C. The City may prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such systems will not function due to high ground water, flooding, or unsuitable soil characteristics.
D. Storm Water Drainage Facilities: Storm water drainage facilities, where required, shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide positive drainage away from building and on-site waste disposal to accommodate frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to protect against surface erosion and siltation of surface water and to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
E. Storm Water Drainage Standards: All developments are responsible for control of surface or storm water to equal or improve pre-development conditions. Developmental drainage systems shall be provided that accept flow from upstream areas, that control, convey, and pond developmental runoff, that limit outflow to the natural pre-development rate, and that do not have detrimental impacts on downstream properties. All pipe conveyance shall be to ten (10) year design return frequency. Flood protection shall be provided for one hundred (100) year design return frequency. Where determined feasible, all ponding, detention or retention shall be designed for 100 year frequency storm condition. Flood protection for public and personal property shall be one (1) foot plus any encroachment above the floodplain.
3-12
3.12 CONDITIONS IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS: All developments in flood hazard areas shall include:
A. Construction and modification of sewage, water supply and drainage facilities to meet the standards of this Ordinance and to promote the health, safety and general welfare.
B. Construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective measures to include filling in.
C. Establishment of flood warning systems.
D. Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions enforceable by the City to restrict the type and design of uses. Such restrictions shall include floodproofing of intended uses mandated by the Minnesota State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing standards for construction shall be in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
3.13 FLOOD WARNING SIGNS IN FLOOD-PRONE AREAS:
A. The limits of the areas which have been or would be inundated by the 100-year flood shall be delineated as reasonably practical at three hundred (300) foot intervals by means of firmly placed markers of sufficient size to be easily read from a distance of twenty (20) feet. The markers shall record the maximum known depth of flooding or height to the flood protection level, whichever is greater.
B. All flood warning signs in flood-prone areas shall be in accordance with the above requirements or any other additional requirements as provided by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
C. The subdivision markers shall meet the following specifications:
1. The markers shall be on substantial permanent metal posts.
2. The marker(s) shall have notification painted white and shall be stenciled or otherwise lettered with the inscription "100-year flood elevation". This lettering is to be of a permanent nature.
3. The marker be firmly placed in the ground and be at least two (2) feet above the ground.
4. The cost of preparing and installing such markers shall be borne by the applicant and the markers shall be installed prior to the sale of lots and construction of any buildings or structures.
3-13
3.14 DRAINAGE: A complete and adequate drainage system design shall be required for the subdivision and may include a storm sewer system or system of open ditches, culverts, pipes, catch basins and ponding areas, or a combination thereof.
3.15 EASEMENTS: All easements shall be dedicated by appropriate language on the final plat as required by law and provisions of this Ordinance.
A. Drainage and Utility Easements: Easements of a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide or a width equal to the required side yard setback established by the respective zoning district in which the property is located, whichever is least, centered on rear and other lot lines, shall be provided for drainage and for public and private utilities. Lot easements shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet when no easement exists on the adjoining parcels. When it is not practical to center easements, the fully required easement width may be required along one (1) property line. Said easements shall have continuity of alignment from block to block. The easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the City Council pursuant to established City regulations, as may be amended.
B. Drainage: Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any natural watercourse or drainage channel to a width sufficient to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for storm water runoff. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding with lot lines shall be provided. Such easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width or a width equal to the required side yard setback established by the respective zoning district in which the property is located, whichever is least.
C. Exclusion from Minimum Lot Area: Easements established over wetlands and utility/pipelines shall be excluded from the calculation of minimum lot area as defined by this Ordinance.
D. Outlot Alternative: The City may at its discretion choose to require outlots rather than easements for wetlands, drainage ways and other natural features.
E. Sight: Sight easements beyond required zoning setback regulations may be required by the City and State Highway Department to protect major intersections on the street and highway system.
3.16 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL: The following guidelines shall be applied in the subdivision:
A. The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion;
B. Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses. Appropriate
3-14
control measures shall be installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one period of time;
C. When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time, as specified in the development agreements;
D. Where the top soil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for re-spreading over the areas to be planted. The soil shall be restored to a minimum depth of four (4) inches or a depth as may be established by the City Engineer and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to development;
E. Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever possible;
F. As determined by the City Engineer, runoff water shall be diverted to a sedimentation basin before allowed to enter the natural drainage system. Storm water runoff from the developed site shall not, at any time, exceed the runoff rate existing prior to development except as may be approved by the City Council.
G. The City shall have the authority to remove the topsoil for its own purposes from all dedicated streets within its corporate boundaries. Said topsoil shall be utilized in the development project from which it is taken unless otherwise specified as part of a development agreement.
H. Erosion and sediment control plans shall be developed in accordance with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency regulations and are subject to review and approval of the City Engineer, prior to construction.
3.17 PROTECTED AREAS: Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed environmentally sensitive by the City due to the existence of waterbodies, wetlands, drainageways, watercourses, floodable areas, vegetation, steep slopes or historic sites, the design of said subdivision shall clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to ensure against adverse environmental impacts. Such measures, when deemed appropriate by the City, may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
A. The establishment of easements and/or outlots over wetlands, drainageways, watercourses, and waterbodies.
B. The implementation of flood control measures.
C. The enlargement of lots or redesign of the subdivision.
D. The submission of a tree preservation plan subject to the review of the City Engineer and approval of the City Council.
E. The utilization of appropriate erosion control measures subject to approval by the
3-15
City Engineer.
F. Soil testing to determine the ability of the proposed subdivision to support development.
G. The limitation of development on slopes steeper than three to one (3:1).
H. Structure conformance to the natural limitations presented by the topography and soil so as to create the least potential of soil erosion.
3.18 TREE PRESERVATION: With respect to existing trees in new developments, all trees on the site are to be saved which do not have to be removed for street, buildings, utilities, drainage or active recreational purposes. Trees over six (6) inches in diameter that are to remain, are to be marked with a red band, and to be protected with snow fences or other suitable enclosure, prior to any excavation. The City may further require that the property owner and/or developer retain a professional forester to prepare a forest inventory and management plan for the development, in order to control and abate any existing or potential shade tree disease and to save trees from construction loss.
3.19 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES (PARK LAND DEDICATION):
A. As a prerequisite to final plat approval, and at the sole determination by the City, applicants and/or developers shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces or trails and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City's Park and Multi-Purpose Trail Funds roughly related to the anticipated effect of the plat on the park and trail system. The amounts listed in this section are the City’s best estimate of the dedication or cash contribution needed to offset the effect on those systems. The requirement may also be met with a combination of land and cash if approved by the City Council.
B. Land to be dedicated shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use as determined by the City and shall be at a location convenient to the public to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access and location.
C. The applicant shall confer with City Staff and the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee at the time the preliminary plat is under consideration, to secure a recommendation as to the location of any property that should be dedicated to the public, such as parks, playgrounds or other public property. The preliminary plat shall show the location and dimensions of all areas to be dedicated in this manner. Such contribution requirement recommendation(s) shall be sent to the Planning Commission for review and comment and subsequently to the City Council for their approval.
3-16
D. When a proposed park, playground, recreational area, or other public ground has been indicated in the City's official map or Comprehensive Plan and is located in whole or in part within a proposed plat, it shall be dedicated to the appropriate governmental unit. If the applicant elects not to dedicate an area in excess of the land required hereunder for a proposed public site that the City feels is in the public interest to acquire, the City may consider acquiring the excess land through purchase or condemnation.
E. Land area conveyed or dedicated to the City shall not be used in calculating density requirements of the City Zoning Ordinance and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for planned unit developments.
F. Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision, such areas shall not be used for credit against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, unless the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so.
G. The City, upon consideration of the particular type of development, may require that a lesser parcel of land should be dedicated due to particular features of the development. In such cases, a cash contribution shall be required above the land dedication to insure that compensation is received for the full amount of the impact on the City’s park and trail system.
H. In all new subdivisions an amount of land equaling the proportion of the gross area to be subdivided, no greater than the percentage of the monetary amount of park dedication fee pursuant to §3.19.J as a percentage of the total value of the parcel to be subdivided prior to development, or a different percentage as the City Council shall determine to be reasonably necessary as a result of the subdivision approval, when so requested by the City Council, shall be dedicated for public recreation space or other public use as established by City Council resolution. The dedicated percent of the gross area subdivided shall be in addition to property dedicated for streets, alleys, easements, or other public ways. No areas may be dedicated for public use until such areas have been approved by the City Council as suitable and necessary for the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the City.
I. All land proposed for trail and/or bikeway dedication shall be subject to the recommendations of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and the approval of the City Council.
J. When a subdivision is proposed, the Developer shall make a dedication of land for public parks and trail use, as provided for in Section 3.19.H of this Ordinance, or shall pay a cash fee in lieu of such land equal to five hundred twenty-five dollars ($525.00) per dwelling unit. Said amount is the City’s best estimate of the effect of the residential subdivision on the City’s trail system.
K. The City may elect at its sole discretion to receive a combination of cash, land, and development of the land for park and/or trail use in accordance with City policy
3-17
established by resolution of the City Council. The potential cash donation generated by the dedicated land and/or the value of the development of land shall be calculated as forth in Subsection J above. That amount shall be subtracted from the cash contribution required by Subsections H and J above.
L. Planned unit developments with mixed land uses shall make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this Section based upon the percentage of land devoted to the various uses.
M. Park cash contributions are to be calculated and established at the time of final plat approval. The City Council may require the payment at the time of final plat approval or at a later time under terms agreed upon in the development agreement. Delayed payment may include interest at a rate set by the City.
N. Cash contributions for parks and trails shall be deposited in either the City's Park Fund or multi-purpose trail fund and shall only be used for park acquisition or development, and trail acquisition or development as determined by the City. Additionally, said funds may be utilized anywhere within the City park and trail systems.
O. Wetlands, ponding areas, and drainageways accepted by the City may not be considered in the park land and/or cash contribution to the City.
P. Property being replatted with the same number of lots and same number of dwelling units shall be exempt from all park land dedication requirements. If the number of lots or the number of dwelling units is increased, or if land outside the previously recorded plat is added, then the park land dedication and/or park cash contributions shall be based on the additional lots and on the additional land being added to the plat. If the additional land does not create additional lots, then each one-third (1/3) acre added shall be considered a new lot for purposes of calculating the dedication requirements.
Q. When land is dedicated and deeded to and accepted by the City for park purposes, it shall be the responsibility of the City to maintain such dedicated property.
R. Land dedication to the City shall be in the form of lots or outlots with approved lot and block numbers.
S. If the applicant or developer does not believe that the estimates contained in this section fairly and accurately represent the effect of the subdivision on the park or trail system of the City, the applicant or developer may request that the City prepare an in-depth study of the effect of the subdivision on the park and trail system and an estimate of that effect in money and/or land. All costs of such study shall be borne by the developer or applicant. If the developer or applicant requests the preparation of such a study, no application for development submitted shall be deemed complete until the study has been completed and a determination is made as to the appropriate amount of land or money necessary to offset the effects of the
3-18
subdivision.
3.20 DEDICATION OF STORM WATER HOLDING AREAS OR PONDS: Upon approval by the City Council, the applicant may be required to dedicate to the public land for storm water holding areas or ponds. The storm water holding area dedication shall not be considered part of the dedication for parks and recreation purposes or trail/bikeway purposes.
3.21 MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE OPEN SPACE: In the event certain land areas or structures are provided within the subdivision for private recreational use or as service facilities, the owner of such land and buildings shall enter into an agreement with the City to assure the continued operation and maintenance to a predetermined reasonable standard. These common areas may be placed under the ownership of one of the following depending upon which is most appropriate:
A. Dedicated to public where a community-wide use would be anticipated;
B. Applicant's ownership and control; or
C. Property owners association ownership and control, provided all of the following conditions are met:
1. The property owners association must be established prior to the sale of any lot;
2. Membership must be mandatory for each owner and any successor in interest;
3. The open space restrictions must be in perpetuity not for a given period of years;
4. The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of the recreational area and facilities.
5. Landowners (homeowners) must pay their prorated share of the cost and any assessment levied by the association that can become a lien on the property in accordance with law; and
6. The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs.
3.22 MINIMUM DESIGN FEATURES: The design features set forth in this Ordinance are minimum requirements. The City may impose additional or more stringent requirements concerning lot size, streets and overall design as deemed appropriate considering the
3-19
property being subdivided based upon site considerations and the St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan.
4-1
SECTION 4. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Subdivision
4.01 Monuments
4.02 Streets and Alleys
4.03 Sidewalks
4.04 Public Utilities Design
4.05 Water Supply
4.06 Sewage Disposal
4.07 Drainage
4.08 Building Site Improvements for Flood-Prone Areas
4.09 Utilities Location
4.10 Street Lighting Requirements
4.11 Inspection
4.12 Certificate of Occupancy
4.01 MONUMENTS:
A. Monuments shall be placed at all block and lot corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the City. Monuments shall be metal and shall be placed by a Registered Engineer or Registered Land Surveyor. Monument placement shall meet the current accepted standards of practice for surveying including the Stearns County Surveyor requirements.
B. All lot corners and survey control monuments shall be set and in place at the time the plat is recorded. An exception to this requirement may be granted for up to one (1) year by the City Council, provided such approval is made part of the development contract and a financial guarantee in a form determined by the City Attorney is provided.
C. Stakes showing the locations of easements shall be provided by the applicant upon request of the City. The stakes shall be wood laths and will be used only to insure the proper location of utilities on the easements. The stakes shall not be intended to be permanent survey monuments.
4.02 STREETS AND ALLEYS:
A. Grading: The full width of the right-of-way of each street and alley dedicated in the plat shall be cleared and graded in accordance with the plan approved by the City Engineer. Boulevards shall be graded to an approved gross slope not less than two (2) percent, nor more than six (6) percent.
B. Paving: All streets and alleys shall be improved with a concrete or bituminous
4-2
surface. Streets to be paved shall be surfaced for a nine (9) ton axle weight capacity using current Minnesota Highway Department design standards and in accordance with City standard design detail plates. No building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel in a subdivision prior to the installation of the first lift (base course) of bituminous surfacing or concrete surfacing on the streets thereof. Exceptions to this provision may be granted by the City Council at their discretion as part of a development contract.
C. Soil Investigation: To determine subgrade soils classification and bearing capacity of the soils in the proposed development, a soil investigation report shall be prepared under the supervision of a soils engineer associated with a qualified soils testing service. Report of the results of the soils investigation shall be provided to the City Engineer. The report shall contain the design recommendation for street section based on nine (9) ton design. In proposed streets, soils investigation shall be performed at intervals not to exceed three hundred (300) lineal feet. The soil borings completed during the investigation shall be at least ten (10) feet in depth below the proposed finished grade. Ground water levels shall be reported at each boring. Elevations shall be in mean sea level datum. Locations of borings shall measure in the field and accurately shown on the plans.
D. Concrete Curb and Gutter: All curb shall be concrete with integral gutter. The standard curb shall be vertical face (Type B-6-18) in accordance with City standard design templates. In new residential developments where access locations to lots are not known, a surmountable curb (Type D418) in accordance with City standard design templates may be used subject to the approval of the City Council if the radius of curvature of the street is two hundred (200) feet or larger and except at intersections and catch basin inlets.
E. Boulevards: All boulevards shall have four (4) inches of topsoil (black dirt) placed on them and then shall be sodded or seeded.
4.03 SIDEWALKS: Sidewalks shall be concrete, a minimum of six (6) feet in width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the City standard design detail plates.
4.04 PUBLIC UTILITIES DESIGN: Where public utilities are available and/or are to be installed, the following minimum design standards shall apply:
A. Water Main:
1. Water main size shall be a minimum six (6) inches diameter. Water main size up to eight (8) inches may be utilized as a standard and minimum distribution size along with six (6) inches. Water main shall be ductile iron pipe and shall meet all the requirements of the City Engineer's Association of Minnesota standard utility specification for Water main and service line installation and American Water Works Association standard, as may be
4-3
amended.
2. Mains shall be valved at intervals not to exceed eight hundred (800) feet. Wedge gate valve shall be installed as main valves. Valve shall also be installed at street intersection and branches in the distribution system or in locations as determined by the City Engineer.
3. "Dead end" mains shall be looped if exceeding the allowed length of a cul-de-sac. The distribution system may require installing a larger main to benefit the entire water service in the City. The City Engineer shall determine location and size of main larger than six (6) or eight (8) inches in residential area. In commercial/industrial areas, Water main up to twelve (12) inches may be required to meet normal distribution required in the development. The cost of normal distribution size and appurtenances shall be the responsibility of the developer. Size of pipe over and above normal distribution shall be installed and financed in accordance with City policy.
B. Fire Hydrants: Installation shall be pursuant to plans approved by the City Engineer and local fire fighting authority and shall be located in accordance with Insurance Service Office (ISO) standards.
C. Sanitary Sewer:
1. Sanitary sewer shall be a minimum of eight (8) inch pipe and shall be of a material approved for use in the City by the City Engineer. Sanitary sewer grades and installation shall conform to the Recommended Standards for Sewage Works latest edition by the Great Lakes - Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers and the City Engineer's Association of Minnesota standard utilities specification for sanitary sewer. Main size will be determined by the sewage flow and grade in accordance with the recommendations of the City Engineer.
2. Size of pipe shall be determined by lateral service and/or trunk service. Trunk service shall be the responsibility of the property served and City Council shall establish cost distribution policy. Lateral service shall be the responsibility of the property serviced and cost shall be borne by the serviced property.
3. Sanitary sewer service shall be a minimum of four (4) inches and shall be installed in accordance with the City's standard detail templates.
D. House Services: Each house service shall be run from the main to the property line, where a cap or plug shall be placed until the service is extended to the structure. A one (1) inch Type K copper water service, or approved equal; corporation cock, curb box and stop; and four (4) inch PVC plastic pipe, or approved equal, sewer service shall be the minimum requirements. All product types shall be approved by the City Engineer.
4-4
E. Reproducible "as-built" drawings showing all utilities and improvements shall be furnished to the City by the applicant of all required improvements in developments where the applicant has been responsible for improvements. Such "as-built" drawings shall be certified to be true and accurate by the registered engineer responsible for the installation of the improvements.
4.05 WATER SUPPLY:
A. Water lines shall be installed and connected to the public system to serve all lots within the proposed subdivision under the provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances. The City Council shall require the installation of water mains, at the applicant’s expense or under the provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances, unless said applicant can prove to the City Council that extension of the existing water system is not feasible in the development of the subdivision and that adequate water facilities will be otherwise provided, in which case the City Council may permit the installation of individual wells.
B. An individual well, if permitted by the City Council, shall be constructed in accordance with the Minnesota State Well Code. The applicant shall provide evidence that lots proposed for individual wells will have a good chance of securing an adequate supply of potable water.
4.06 SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Sanitary sewer lines shall be installed and connected to the public system to serve all lots within the proposed subdivision under the provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances. The City Council shall require the installation of sanitary sewer mains, at the applicant’s expense or under the provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances.
B. When a subdivision will be able to be served by sanitary sewer within six (6) years, the City may require that sewer mains and service connections be installed within the subdivision and the entire system connected to a temporary, private central sewage treatment mechanism. The cost for such improvements is to be borne by the applicant.
C. In areas being developed for building sites with lots totaling twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more for soil absorption sewage disposal and the City does not have plans to provide public sewer and water within six (6) years, individual on-site sewage disposal systems may be provided for each lot.
D. There shall be no overflow outlets from septic tanks or seepage pits allowing effluent to flow to any waterway, drainage way or roadside ditch.
E. The applicant or owner shall be required to provide appropriate soil borings and
4-5
percolation tests in order to determine proper sewage system design. Where on-site residential sewer systems are to be installed, the rules and regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Minnesota Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards (Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080) as may be amended.
F. Any means or methods of sewer disposal including septic tanks and seepage pits in the subdivision shall be allowed to exist only if in compliance with Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) rules and regulations, requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and Minnesota Rules 7080, as may be amended.
4.07 DRAINAGE: All surface and underground drainage systems shall be installed by the applicant to adequately remove all natural drainage that accumulates on the developed property. All such systems shall provide complete removal and a permanent solution for the removal of drainage water and shall be subject to City review and approval.
4.08 BUILDING SITE IMPROVEMENTS FOR FLOOD-PRONE AREAS:
A. No lot will be sold or building constructed in an area subject to flood prior to completion of all flood protection works or measures planned for such lot and necessary facilities.
B. No subdivision shall be approved for floodway areas if anticipated levees, fill, structures or other features will individually or collectively increase flood flows or damages. The City Council shall reasonably assume an equal degree of encroachment on the opposite side of the watercourse in calculating possible effects of the proposed uses.
C. New building sites for any structures, residences, motels, resorts and all manufactured home parks/subdivisions, and similar uses for human occupation shall not be permitted in floodway areas. These uses may be permitted outside the floodway if building sites are filled to a height not more than one (1) foot above the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area. Required fill areas shall extend fifteen (15) feet beyond the limits of extended structures. If the subdivision is not to be serviced with sewer, it shall include areas for on-site waste disposal at or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with FEMA rules and regulations.
D. Building sites for structures other than those used for human occupancy outside of floodway areas shall ordinarily be filled as provided above. However, the City Council may allow subdivision of areas for commercial and industrial use at a lower elevation if the applicant protects the areas to the regulatory flood protection elevation by levees, flood walls, channels modifications or other protective techniques; or if the applicant agrees to protect uses through structural floodproofing, flood warning systems or other techniques specified in this
4-6
Ordinance.
E. Should the City Council determine that only a part of a proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and require that the specifications for development be consistent with its determination.
F. When someone other than the applicant intends to develop the plat, and the City Council determines that additional use controls are required to insure safe development, it may require the applicant to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on the face of the final recorded plat.
4.09 UTILITIES LOCATION: Except as expressly allowed by the City, all utilities shall be placed underground. All underground work shall be completed prior to street surfacing. All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles.
4.10 STREET LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS: The need to install street lighting shall be determined by the City Council. Where required, the minimum requirement for street lighting facilities shall be one (1) eight thousand (8,000) lumen light, or equal, at each street intersection within or abutting the subdivision. At least one (1) street light shall be erected within blocks having a length of nine hundred (900) feet or greater and no street light shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of another street light except for white-way areas. Light standards must be approved by the City.
4.11 INSPECTION: All required improvements shall be inspected by the City Engineer or City approved consultant during construction, at the expense of the applicant.
4.12 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the City Building Official for any building in the subdivision prior to all improvements outlined in the development contract having been installed. Exceptions to this provision may be granted by the City Council at their discretion as part of the development contract.
5-2
SECTION 5. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENT
Subdivision
5.01 Improvements Required
5.02 Construction Plans, Inspection and Warranty
5.03 Installation of Improvements
5.04 Development Contract
5.05 Financial Guarantee
5.06 Improvements Completed Prior to Approval of the Final Plat
5.01 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED: Prior to the approval of a final plat by the City Council, the applicant shall have agreed, in the manner set forth below, to install the following improvements on the site when required by the City Council, in conformity with approved construction plans and in conformity with all applicable standards and ordinances:
A. Monuments: Monuments are to be placed in the subdivision in accordance with Section 4.01 of this Ordinance.
B. Grading: The full width of the right-of-way of each street dedicated in the plat shall be cleared and graded as outlined in Section 4.02.A of this Ordinance.
C. Pavement: All streets shall be improved with concrete or bituminous surface, except as may be approved by action of the City Council as part of a development contract. Pavement standards are outlined in Section 4.02.B of this Ordinance.
D. Public Water: Public water facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards and specifications as outlined in Section 4.04.A of this Ordinance and subject to the approval of the City Engineer, at the expense of the applicant.
E. Public Sanitary Sewer: Public sanitary waste disposal systems shall be installed in accordance with the standards and specifications as outlined in Section 4.04.C of this Ordinance and subject to the approval of the City Engineer, at the expense of the applicant.
F. Curb and Gutter: Concrete curb and gutter, as recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council, shall be installed along both sides of all streets to the standards listed in Section 4.02.D of this Ordinance.
G. Drainage Facilities: Such facilities and easements shall be installed at the expense of the applicant under City approval as will adequately provide for the drainage of surface waters, and storm sewer system may be required. Drainageway easements or land dedication may be required when such easements or land is needed in the public interest for purposes of flood plain management, proper drainage, wetland protection, prevention of erosion, pedestrian access to water bodies, or other pubic purpose.
5-3
H. Utilities: All utilities, including but not limited to telephone, cable television, electric and/or gas lines, shall be placed as outlined in Section 4.09 of this Ordinance.
I. Larger Facilities: Where a larger size water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, storm drain or similar facility is required to serve areas outside the subdivision, the larger facility shall be constructed at the applicant’s expense unless provided for as outlined in Section 5.03.A of this Ordinance.
J. Miscellaneous Facilities: Tree plantings, street name signs, traffic control signs, pavement marking and other improvements may be required and be installed at the expense of the applicant.
5.02 CONSTRUCTION PLANS, INSPECTION AND WARRANTY:
A. Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects with the standards and ordinances of the City shall be prepared at the applicant's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota, and said plans shall contain professional certification. Such plans together with the quantities of construction items shall be submitted to the City Engineer for an estimate of the total costs of the required improvements and recommendation to the City Council. Upon City Council approval, such plans shall become a part of the required written agreement. The tracings of the plans approved by the Engineer, plus two (2) prints, shall be furnished to the City to be filed as a public record.
B. All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the provisions of these regulations shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City Engineer at the applicant's expense, and acceptance by the City shall be subject to the City Engineer's certificate of compliance with the contract.
C. The applicant and/or developer shall provide to the City a written warranty that all required improvements on the site meet or exceed all City standards and that such improvements have been inspected and tested in regards to the City standards. The applicant and/or developer shall be responsible for having all such inspections and testing completed at their expense.
5.03 INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Payment: The required improvements as listed are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the applicant. If any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit to such lands, to be allocated in accordance with City policies.
5-4
B. City Installation Right: The City reserves the right to elect to install all or any portion of the improvements required under this section pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, as may be amended. The City may require the applicant to post a financial guarantee as outlined in Section 5.05 of this Ordinance to ensure payment of assessments for the costs of installing the required improvements.
5.04 DEVELOPMENT CONTRACT:
A. Private Installation of Improvements:
1. Prior to the installation of any required improvements by the applicant and prior to approval of the plat, the applicant shall enter into an agreement in writing with the City requiring the applicant/developer to furnish and construct said improvements at their sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract conditions. This shall include provision for observation of details of construction by the City Engineer and shall grant to the City Engineer authority to coordinate the work and improvements to be done under said contract by any subcontractor authorized to proceed thereunder and with any other work being done or contracted by the City in the vicinity. The agreement shall require all public and private utility material standards and installation requirements be met and shall be approved by the City Engineer.
2. The agreement shall require the applicant to make an escrow deposit or furnish an irrevocable letter of credit or a certified check as is determined by the City. The amount of the deposit or penal amount of the security is to be based on the City Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the contract, including the cost of inspection. The deposit or penal amount shall equal one hundred fifty (150) percent of the City Engineer's estimate.
3. On request of the applicant, but at the sole discretion of the City, the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat. In such event, and if evidence is presented that the described work and improvements have been paid for, the amount of the deposit or bond may be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to the acceptance of the plat.
4. The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be determined by the City Council, upon recommendation of the Engineer after consultation with the applicant. It shall be reasonable with relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper coordination with construction activities in the plat and subdivision.
5. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
5-5
6. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision improvements without special written approval of the City Council.
B. City Installation of Improvements:
1. Any person desiring to have utility and street improvements installed may request the City to install them, subject to the following conditions and to the approval and authorization thereof by the City Council and as authorized by State law.
2. If so approved by the City Council, the person requesting the installation of said utility and street improvements shall supply a security approved by the City running to the City guaranteeing payment for the installation of the improvements in an amount based on the City Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be installed. The deposit or penal amount shall equal one hundred fifty (150) percent of the City Engineer's estimate of the cost of installation of the improvements. The security to be supplied the City shall be payable on such terms and conditions as found by the City Council to be reasonable and necessary to insure that the costs of the improvements are properly secured and paid.
3. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
4. The provisions of Section 5.04.B do not apply to any improvement installed in a platted block upon which at least fifty (50) percent of the lots thereof have a dwelling or other building constructed and occupied.
5. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision improvements without special approval of the City Council.
5.05 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE:
A. The contract provided for in Section 5.04 shall require the applicant to make an escrow deposit or provide a certified check or irrevocable letter of credit as determined by the City. The escrow deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit shall conform to the requirements of this section.
B. Escrow Deposit, Certified Check:
1. If an escrow deposit or certified check is required, the escrow deposit or certified check shall be made with the City Treasurer in a sum equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the total costs calculated as provided in Section 5.04, as estimated by the City for all the improvements to be furnished and installed by the applicant pursuant to the contract, which have
5-6
not been completed prior to approval of the plat. An additional cash deposit shall be furnished for costs of City inspections, and any necessary review by the City Engineer and City Attorney. Such deposit shall be equal to a sum determined by the City Engineer.
2. The City shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said deposit or check for any cost and expense incurred by the City for completion of the work in case of default of the applicant under said contract, and for any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof.
3. Upon completion of the work and termination of any liability, the balance remaining in said deposit or check from Section 5.05.B above shall be refunded to the applicant.
C. Irrevocable Letter of Credit:
1. If the applicant is required to furnish an Irrevocable Letter of Credit, the penal sum shall be payable to the order of the City and delivered to the City in an amount calculated as provided in Section 5.04, as estimated by the City Engineer of all the improvements to be furnished and installed by the applicant pursuant to the contract, which have not been completed prior to the approval of the plat. An additional cash deposit shall be furnished for costs of City inspections. Such deposit shall be equal to a sum determined by the City Engineer.
2. The Irrevocable Letter of Credit shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and filed with the City Treasurer.
3. The City shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said letter of credit for any cost and expense incurred by the City for completion of the work in case of default of the applicant under said contract, and for any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof.
5.06 IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAT: Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to application for approval of the final plat, or execution of the contract for installation of the required improvements, shall be accepted as equivalent improvements in compliance with these requirements only if the City Engineer certifies that the existing improvements conform to applicable standards and if evidence of payment for the work that has been completed is presented in such form as the City reasonably requires.
6-1
SECTION 6. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Subdivision
6.01 Non-platted Subdivisions
6.02 Variances, City Council Approval, Standards
6.03 Violations and Penalty
6.04 Schedule of Administrative Fees, Charges, and Expenses
6.01 NON-PLATTED SUBDIVISIONS
A. Registered Land Surveys: All registered land surveys shall be filed subject to the same procedures as required for the filing of a preliminary plat for platting purposes. The standards and requirements set forth in these regulations shall apply to all registered land surveys.
B. Metes and Bounds: Except in highly unique situations as may be allowed by the City Council, conveyances by metes and bounds shall be prohibited where any lot or lots involved are less than ten (10) acres in area or have a width of less than three hundred thirty (330) feet at the building setback line.
6.02 VARIANCES, CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL, STANDARDS:
A. Findings: The City Council may approve a variance from the minimum standards of this Ordinance (not procedural provisions) when, in its opinion, exceptional and undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In approving any variance, the City Council shall prescribe any conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable to the public interest. In making its approval, the City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. A variance shall only be approved when the City Council finds that each and every one of the following apply:
1. That there are special circumstances or highly unique conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land.
2. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which property is situated.
3. That the variance is to correct inequities resulting from an extreme physical hardship such as topography.
6-2
4. Hardships relating to economic difficulties shall not be considered for the purpose of granting a variance.
5. That the hardship is not a result of an action or actions by the owner, applicant or any agent thereof.
6. The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or Official Zoning Map.
B. Procedures:
1. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, as may be amended, an application for a variance shall be approved or denied by the City Council within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless notice of extension is provided by the City or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required State or Federal agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60) days unless this limitation is waved by the applicant. If the variance request is not approved, the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the official proceedings of the City and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
2. Request for variances, as provided within this Section, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council Resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use. The request for variance shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when all the information requirements are complied with.
3. Upon receipt of said application, the City shall set a public hearing following property hearing notification as applicable. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing, and report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and written notification of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the property in question. The Zoning Administrator shall have the right to provide additional property owners notification beyond the one-quarter (1/4) mile distance if it is judged that the request will have impact upon additional properties. The County Assessors records shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and ownership of said property. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding. In the case of a proposed subdivision which abuts a municipal
6-3
boundary, notices shall be sent to the appropriate City Board of Supervisors.
4. For properties within the Shoreland Overlay or Scenic River District or one hundred (100) year floodplain, the City shall submit to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days notice of the hearing.
5. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance, provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this Section.
6. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.
7. The Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said information to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure of an applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be rounds for denial of the request.
8. The applicant or representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission to answer questions concerning the proposed variance.
9. The Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and recommend approval or denial of the request. The Planning Commission shall reach a decision within sixty (60) days after the first regular meeting at which the variance request was considered by the Commission, unless a delay in action is requested by the applicant. The Commission’s recommendation and the City staff’s report shall be presented to the City Council.
10. The City Council shall not grant a variance until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission. If, however, the Planning Commission has not acted upon the request after sixty (60) days from the first regular meeting at which the request was considered, the City Council may proceed with its consideration and action on the request.
11. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City shall place the report and recommendations on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
6-4
12. The City Council shall review the application and may at its option conduct a public hearing on the request.
13. A variance of this Ordinance shall be by a majority vote of the entire City Council.
14. All decisions by the City Council involving a variance request shall be final except that an aggrieved person or persons shall have the right to appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision to the Stearns County District Court.
15. A copy of all decisions granting variances for properties in the Shoreland Overlay, Scenic River District, or one hundred (100) year floodplain shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
16. Whenever a variance has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for the variance affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial, except as follows:
a. If the applicant or property owner can clearly demonstrate that the circumstances surrounding the previous variance application have changed significantly.
b. The City Council may reconsider such matter by a majority vote of the entire City Council.
17. If a request for a variance receives approval of the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the Stearns County Recorder within thirty (30) days of the City Council approval date. The applicant, immediately upon recording such, or as soon as is reasonably possible, shall furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.
6.03 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
A. Sale of Lots from Unrecorded Plats: It shall be a misdemeanor to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with, any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance unless said plan, plat or replat shall have first been recorded in the Stearns County Recorder’s office.
B. Receiving or Recording Unapproved Plats: It shall be unlawful for a private individual to receive or record in any public office any plans, plats of land laid out in building lots and streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots
6-5
fronting on or adjacent thereto, and located within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, unless the same shall bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the City Council.
C. Misrepresentations: It shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in Minnesota Statutes 606.02, Subd. 3 for any person owning an addition or subdivision of land within the City to represent that any improvement upon any of the streets, alleys or avenues of said addition or subdivision or any sewer or utility in said addition or subdivision has been constructed according to the plans and specifications approved by the City Council, or has been supervised or inspected by the City, when such improvements have not been so constructed, supervised or inspected.
D. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in Minnesota Statutes 606.02, Subd. 3. Each day during which compliance is delayed or such violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense and may be prosecuted as such.
6.04 SCHEDULES OF ADMINISTRATIVE FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
A. Fees and charges, as well as expenses incurred by the City for engineering, planning, attorney, and other services related to the processing of applications under this Ordinance shall be established by resolution of the City Council and collected by the Zoning Administrator for deposit in the City's accounts. Fees for the processing of requests for platting, major and minor subdivisions, review of plans, and such other subdivision-related procedures may from time to time be established by City Council resolution. The City Council may also establish fees by resolution for public hearings, special meetings, or other such City Council or Planning Commission actions as are necessary to process applications.
B. Such fees, charges and estimated expenses (as well as a deposit, if so required by the Zoning Administrator) shall be collected prior to City action on any application. All such applications shall be accompanied by a written statement between the City and the applicant/owner (when the applicant is not the same person or entity as the landowner, both the owner and the applicant must sign the agreement) whereby the applicant/owner agrees to pay all applicable fees, charges and expenses as set by City resolution as provided above, and which allows the City to assess the above fees, charges and expenses against the landowner if such monies are not paid within thirty (30) days after a bill is sent to the applicant/landowner.
C. These fees shall be in addition to building permit fees, inspection fees, trunk storm water facility costs, zoning fees, charges, expenses and other such fees, charges and expenses currently required by the City or which may be established by City Council resolution in the future.

SECTION 1
TITLE AND APPLICATION

Subdivision

1.1	Title
1.2	Intent and Purpose
1.3	Relation to Comprehensive Plan
1.4	Standard Requirements
1.5	Uses Not Provided for Within Zoning Districts
1.6	Monuments
1.7	Separability
1.8	Authority
1.9	Comprehensive  Revision



1.1	TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the St. Augusta City Zoning Ordinance, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this Ordinance".



1.2	INTENT AND PURPOSE: This is an ordinance regulating the use of land in St. Augusta including the regulation of the location, size, use, and height of buildings, the arrangement of buildings on lots, and the density of population for the purpose of:

A      Protecting the public health, safety, order, convenience and general welfare.

B.	Promoting	orderly	development	and	redevelopment	of	the	residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, and public areas:

C.	Conserving the natural and scenic beauty and attractiveness of the community.

D.	Conserving, protecting, and developing natural resources.

E.		Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land throughout the community.

F.	Preserving agricultural areas.

G.	Promoting orderly development of the community to provide adequate levels of service	in areas of public safety, utilities, service, transportation, and administration in a financially responsible manner.
 
1.3	RELATION TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: It is the policy of St. Augusta that the enforcement, amendment, and administration of this Ordinance be accomplished with due consideration of the recommendations contained in the City Comprehensive  Plan as  developed  and  amended  from  time  to  time  by  recommendation  of  the  Planning
.Commission and approval by the City Council of the City. The City Council recognizes the City Comprehensive  Plan as the  policy to  regulate  land use and development  in
accordance with  the policies and purpose herein set forth.



1.4	STANDARD  REQUIREMENTS:

A		In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.

8.		Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statutes, resolution, or regulation of any  kind, the  regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher  standards  or  requirements shall prevail.

C.	Except as herein provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used, for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with this Ordinance.

D.	Except as herein provided, no building, structure, or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building permit shall be granted that does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance.                         ·

E.		No yard or lot existing in the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.

F.	This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate  any  easement,  restrictions, covenants, relating to the use of land or imposed on lands within the City by private declaration or agreement, but where the provisions of this Ordinance are more restrictive than any such easement, restriction, or covenant, or the provision of any private agreement, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
 
1.5	USES NOT PROVIDED FOR WITHIN ZONING  DISTRICTS:   Whenever  in  any
zoning district a use is  neither specifically permitted nor denied, the use shall be considered prohibited. In such cases, the City Council, on their own initiative or upon request, may conduct a study to determine if the use is acceptable and if so, what zoning district would be most appropriate and the determination as to conditions and standards relating to development of the use. The City Council or property owner, upon receipt of the staff study, shall if appropriate, initiate an amendment to the zoning regulations to provide for the particular use under consideration or shall find that the use is not compatible for development within the City.



1.6	MONUMENTS: For the purpose of this Ordinance, all international, federal, state, county and other official monuments, benchmarks, triangulation points, and stations shall be preserved in their precise locations; and it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to insure that these markers are maintained in good condition during and following construction and development. All section, one-quarter (1/4) section, and one­ sixteenth (1/16) section corners shall be duly described and tied.



1.7	SEPARABILITY: Every section, prov1s1on, or part  of  this  Ordinance  or  any permit issued pursuant  to  this  Ordinance  is  declared  separable  from  every  other section, provision, or part thereof  to the extent that  if any  section,  provision,  or  part of this Ordinance or any permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not invalidate. any other section, provision, or part thereof.



1.8	AUTHORITY: This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota Statutes 462.351 to 462.363.



1.9	COMPREHENSIVE REVISION: The City Council intends this Ordinance to be a comprehensive revision to Ordinance No. 83-1 and all other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance, as amended. Any act done, offense committed, or rights accruing or accrued, or liability, penalty incurred or imposed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance is not affected by its enactment.
 
SECTION 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS

Subdivision

2.1	Rules
2.2	Definitions



2.1	RULES:  The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:

A.	The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.

B.	The  present  tense  includes  the  past  and  future  tenses,  and  the  future  the present.

C.	The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.

D.	The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

E.	Whenever   a  word  or  term  defined  hereinafter  appears  in  the  text  of  this Ordinance, its meaning shall be constructed as set forth in such definition .

F.	All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot.

G.	Whenever a calculation is made based upon the provisions herein, if a fraction of a number results, the more restrictive rounding to a whole number shall apply. ·



2.2	DEFINITIONS:	The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as follows:

A.	Abutting:   Making direct contact with or immediately .bordering.

Accessory Building, or Use:  A subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use.

Addition: A physical enlargement of an existing structure.

Adjacent:  In close proximity to or neighboring, not necessarily abutting.
 
Administrative	Permit: A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with procedures specified in this Ordinance.

Agricultural Building: A structure on agricultural land  designed  and constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products. An agricultural building shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged; nor shall it be a place used by the public.

Agricultural Use: The use of land for the growing and/or production of field crops,	livestock, and livestock products for the production of income including but not limited to the following:

1.	Field crops including but not limited to: barley, soybeans, nursery stock, garden crops, corn, hay, oats, potatoes, rye, sorghum, and sunflowers.

2.	Livestock including but not limited to: dairy and beef cattle, goats, horses, sheep, hogs, poultry, game birds and other animals including dogs, ponies, deer, rabbits, and mink.

3.	Livestock products including but not limited to: milk, butter, cheese, eggs, meat, fur and honey.

Animals:

1.	Domestic Animals. House pets such as dogs, cats, and birds which can be contained within a principal structure throughout the entire year, provided	that containment can be accomplished without special modification to the structure requiring a building permit from the City. Domestic animals shall include birds and rabbits normally sheltered outside the home.

2.	Farm Animals. Cattle, hogs, bees, sheep, goats, chickens,  turkeys, horses and other animals commonly accepted as farm animals  in the State of Minnesota.

3.	Wild Animals or Exotic Animals. Any mammal, amphibian, reptile or bird which is of a species not usually domesticated, and of a species which, due to size, wild nature or other characteristics, is dangerous to humans. The term includes animals and birds the keeping of which is licensed by the state or federal government, such as wolves, and raptors. By way of example and not of limitation, the term includes: snakes, eagles, ocelots, jaguars, cougars, weasels, ferrets, badgers, monkeys, chimpanzees, deer and bison. The term also includes crossbreeds such as the cross between dogs and coyotes and dogs and wolves.
 
Antenna, Personal Wireless Service:  A device consisting  of a metal,  carbon fiber, or other electromagnetically conducive rods or elements, usually arranged in a circular array on a single supporting pole or other structure, and used for the transmission and reception of radio waves  in wireless communications including cellular; personal communication  services  (PCS),  enhanced  specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services, and including the support structure thereof.

Antenna, Public Utility Microwave: A parabolic dish or cornucopia shaped electromagnetically reflective or conductive element used for the transmission and/or reception of point to point UHF or VHF radio waves in wireless telephone communications, and including the supporting structure thereof.

Antenna, Radio and Television, Broadcast Transmitting: A wire, set of wires, metal or carbon fiber · rod or other electromagnetic element used  to  transmit public or commercial broadcast radio or television programming, and including the support structure thereof.

Antenna, Radio and Television Receiving: A wire,  set  of  wires,  metal  or carbon fiber element(s), other than satellite dish antennas, used to receive radio, television, or electromagnetic waves, and including the supporting structure thereof.

Antenna, Satellite Dish: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses and including the support structure thereof. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs (television receive only) and satellite microwave antennas.

Antenna,  Short-Wave  Radio Transmitting  and Receiving:  A wire,  set of wires or a device, consisting of a metal, carbon fiber, or other electromagnetically conductive element used for the transmission and reception of radio waves used for short-wave radio communications, and including the supporting structure thereof.

Antenna Support Structure: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower,  tripod,  or any other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving of radio frequency energy.

Applicant:	The owner, their agent or person having legal control, ownership and/or interest in land which the provisions of ·this Ordinance are being considered for or reviewed.
 
Automobile Repair, Major: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle steam cleaning.

Automobile  Repair, Minor:	Minor repairs, incidental body and fender work, · painting and upholstering, replacement of parts and motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross weight,  but  not  including  any  operation  specified  under  "automobile  repair, major''.

Automobile Wash (Car Wash): A building or area that provides facilities for washing and cleaning motor vehicles, which may use production line methods with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices, and which may employ some hand labor.

Awning: A- roof-like cover that is temporary in nature and that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway  or window from the elements.

8.	Basement: A portion of a building located partly underground but having half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.

Bay:  Cantilevered area of a room.

Block: That property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or railroad right-of-way  or unsubdivided acreage.

Boarding House (Rooming or Lodging House): A building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not to exceed twenty (20) persons.

Buffer: The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences, or landscape planting to screen or partially screen a use or property from the vision of another use or property, and thus reduce undesirable influences such as: sight, noise, dust and other external effects.

Buildable Area:  The space remaining on a lot after the minimum setback and open space requirements of this Ordinance have been met.

Building: Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any  kind and when said structures are
 
divided by party walls without  openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.

Building Height: The vertical  distance  above a reference datum  measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either or the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:

1.	The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five (5) foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more then ten (10) feet above lowest grade.

2.	An elevation ten (10) feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or  ground surface described in Item 1 above is more than ten (10) feet above lowest grade.

The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.

Building Line: A line parallel to the street right-of-way, street easements, or ordinary high water level at any story level of an  existing  building  and representing the minimum distance which all or any part of the existing building is set back from said right-of-way, easement or ordinary high water level. In the case of street easements,  the building line shall be the required front yard plus one-half (1/2) the easement width measured from the centerline.    -

Building Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the building and the lot line.

Business: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.

C.		Canopy: An accessory roof-like structure, which is either attached  to  or detached from an allowable primary building; which is open on all sides, other than where attached; and, which is located over and designed to provide cover for entrances, exits, walkways, and approved off-street vehicle service c;ireas.

Cemetery: A parcel or tract of  land used or  intended to  be used for  the  burial of the  dead  including  columbariums,   crematories,   mausoleums   and   mortuaries when  operated within  the  boundaries  of such cemetery. ·

Channel: A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or periodically.
 
Church: A building and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.

City Attorney: The person designated by the City Council to be  the  City Attorney for St. Augusta.

City Building Official: The person designated by the City Council to be the City Building Official for St. Augusta .

City Council:  The City Council of St. Augusta.

City Engineer: The person designated by the City Council to be the  City Engineer for St. Augusta.

City Planner: The person designated by the City Council to be the City Planner for St. Augusta .

Clear Cutting:  The removal of an entire stand of trees and woodland.

Club or Lodge: A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, with the use of the premises being restricted to members and their guests.

Cluster	Development:	A	development	pattern  and  technique	whereby structures are arranged in closely related groups to make the most efficient use of the natural amenities of the land as accomplished through a planned unit · development.

Common Open Space: Any open space including parks, nature areas, playgrounds, trails, and recreational buildings and structures which is an integral part of a development and is not owned on an individual basis by each owner of the dwelling unit.

Community Center: A building or room or group of rooms within a building designed specifically as a gathering place for the general public or for a specific segment of the general public and operated on a non-profit basis.

Community Water and Sewer System: Utility systems serving a group of buildings, lot, or any area of the community, with the design and construction of such utility system as approved by the community and the State of Minnesota.

Comprehensive Plan: A comprehensive plan prepared by the City, including a compilation of policy statement goals, standards and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes  of  land use,  places, and structures,  and for the general  physical development  of the  City,  including
 
any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.

Conditional Use: Those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions, or uses specifically designated in each zoning district, which for the respective conduct or performance in such designated districts may require reasonable, but special, unusual or extraordinary limitations peculiar to the use for the protection, promotion and preservation of the general public welfare, health and safety, and the integrity of the City Comprehensive Plan and for which a conditional use permit is required.

Conditional Use Permit: A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with procedures specified in this Ordinance, as a flexibility device to enable the City Council to assign dimensions to a proposed use or conditions surrounding it after consideration of adjacent uses and their functions and  the  special  problems which the proposed use presents.

Contractor: General contractors and builders engaged in the construction of buildings, either residences or commercial structures, as well as heavy construction contractors engaged in activities such as paving, highway and utility construction.

Contractor's Storage Yard: That part of a lot or parcel upon which a construction contractor maintains its business office and an area enclosed by fence and/or screening that is used to store and maintain construction equipment and other materials customarily used in the trade carried on by the construction contractor.

Construction Waste: Building materials and other wastes associated with construction projects including, but not limited to, such materials as wood, concrete, drywall, masonry, roofing, siding, structural metal, wire, insulation, plastics, Styrofoam, twine, baling and strapping . materials, cans, buckets, packaging materials and containers.

Convenience Food Establishment:  An establishment which serves food in or on disposable or edible containers in individual servings for consumption  on or off the premises.

Curb Level: The grade elevation established by the governing body of the curb in front of the center of the building. Where no curb· level has been established, the engineering staff shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this Ordinance.

D.	Day Care Facility, State Licensed: Any facility licensed by the State Department of Human Services or Department of Health, publ.ic or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with care, training,
 
superv1s1on, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, in a place other than the person's own home. Day care facilities include but are not limited to: family day care homes, group family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, day time activity centers, day treatment programs and day services , as defined by Minnesota State Statutes, Section 245.782.5, as may be amended .

Deck: A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three (3) feet above ground.

Density, Residential: A number expressing the relationship of the number of dwellings to an acre of land as established in the Comprehensive Plan.

Deposition: Any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material deposited naturally or by man into a waterbody,  watercourse, floodplains,  or wetlands .

Display, Outside: A class of storage outside the principal building where merchandise is visible and may involve active sales as well as passive sales (where items can be taken inside for actual purchase) . Outside display of merchandise may be temporary or permanent depending upon the conditions of the permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance.

Distribution Center: A use greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in area in which typically large volumes of commodities are received and organized for transport prior to final dispersal to the consumer.

Diversion: A channel that intercepts surface water runoff and that changes the accustomed course of all or part of a stream.

Draining: The removal of surface water or ground water from land.

Dredging: To enlarge or clean out a waterbody , watercourse , or wetland .

Drive Through Business: A business that by design, physical facilities, service or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles, excluding gasoline service stations as defined in this subdivision.

Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for residential occupancy , but not including one family, two family, and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses, or manufactured housing.

Dwelling, Single Family: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family .
 
1.	Attached.   A dwelling which is joined to another at one or more sides by a party wall.

2.	Detached.  A dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling or structure or is entirely surrounded by open space.

Dwelling Unit: A residential building or portion thereof  intended for  occupancy by one (1) or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, tents, seasonal cabins, boarding or rooming houses, motor homes, or travel trailers.

E.		Easement, Access: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the public or another person or entity for the purpose of allowing  ingress  or egress to property.

Easement, Utility: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the installation of utilities or for the preservation or maintenance  of a drainage facility.
Erosion: The wearing away of land surface by the action of natural elements. Essential  Services:    The  erection,  construction,  alteration  or  maintenance  by
public utilities or municipal departments  of underground or overhead telephone ,
gas,   electrical ,   communication,   water   or   sewer   transmission,   distribution,
collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,  pipes,  conduits,  cables,  fire  alarm  boxes,  police  call  boxes,  traffic
signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith for the furnishing of adequate service by such private or public utilities or municipal departments. Transmission/reception support  structures  and antennas shall not be considered an essential service .

Essential Service Structures: Structures and buildings necessary  for  the operation of essential services, including but not limited to: telephone buildings, telephone booths, gas regulator stations, substations, electrical stations, water tanks, lift stations. Essential service structures shall not include transmission/ reception antennas .

Excavation: The mechanical removal of earth material below finish grade and shall be limited to only those areas needing soil correction, and shall not include the exporting of earth material from the site.

Existing Grade:  The grade prior to grading .

Explosive: Any chemical compound,  mixture,  or  device,  the  primary  or common purpose of which is to function by explosion; that is, with substantially instantaneous  release of gas and heat capable of producing destructive effects.
 
The term includes devices that produce a chemical reaction that produces gas capable of bursting its container and producing destructive effects. The term does not mean or include black powder, smokeless powder, primers, and fuses when used for antique or replica muzzle loading rifles, pistols, muskets , shotguns , and cannons or when possessed or used for rifle, pistol, and shotgun ammunition, nor does it  include fireworks as defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 624.20.

Extractive Use: The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other non-metallic minerals, and peat not regulated under Minnesota Statutes, Sections 93.44 to 93.51.

F.	Family: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or a functional family living together in a dwelling unit and sharing common cooking facilities.

Family, Functional: A group of no more than six (6) people plus their offspring, having a relationship which is functionally equivalent to a family. The relationship must be of a permanent and distinct character with a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit. Functional family does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization or group of students or other individuals where the common living arrangement or basis for the establishment of the housekeeping unit i's temporary.

Farm: A tract of land greater than ten (10) acres in size, which is principally used for agricultural activities such as the production of cash crops, livestock or poultry farming. Such farm may include agricultural dwelling and necessary buildings and structures necessary to the operation of the farm.

Farm - Hobby: A tract of land generally consisting. of ten (10) or less acres in size with a house and accessory buildings on which crops and often livestock are raised but not as a principal source of income.

Farming: The process of operating a farm for the growing and harvesting of crops which shall include those necessary buildings, related to operating the farm, and the keeping of common domestic farm animals.

Farmstead: A dwelling unit surrounded by or connected to a farming operation, all under single ownership.

Feedlot Related:

1.	Animal  Feedlot  Permit:    A  permit  issued  by  the  Minnesota  Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) when the potential pollution hazard will not be corre.cted within ten (10) months of the date of permit issuance or when manure is not used as a domestic fertilizer.  This permit shall contain such
 
conditions and requirements as the agency deems  necessary  in order to insure compliance with applicable state rules.

2.	Animal Unit (AU): A unit of measure used to compare differences in the production of animal manures that employs as a standard the amount of manure produced on a regular basis by a slaughter steer or heifer. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following equivalents shall apply:




























n

For animals not listed above, the number of animal units shall be defined as the average weight of the animal divided by one thousand (1,000) pounds.  The  total  number  of animal units subject to permit or registration shall be determined by including operations located within one-half mile which utilize a common area or system for manure disposal.

3.	Certificate of Compliance: A letter from the MPCA Director to the owner of an animal feedlot stating that the feedlot meets agency requirements and the livestock operation does not create or maintain a potential pollution hazard or the potential pollution hazard has been corrected to meet MPCA requirements.

4.	.Change  in  Operation:     An  increase  beyond  the  permitted  maximum number of animal units, an increase in the amount of animal units which are  confined  at  an  un-permitted  animal  feedlot  requiring  a  construction investment, or a change in the construction operation of an animal feedlot that  would  affect  the  storage,  handling,  utilization,  or  disposal  of animal manure.
 

5.	Commissioner: The Commissioner of the MPCA whose duties are defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 116.03, as amended.

6.	Corrective or Protective Measures: A practice, structure, condition, or combination thereof which prevents or reduces the discharge of pollutants from an animal feedlot to a level in conformity with MPCA rules.

7.	Domestic Fertilizer:

a.	Animal manure that is put on or injected into the soil to improve the  quality or quantity of plant growth; or

b.	Animal   manure  that  is  used  as  compost,  soil  conditioners,   or specialized plant beds.

8.	Drainage Ditch: A natural or constructed open channel that is shaped or graded for the stable conveyance of storm water runoff.

9.	Earthen Basin: A dike or excavated structure, often lined with clay or a synthetic liner, in which manure is stored. The basin is emptied at least once each year. It is designed by a professional engineer or Natural Resources Conservation Service/Soil and Water Conservation District (NRCS)/(SWCD) technician.

10.	Feedlot, Animal: A lot or building or combination of lots and  buildings intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals and specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be maintained within the enclosure. For purposes of these parts, open lots used for feeding and rearing of poultry (poultry ranges) and barns, dairy farms , swine facilities, beef lots and barns, horse stalls, mink ranches and zoos, shall be considered to be animal feedlots . Pastures shall not be considered animal feedlots under these parts.

11.	Feedlot, New Animal: An animal feedlot constructed and operated at a site where no animal feedlot existed previously or where a pre-existing animal feedlot has been abandoned or unused for a period of five  (5) years or more.

12.	Feedlot Operator: An individual, a corporation, a group of individuals, a partnership, joint venture , owner or any other business entity having charge or control of one or more livestock feedlots, poultry lots or other animal lots.
 
13.	Interim Permit: When required, a permit issued by the  MPCA  which expires no later than ten (10) months from the date of issuance, identifying the necessary corrective measures to abate potential pollution hazards.

14.	Lagoon: A manure treatment structure , typically earthen. Lagoons can be aerobic, anaerobic, or facultative depending on their design. An anaerobic lagoon is different from an earthen storage basin in that the lagoon is managed for manure treatment. Anaerobic lagoons are only partially emptied each year whereas earthen storage basins are emptied once or twice a year.

15.	Manure, Animal:  The fecal and urinary excretions of livestock and poultry.
Manure can include bedding material and water used for livestock. Types of manure have descriptive names such as liquid, slurry, and solid. Manure that has a content of more than ninety-six (96) percent moisture is liquid.   Manure with a moisture content between ninety (90) and ninety-six
(96) percent  is referred to as a slurry. A moisture content of less than eighty-four (84) percent is considered solid.

16.	Manure Storage Area : An area associated with an animal feedlot where animal manure or runoff containing animal manure is stored until it can be utilized as domestic fertilizer or removed to a permitted animal manure disposal site. Animal manure packs or mounding within the animal feedlot shall not be considered to be manure storage for these parts.

17.	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit:  A permit issued by the MPCA for the purpose of regulating the discharge of pollutants from point sources including concentrated animal feeding operations. Issued to large facilities (one thousand (1,000) animal units or more) that have the potential to discharge to waters of the state.

18.	Pastures: Areas where grass or other growing plants are used for grazing and where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetation cover is maintained during the growing season except in the immediate vicinity of temporary supplemental feeding or water devices.

19.	Potential Pollution Hazard: A condition which indicates a potential for pollution of the land or waters of the state including:

a.	An animal feedlot or manure storage area whose boundaries are located within shoreland or floodplain , or are located in an area draining directly to a sink hole or draining to an area with shallow soils overlying a fractured or cavernous rock, or are located within one hundred (100) feet of a water well; or
 
b.	An animal feedlot or manure storage area whose construction or operation will allow a discharge of pollutants to surface or ground waters of the state in excess of applicable standards, including, but not limited to, Minnesota Rules Chapter 7050 and 7055, during a rainstorm event of less magnitude than the 25-year, 24-hour event or will allow uncontrolled seepage of pollutants into the ground water or violate any applicable state rules.



Fence Related:

1.	"Fence" shall mean a partition, wall, hedge, row(s) of continuous plantings, or gate erected as a dividing marker, visual or physical barrier, or enclosure .

a.	"Man-made fence" shall mean a partition or wall constructed  of wood, metal, masonry, brick, stone, concrete, and the like.

b.	"Natural hedge or planting" shall mean a divider  or  barrier comprised of vegetation materials.

z.	"Fence height" shall mean the distance from the adjacent finished grade to the highest projection of a fence structure, not including support posts.

Fill:  A deposit of each material placed by artificial means so as to elevate the grade of a site.

Filling:  The act of depositing any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material so as to fill a waterbody, watercourse,  or wetland.

Flood Related:

1.	Equal Degree of Encroachment: Method of .determining the location of encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each side of a stream are reduced by an equal amount when calculating the increases in flood stages due to floodplain encroachments.

2.	FEMA:  Federal Emergency Management Agency.

3.	Flood: A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel·.

4.	Flood Frequency: The average frequency, statistically  determined,  for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
 
5.	Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City.

6.	Flood Hazard Areas: The areas included in the floodway and flood fringe as indicated on the official Zoning Map and the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map which have been officially adopted by the City.

7.	Flood Insurance Rate Map: The Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the	Federal Emergency Management Agency for the City and as applicable and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the County  of Stearns and dated March 1, 1979.

8.	Flood Insurance Study: The Flood Insurance Study prepared for the City by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and, as applicable and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the County of Stearns and  dated March 1, 1979.

9.	Floodplain: The areas adjoining a watercourse  which has been or hereafter may be covered by the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the 100-year  flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.

10.	Floodproofing: A combination of structural prov1s1ons, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject  to flooding  primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.

11.	Floodway: The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably req.uired to carry and discharge the regional flood determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.

12.	Obstruction:	Any   dam,   wall,   wharf,   embankment,	levee,   dike,   pile, abutment,   projection,   excavation,   channel   rectification,   culvert,   building, wire,  fence,  stockpile,  refuse,  fill,  structure  or  matter  in,  along,  across  or  · projecting  into  any  channel,  watercourse   or  regulatory  flood  hazard  area which  may  impede,  retard  or  change  the  direction  of  the  flow  of  water, either  in itself  or  by  catching  or collecting  debris  carried  by such water,  or that  is  placed  where  the  flow  of  water,  either  in  itself  or  by  catching  or collecting  debris  carried  by such water,  or that  is placed where  the flow  of water  might carry the same  downstream  to the  damage  of  life or property.
 
13.	100-Year Flood: A flood which is representative of large regional floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval as determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.

14.	Reach:  A hydraulic engineering  term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by the natural or man-made obstruction . In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.

15.	Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: A point not less than one (1) foot above the water surface profile associated with the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study plus any increase in flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodplain . It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this Section are required to be elevated or flcod-proofed.

Floor Area, Gross: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building or portion thereof devoted to a particular use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space  and  including  any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production of processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.  However, the floor area shall not include: basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.

Floor Plan: A graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor area within a building or structure but not necessarily as detailed as construction plans.

Frontage: That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street, watercourse or similar barrier.

G.		Garage, Private (Residential): An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building which is primarily intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles and trucks not exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross weight, of the family or families resident upon the premises. Excepting home occupations as may be allowed by this Ordinance, no business, service or industry shall be conducted within a residential private garage.

Garage, Public: A building or portion of a building, except any herein defined as private garage or as a repair garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles, or where any such vehicles are kept for enumeration  or hire and in which any sale
 
of gasoline, oil and accessories is only incidental to the principal use (see also automobile repair-minor and major).

Gazebo: A freestanding accessory structure or pavilion. Such structures are characterized by partly open construction, design symmetry , and the use of ornamental architectural features .

Grade (Adjacent Ground Elevation): The lowest point of elevation of  the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, or when the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building, between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building.

Grading:  Changing the natural or existing topography of land.

Grocery, Convenience Market: A retail establishment having a gross floor area of less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet which offers for sale pre-packaged food products, household items and other goods associated with the same. Convenience markets are intended to draw customers from surrounding neighborhoods and not the entire community.

Grocery, Supermarket: A retail establishment having a  gross  floor  area  of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or greater which offers for sale food products, household items and other goods as.sociated with the same. In many cases, supermarkets include pharmacies, delicatessens and snack  bars. Supermarkets are intended to draw customers on a community, but not regional scale.                                                                                                    ·

Group Care Facility: A facility which provides resident services to seven (7) or more individuals of whom one or more are unrelated. These individuals are handicapped, aged, or disabled, are undergoing rehabilitation, and are provided services to meet their needs. Category includes uses such as homes for the physically handicapped, mentally retarded, chemically dependent, foster children; maternity shelters and halfway houses.

Group Day Care Center: Any location which provides care for six (6) or more unrelated children at one time, for compensation, and which is  licensed  to provide such services by the Minnesota Department of Human Services or Department of Health. This term shall include, but is. not limited to, uses such as day nurseries, child care centers , and drop in care centers.

H.		Hardship: A situation where property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use under the conditions allowed by the official controls; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property, not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship if a reasonable use for the property exists under terms ofthe official controls.
 

Highway: Any public thoroughfare or vehicular right-of-way with a federal, state, or county numerical route designation .

Home Occupation: Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a residential dwelling  unit, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises and does not change the character of said premises.

Home Occupation, Interim: A home occupation which does not meet . the requirements of a permitted home occupation and requires approval of an interim use permit pursuant to Section 25 of this Ordinance .

Home Office: A home occupation consisting of a room or group of rooms used for conducting affairs of a recognized business, profession or service solely by the occupant of  the dwelling and which does not involve the on-site sale of products or clienUpatron site visitations.

Hotel: A building which provides a common entrance, lobby, halls, and stairway and in which twenty (20) or more people are, for compensation, lodged with or without meals.

I.		Impervious Surface: An artificial or natural surface .through which water, air, or roots cannot penetrate. It includes surfaces such as compacted sand or clay as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures.

Incendiary Device: A device so articulated that an ignition by fire, friction, concussion, detonation, or other method may produce destructive  effects primarily through combustion rather than explosion. The term does not include a manufactured device or article in common use by the general public that is designed to produce combustion for a lawful purpose, including but not limited to matches, lighters, flares, or devices commercially manufactured primarily for the purpose of illumination, heating, or cooking. The term does not include firearms ammunition.

Interim Use: A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until the use is no longer allowed by zoning regulations.

Interim Use Permit: A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with procedures specified in this Ordinance.

J.	Junk Yard:   An open area where waste,  used, or second hand materials are bought, sold,  exchanged,  stored,  baled,  packed, . disassembled  or  handled, including  but  not  limited to,  scrap  iron and other  metals,  paper,  rags,  rubber,
 
tires, and bottles. A junk yard includes an auto  wrecking yard  but  does  not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. This definition does not include sanitary landfills.

K.	Kennel, Dog:  Any structure or premises on which four (4) or more dogs over six
(6) months of age are kept for pets, sale, breeding, profit, etc.

L.		Land Reclamation: The process of the re-establishment  of  acceptable topography (i.e. slopes), vegetative cover, soil stability and the establishment of safe conditions appropriate to the subsequent use of the land.

Landfill: A type of operation in which earth is deposited in alternate layers of specified depth in accordance with a definite plan on a specified portion of open land, with each layer being compacted by force applied by mechanical equipment.

Landscaping: Plantings such as trees, flowers, grass and shrubs and improvements directly related thereto.

Loading Space (Off-Street): A formally delineated space, area, or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a vehicle or truck while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.

Lodging Room: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities. In a suite of rooms, without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one (1) lodging room.

Lot: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.

Lot (of Record): Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed, or one unit of an Auditor's Subdivision or a Registered Land Survey that has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder for Stearns County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. Lot of record shall also include parcels of land for which a deed or contract for deed has been recorded in the Office of the Stearns County Recorder prior to the date of this Ordinance, provided that said parcel or parcels were legally created  in  accord  with ordinances in effect at the time the deed or contract was recorded.

Lot Area: The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.

2		Lot, Buildable: Contiguous land area  exclusive  of  lakes,  ponds,  creeks,  or other waterbodies, wetlands, drainageways, slopes in excess of eighteen (18) percent and rights-of-way. The area shall meet or exceed all requirements within the Land Use Plan and Zoning Ordinance without the necessity of a variance.
 

Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.

Lot, Double Frontage:  An interior lot having frontage on two streets.

Lot, Frontage: The narrowest lot boundary abutting a public street that meets minimum lot width requirements. If none of the boundaries abutting  a  public street meet minimum lot width requirements, then the lot frontage is the widest boundary abutting a street.

Lot Improvement: Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.

Lot, Interior: A lot, other than a corner lot, including through or double frontage lots.

Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.

Lot Line: The property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this Ordinance.

Lot Line, Front: That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public streets, and in the case of a comer lot, it shall be the shortest dimension on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front lot line shall be designated by the owner and filed with the Stearns County Recorder.

Lot Line, Rear: That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.

Lot Line, Side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

Lot, Substandard: A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in the Office of the Stearns County Recorder upon or prior to the effective date of this Ordinance which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks or other dimensional standards of this Ordinance.
 
Lot, Through: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this Ordinance.

Lot, Unit: Lots created from the subdivisions of a base lot for  two  family dwelling, townhome, or manor home dwelling having different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional base lots within the zoning district.

Lot Width: The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within the first thirty (30) feet of the lot depth. The lot width shall determine the required street frontage and shoreline frontage for lots.

M.		Manufactured Home (Mobile Home): A structure, transportable  in one  (1) or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in  length or, when erected on  site,  is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when  connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein, except that the term includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily filed a certification required by the Secretary of State and complies with the standards established under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 327.

Manufactured Home Park:  Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which two
(2) or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or
for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment· of the manufactured home park.

Massage Therapy (Therapeutic): The process by which a practitioner applies massage therapy techniques, and may apply adjunctive therapies, with the intention of positively affecting the health and well being of the  client.  The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, positioning,  causing  movement,  and applying touch and pressure to the body. Adjunctive therapies may include (1) application of heat, cold, water, mild abrasives, heliotherapy, topical preparations not classified as prescription drugs, (2) the use of mechanical devices and tools which mimic or enhance manual actions, (3) and instructed self-care and stress management. Massage therapy shall  not  include  techniques  traditionally practices by chiropractors.

Medical and Dental Clinics: A structure intended for providing medical and dental examinations and service available to the public. This service is provided without overnight care available.
 
Metes and Bounds Description: A method of property description by means of their direction and distance from an easily identifiable point.

Minerals: Soil, clay, stone, sand and gravel and other similar solid material or substance to be mined from natural deposits.

Mining: All or part of the process involved in the extraction of minerals by removing the overburden and extracting directly from the mineral deposits thereby exposed.

Model Home: A home which is similar to others in a development and which is open to public inspection for the purpose of selling said other homes.

Motel (Motor Hotel): A building or group of detached, semi-detached or attached buildings containing guest rooms or dwellings, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of automobile transients.

Motor Freight Terminal: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck.

Motor Fuel Station: Any building or premises used for the dispensation, sale or offering for sale at retail of any motor fuels, oils or lubricants. When the use is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage.

N.		Natural  Drainage  System:	All  land  surface  areas which  by	nature of their contour configuration, collect, store and channel surface water runoff.

Non-Conforming Structure, Use, or Lot, Illegal: A building, structure, premises, or use illegally established prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto which does not now conform with the applicable conditions or provisions of this Ordinance for the district in which the structure or use is located.

Non-Conforming Structure, Use, or Lot, Legal: A building,  structure, premises, or use lawfully established prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto which does not now conform with the applicable conditions or provisions of this Ordinance for the distinct in which the structure or use is located.

Nursery, Landscape: A business involving the growing and selling of trees, flowering and decorative plants, and shrubs and which may be conducted within a building or without, for the purpose of landscape construction.
 
0.	Occupancy:	The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used.
The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.

Open Sales Lot {Exterior Storage): Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling any goods, materials, or merchandise and for the storing of same under the open sky prior to sale.

Open Space: Any open area not covered by structures, including but not limited to the following uses: required or established yard areas, parking areas, sidewalks, school walks, trails, recreation areas, waterbodies, shorelands, watercourses, wetlands, ground water recharge areas, floodplain, floodway, flood fringe, erodible slopes, woodland, and soils with severe limitation  for development.

Open Space, Usable: A required ground area or terraced area on a lot which is graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and maintained for either active or passive recreation or both, available and accessible to and usable by all persons occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit on the lot and their guests. Such areas shall be grassed and landscaped or covered only for a recreational purposes. Roofs, driveways and parking areas shall not constitute usable open space.

Outlot: A parcel of land, included in a plat, which is smaller than the minimum size permitted for lots and which  is thereby declared unbuildable until combined through platting with additional land; or, a parcel of land which is included in a plat and which is at least double the minimum size and which is thereby subject to future platting prior to development; or a parcel of land which is included in a plat and which is designated for public or private open  space,  right-of-way, utilities or other similar purposes.

Owner: An individual, firm, association, syndicate,  partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having proprietary interest in the land.

P.	Parcel: An individual lot or tract of land.

Park, Private: A tract of land presently owned or controlled and used by private or semi-public persons, entities, groups, etc. for active and/or  passive recreational purposes.

Park, Public: A tract of land publicly owned and used by the public for active and/or passive recreational purposes. Trailways themselves shall not constitute a public park.
 
Parking Space (Off-Street): A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately owned property either within or outs.ide of a building of sufficient size to store a standard automobile .

Party Wall: A common wall which divides two (2) independent structures by a fire wall.

Patio: A level, surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal building at or within three (3) feet of the finished grade, without a permanent roof which is intended for outdoor lounging, dining and the like.

Performance Standard: Criterion established for, but not limited to, setbacks, fencing, landscaping , screening, drainage, accessory buildings, outside storage, off-street parking, and to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat or other nuisance elements generated by or inherent in use of land or buildings.

Permitted Use: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards (if any) of such districts.

Person: Any individual or legal entity.

Planned Unit Development: A zoning designation which allows a mixing of buildings and uses which  cannot be otherwise addressed under this section, and/or whereby internal site design standard deviations from this section may be allowed to improve site design and operation.

Planning Commission:  The St. Augusta Planning Commission .

Play and Recreational Facilities: Equipment customary and incidental to the principal use of the site intended for the enjoymeht and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. Such facilities include swing sets, play sculptures, sand boxes, picnic tables, basketball standards, tennis courts, barbecue grills, patios and accessory furniture, and the like.

Pole Building: Any structure possessing the following characteristics: structural wood poles or timbers buried in ground on individual footings, metal wall coverings hung vertically of less than twenty-eight (28) gauge; or any structure constructed using post-frame design. Such definition shall not include or apply to decks, sign supports, earth retention structures, playground equipment, electric utilities, or any similar structure not covering or enclosing a specific area .

Premises: A lot or plot with the required front, side and rear yards for a dwelling, structure , or other use as allowed under this Ordinance .
 
Principal Building:  The primary building on a lot.

Principal Use: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A "principal use" may be either permitted, interim, or conditional.

Property Line: The legal boundaries of a parcel of property which may also coincide with a right-of-way lines of a street, cartway , and the like.

Protective Covenant: A contract in readable form entered into between private parties which constitutes a restriction of the use of a particular parcel of property.

Public  Land:   Land owned  or  operated  by  municipal,  school  district,  county ,
state, or other governmental units.

Public Uses: Uses owned or operated by municipal school districts, county, state, or other governmental units.

Public Utility: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board fully authorized and furnishing under municipal regulation to the public electricity, gas, steam, communication services, cable  television,  telegraph  services, transportation , water or the like.

Publication: Notice placed in the official City newspaper stating time, location and date of meeting and description of the topic.

Q.	No Definitions.

R.	Recreation, Commercial: A business directed toward the  general public, not requiring membership, that offers recreational entertainment such as amusement centers, bowling alleys, billiard halls, miniature golf, movie theaters, ballrooms, and the like.

Recreational Camping Vehicle (Travel Trailer/Motor Home): Any vehicle or structure which meets all of the following qualifications:

1.	Any vehicular,  portable structure built on a chassis,  designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses.

2.	Any  structure  designed  to be mounted  on a truck  chassis  for  use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation.

3.	Any  portable,  temporary  dwelling  to  be used for  travel,  recreation,  and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
 
4.	Any  folding  structure,   mounted  on  wheels· and  designed  for  travel, recreation, and vacation use.

Recreational Equipment: Non-vehicular materials used primarily for recreation and leisure time activities and purposes, including ice fishing houses.

Recreational Field, Structure or Building: An area of land, water, or any building in which amusement, recreation or athletic sports are provided for public or semi-public use, whether temporary or permanent, except a theater, whether provision is made for the accommodation of an assembly or not. A golf course, arena, baseball park, stadium, or gymnasium is a recreation field or building for the purpose of this Ordinance.

Recreational Vehicle: A self-propelled vehicle which is used primarily for recreation and leisure time activities and purposes including, but not limited to, classic cars, cars used for racing, bicycles, motor boats, sailboats, and recreational camping vehicles.

Recyclable Materials: Materials that are separated from mixed municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass, metals, automobile oil, batteries and other specifically allowed items. Refuse derived material or other material that is destroyed by incineration is not a recyclable material.

Refuse: Waste products which are composed wholly or partly of such materials as garbage, sweepings, swill, cleanings, trash, rubbish, litter, industrial solid wastes or domestic solid wastes ; organic wastes or residue of animals, fruit, or other vegetable or animal matter from kitchen, dining room, market, food establishment or any place dealing or handling meat, fowl, fruit, grain or vegetables; offal, animal excreta, or the carcass of animals; tree or shrub trimmings, or grass clippings; brick, plaster, wood, metal, roofing materials, pipe or other waste matter resulting from the demolition, ·alteration or construction of buildings or structures; accumulated waste materials, cans, used containers , boxes and packing materials, junk vehicles, ashes, tires, junk, Christmas trees, rocks, sod, dirt, glass, jars, bottles, auto parts, cement brick, leaves, burn barrels, household appliances, furniture, toys, floor coverings, fabric, drain oil, solvents and fluids, or other such substances which may become a nuisance.

Registered Land Survey: A survey map of registered land designed to simplify a complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract or tracts of a Registered Land Survey Number. See Minnesota Statutes 508.47 as amended.

Religious Institution: A building, together with its accessory buildings and use, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events  and which  building, together  with  its accessory  buildings and uses, is
 
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes.

Residential  Facility,  State   Licensed:		Any facility  licensed  by the  Minnesota Department of  Human Services,  public or private, which for  gain or otherwise regularly  provides  one  or  more  persons  with  twenty-four  (24)  hour  per  day substitute   care,  food,	lodging,  training,   education,   supervision,	habilitation, rehabilitation,  and  treatment  they  need,  but which  for  any  reason  cannot  be furnished in the person's own home.	Residential facilities  include, but are not limited to:	state  institutions  under the  control  of the  Commissioner  of  Public Welfare, foster homes, halfway houses, residential treatment centers, maternity shelters, group homes, residential programs or schools for handicapped children.

Residential Shelter: A supervised facility providing short-term housing, food, and protection for individuals, not including residential care facilities, community correctional facilities, day care facilities, hotels, motels, or nursing homes.

Restaurant (Not  drive in, convenience or drive through type): An establishment which serves food in or on non-disposable dishes to be consumed primarily while seated at tables or booths within the building.

Restaurant, Convenience (Fast) Food: An establishment which serves food in or on disposable or edible containers in individual servings for consumption on or off the premises.

Restaurant, Delivery or Take Out: An establishment which by design  of physical facilities, service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared, ready-to-eat foods to either be picked up or delivered for off-premise consumption.

Restaurant, Drive In (not drive through type): Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages on the premises, typically eaten in the customers vehicle on the site.

Right-Of-Way: Land acquired by reservation or dedication intended for public use, and intended to be occupied or which is occupied by a street, trail, railroad, utility lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or other similar uses.                                                              ·

Roof Line: The top of coping; or, when the building has a pitched roof, as the intersection of the outside wall with the roof.

S.	Scenic River Related:

SEE ATTACHED APPENDIX D
 
School: A building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary education, which meets all the requirements of compulsory education laws of the State of Minnesota, and not providing residential accommodations.

School, Private: Any building or group of buildings, not operated by a public agency or unit of government , the use of which meets compulsory education laws of the State of Minnesota, for elementary school, middle school Uunior high school), secondary (senior high school), or higher education and which use does not secure the major part of its funding directly from any governmental source.

School, Public: Any building or group of buildings, the use of which meets compulsory education laws of the State of Minnesota, for elementary school, middle school Uunior high school) , secondary (senior high school) , or higher education and which secures all or  the major part of its funding  from governmental sources and is operated by a public agency or governmental unit.

Secondary Use: A use of land or of a building or a portion thereof which is subordinate to and does not constitute the primary use of the land or building.

Semi-Public Use:  Uses owned by private or private non-profit organizations which are open to some, but not all, of the public.

Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between a structure  and  the property line nearest thereto; within shoreland districts it shall also mean the minimum horizontal distance between a structure or a sewage treatment system and the ordinary high water level. For purposes of earth shelter buildings only, above grade portions shall be used in determining setback requirements. Distances are to be measured from the most outwardly extended portion of the structure at ground level, except as provided hereinafter.

Sewage: A combination of water carried or dewatered wastes from residences, businesses, institutions, industrial establishments or from any other source, including transported wastes or sludge from treatment plants and/or industrial establishments, regardless whether the point of origin of said wastes or sludge is within or outside St. Augusta.

Sewage Treatment Systems, Private: On-site · means  for  disposing  and treating human and domestic waste such as a septic tank and soil absorption system or other system allowed by State, County and City  regulations;  used where authorized by the City when access to a municipal sewer system  is not required or feasible .

Sexually Oriented Activities,  Related Terms:

1.	Sexually  Oriented  Uses:	Uses  which  include  adult  bookstores,  adult motion picture theaters,  adult mini-motion picture theaters,  adult massage
 
parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult  novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description  of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as "obscene" as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 617.241 are not included.

a.	Specified  Anatomical  Area:  Human genitals  in a  state  of  sexual arousal.

b.	Specified Sexual Activities:  Includes any of the following:

1)	The  fondling  or  other  erotic  touching  of  human  genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;

2)	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

3)	Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

4)	Excretory functions  as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in sub-section 2.a through 2.c above.

2.	Sexually Oriented Uses, Accessory: The offering of retail goods for sale which are classified as sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines,  the  sale and/or  rental of  adult  motion pictures,  the  sale  of
•	adult novelties, and the like.

3.	Sexually Oriented Uses, Principal: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as sexually oriented uses ·as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and include but are not limited  to the following:

a.	Escort: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
 
b.	Escort Agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.

c.	Establishment:  Means and includes any of the following :

1)	The opening or  commencement  of  any  sexually  oriented business as a new business;

2)	The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexuaHy	oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;

3)	The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or

4)	The relocation of any sexually oriented business.

d.	Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person who  appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical area" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.

e.	Nudity or State of Nudity: Nudity or state of nudity is described as follows:

1)	The  appearance   of  a  human  bare  buttock,  anus,   male
•	genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or

2)	A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.

f.	Semi-Nude: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

g.	Sexual Encounter Center: A business  or  commercial  enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:

1)	Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
 
2)	Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the  same sex when  one or more of the persons  is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.

h. Sexually Oriented  Arcade:  Any  place  to  which  the  public  is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time,  and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".

i.	Sexually Oriented Bookstore, Sexually Oriented Video Store, or Sexually Oriented Store: A commercial establishment which as a principal business purpose offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:

1)	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictur'es, video cassettes or video reproductions, compact discs, computer software, digital recordings, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or

2)	Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia  which  are  designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities".

j.	Sexually Oriented Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
•
1)	Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or

2)	Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or

3)	Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact discs,	computer software, digital recordings or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".

k.	Sexually Oriented Conversation/Rap Parlor: A conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the  service  of  engaging  in  or  listening  to  conversation,  talk,  or
 
discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".

I.		Sexually Oriented Massage Parlor: A massage parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides for any form of consideration, the rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body, if the service provided by the massage parlor is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" .

m.	Sexually Oriented Motel: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:

1)	Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexually activities" or "specified anatomieal areas"  and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or

2)	Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or

3)	Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
•
n.	Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical  areas".

o.	Sexually Oriented Sauna: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides for any form of consideration, a steam bath or heated bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".

p.	Sexually Oriented Theater:  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar  commercial  establishment  which regularly features  persons	,..
 
who appear in a  state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities" .

Shopping Center: A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on­ site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements.

Shoreland Related:

1.	Bluff: A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having all of the following characteristics:

a.	Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area.

b.	The slope rises at least twenty-five (25) feet above  the  ordinary high water level of the waterbody.

c.	The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more  above the ordinary high water level averages thirty  (30) percent or greater.

d.	The slope must drain toward the waterbody.

An area with an average slope of less than eighteen (18) percent over a distance for fifty (50) feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff.

2.	Bluff Impact Zone: A bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet from the top of a bluff.

3.	Boathouse: A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.

4.	Building Line: A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.

5.	Commissioner :  The  Commissioner   of   the   Department   of   Natural Resources.

6.	Deck: A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three (3) feet above ground.
 
7.	Dwelling Site: A designated location for residential use by one or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites .

8.	Extractive Use: The use  of land for surface or  subsurface  removal  of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other  non-metallic  minerals,  and peat not regulated under Minnesota Statutes, Sections 93.44 to 93.51.

9.	Forest Land Conversion: The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than re-establishment of a subsequent forest stand.

10.	Guest Cottage: A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain sleeping spaces and kitchen and bathroom facilities in addition to those provided in the primary dwelling unit on a lot.

11.	Intensive Vegetation Clearing: The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.

12.	Non-Conformity: The same as that term js defined or described in Minnesota Statutes,  Chapter 394.

13.	Ordinary High Water Level: The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from	predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel.  For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.

14.	Public Waters: Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 105.37, subdivisions 14 and 15. However, no lake, pond, or flowage of less than ten (10) acres in size in municipalities and twenty-five (25) acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated for the purposes of parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the local government, be exempted from parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900. The official determination of the size and physical limits of drainage areas of rivers and streams shall be made by the Commissioner.

15.	Sensitive Resource Management: The preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over ground water or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility of flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special protection.




St. Augusta Zoning Ordinance	Rules and Definitions
2-34




•
 
16.	Shore Impact Zone: Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty (50) percent of the structure setback.

17.	Shoreland: Land located within the following distances from public water: one thousand (1,000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage ; and three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner.

18.	Significant Historic Site: Any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section 307.08.  A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently  listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota·State Archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.

19.	Steep Slope: Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics , as mapped and described in available County soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of these regulations . Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over twelve (12) percent, as measured over horizontal distances of fifty (50) feet or more, that are not bluffs.

20.	Surface Water Oriented Commercial Use: The use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature  is  an integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use.

21.	Toe of the  Bluff:     The lower  point of a fifty  (50) foot  segment with an average slope exceeding eighteen (18) percent.

22.	Top of the Bluff: The higher point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average slop exceeding eighteen (18) percent.

23.	Water  Oriented Accessory  Structure  or Facility:  A small,  above ground building  or  other  improvement,  except  stairways,  fences,  docks ,  and
 
retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached decks.

Sign Related:

1.	Address Sign:  A sign communicating only a street address.

2.	Advertising  Sign:  Any   permanent   non-governmental   sign  advertising products,   services,   commodities,   entertainment   or   other   activity   not offered at the location of the sign or not exclusively related to the premises on which the sign is located.

3.	Alteration:   Any change to a sign excluding routine maintenance,  repair, painting or change of copy of any existing sign.

4.	Area Identification Sign: A freestanding sign identifying the name of  a single family residential subdivision consisting of twenty (20) or more lots; a residential  planned unit  development;  a  multiple  residential  complex consisting of three  (3) or more structures;  an office or business structure or  development  containing three  (3) or more independent operations; a single  business  consisting of three  (3)  or  more  separate  structures;  a manufactured home court; or any integrated combination of the above.

5.	Artificial Light:  Illumination resulting from internal or external artificial light sources,  including  glare  and  reflected  light  byproducts  of  artificial  light sources.

6.	Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign: A written or graphic message, identification or advertisement, as part of or permanently or semi­ permanently affixed to an awning, canopy, . marquee or other similar device.	Where lighting is incorporated with the awning, canopy or marquee, the apparatus shall not be construed as a sign exclusive of the area	physically designed to form the message, identification or advertisement thereto.

7.	Banners: Attention getting devices which resemble flags and are  of  a paper, cloth or plastic-like consistency.

8.	Billboard: An off-site sign used to advertise products, goods, or services not exclusively related to the premise on which the sign is located. An advertising sign.
 
9.	Building Facade: That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation.

10.	Business Sign: Any sign which identifies a specific business, either retail, wholesale, or industrial, or which identifies a profession and is located upon the subject property.

11.	Campaign Sign: A temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person running for a governmental office, or promoting an issue to be voted on at a governmental election.
12.	Canopy Sign:  See Awning.

13.	Construction Sign: A sign at a construction site identifying the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier, or other involved parties.

14.	Copy: The wording on a sign surface either permanent  or  removable letter form.

15.	Crop Demonstration Sign: A sign identifying agricultural products utilized upon the subject property.

16.	Directional Sign: A sign erected with the address and/or name only of a business, development project, institution, church or other use or activity plus directional arrows or information on location.

17.	Directory Sign, Private: An exterior information wall sign, or a free­ standing	sign identifying the names of residences, businesses or professional offices served by a common public entrance such as an apartment complex, shopping center, or office building.

18.	Directory Sign, Public: A sign, group of signs on a sign panel or any identifiable object intended to communicate a ·public message or direction when located on public property as may be approved by the City Council.

19.	Double Sided Sign: A sign with two faces back to back, or a V-type sign with an angle not exceeding twenty (20) degrees. Only one side of a double sided sign shall be used in computing total surface area.

20.	Farm Identification Sign: A sign identifying the name and/or type  of farming activity practices upon the subject property.

21.	Flashing Sign: An illuminated sign upon which the artificial light is not kept constant in terms of intensity or color when the sign is illuminated.
 
22.	Freestanding Sign:  A self-supported sign not affixed to another structure.

23.	Ground or Low Profile Sign: A sign that is intended to be incorporated into some form of landscaping design scheme or planter box, is not elevated from the ground by means of a pole or free-standing support structure, but is placed directly on the ground or on an interior planter base which is incorporated into such a design arrangement.
24.	Historical Sign:  A sign commemorating places of local, state, or national
historical significance.

25.	Holiday Sign: Signs or displays which contain  or depict a message pertaining to a religious, national, state, or local holiday.

26.	Identification Sign: A sign which identifies the business, owner, manager, resident, or address of the premises where the sign is located and which contains no other material.

27.	Illuminated Sign: A sign illuminated by an ·artificial light source either directed upon it or illuminated from an interior source.

28.	Informational Sign: Any on-site sign giving information to employees, visitors, or delivery vehicles, but containing no advertising or identification.

29.	Institutional Sign: A sign which identifies the name and other characteristics of a public or semi-public institution on the site where the sign is located.

30.	Integral Sign: A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure.

31.	Marquee:  See canopy.

32.	Maximum Height of Sign: The vertical distance from the base of the sign, or the grade of the street centerline, whichever is higher, to the top of the sign.

33.	Menu Board: A sign containing a food price list for restaurant customers, but containing no advertising or identification.

34.	Message Sign: A sign which allows for the graphic and/or verbal content to be changed, when desired, through electronic or manual methods.
 
35.	Monument Sign: A block type sign structure not supported by poles or braces, but rather placed directly on the ground.

36.	Motion Sign: Any sign which revolves, rotates, has moving parts, or gives illusion of motion.
37.	Non-Profit  Organization:  A  corporation  formed  under  Chapter  317  of
Minnesota State Statutes and which is formed for a purpose not involving pecuniary gain to its shareholders,  or members and paying no dividends
or other pecuniary enumeration, directly or indirectly, to its shareholders or members, or a community or civic group such as the Lion's Club, League of Women Voters, etc.

38.	Parapet: A low wall which is located on a roof of a building will be known as a parapet for this Ordinance.

39.	Permitted Signs:  Signs allowed with or without a permit.

40.	Political Sign: A sign used exclusively to call attention to the candidacy of any individual or party for elective office which appears on the official ballot to be voted upon by the citizens of the City.

41.	Portable Sign: A sign so designed as to be movable from one location to another and which is not permanently attached to the ground, sales display device or structure.  A temporary sign. .

42.	Principal Frontage: The wall of the principal building on a lot which fronts toward the principal public streets.

43.	Prohibited Signs:  Signs not allowed in the City.

44.	Projecting Sign: A sign, other than a wall sign, which is affixed to a building and which extends perpendicular from the building wall.

45.	Public Entrance: Any passage or opening which affords entry and access to the general public or customer.

46.	Public Entrance, Common: A public entrance providing access for the utilization and benefit of two or more tenants or building occupants.

47.	Public Signs: Signs on non-commercial nature and in the public interest, erected by, or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his or her public duty.

48.	Pylon Sign: A freestanding sign mounted on top of a single post which is greater than ten (10) feet in height.
 
49.	Reader Board: A message sign with an electronic changing message.

50.	Real Estate Sign: A business sign placed upon a property advertising that particular property for sale, or for rent or for lease.

51.	Real Estate Development Project Sign: A temporary business sign advertising a new subdivision or development.

52.	Roof Line: The top of the coping or, when the building has a pitched roof, the intersection of the outside wall with the roof.

53.	Roof Sign: A sign erected, constructed or attached wholly or in part upon or over the roof of a building.

54.	Rummage Sale Sign: Temporary signs announcing a non-commercial rummage or garage sale.

55.	Sign: The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices or trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to show an individual, firm, professional or business and are visible to the general public.

56.	Sign Area: The area within the marginal lines of the surface of a sign which bear the advertisement or, in the case of messages, figures or symbols attached directly to a building or sign structure, that area which is included in the smallest rectangle  or series of geometric figures used to circumscribe the message, figure or symbol displayed thereon.

57.	Sign Structure: The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for a sign including the sign area.

58.	Street Frontage:  The proximity of a parcel of land to one or more streets.
An interior lot has one (1) street frontage and a corner lot has two (2) or
more frontages.

59.	Temporary Sign: A sign  erected or displayed  for  a specified  period of time.

60.	Time and/or Temperature Sign: A sign that displays  the  current  time and/or temperature without advertising material, company name, logo or other identifying marks.

61.	Total Allowable Sign Area: The maximum allowable gross surface area in square feet of a sign or signs. The maximum number of signs cannot be arranged and integrated so as to create a surface area in excess of this requirement.
 
62.	Traffic  Sign:    A  sign which  is  erected  by a  governmental  unit for  the purpose of directing or guiding traffic.

63.	UL Approved: A device which has been approved by the "Underwriters' Laboratories (48)", a U.S. non-profit organization which establishes standards for electrical equipment.

64.	Wall Sign:   A sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building and which is parallel to the building wall.  A wall sign does not project more than twelve
(12) inches from the surface to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the
top of the parapet wall.

65.	Wall Graphics:  A sign painted directly on an exterior wall.

66.	Window  Sign:   A  sign  affixed to or  inside of  a window  in view  of the general public.  This does not include merchandise on display.

Site Plan: A map drawn to scale depicting the development of a tract of land, including, but not limited to, the location and relationship of structures, streets, driveways, recreation areas, parking areas, easements,  utilities,  landscaping, and walkways, as related to a proposed development.

Sketch Plan: A report in map and text form submitted as the first phase of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) proposal, depicting the location, general purpose, general type of land use and circulation patterns, primary relationships between site elements and between the proposed development and surrounding development, proposed general schedule of development, and information on the applicant.

Slope:	The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually, expressed in percent of degrees.

Storage, Outside (Exterior): Exterior depository, stockpiling, or safekeeping of materials, products, vehicles, trailers and the like. Outside storage may be enclosed by a structure that includes a roof, but no side walls, in which case the structure shall be deemed outside storage; or outside storage may involve fencing or screening without a roof in which case fencing or screening shall be deemed outside storage. Parking lots do not qualify for outside storage. Outside storage does not involve any product representation or signage except for those emergency or safety related signs specifically approved by the City. Vending machines accessory to allowable uses do not constitute outside storage. The parking or storage of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise for a period of less than seventy-two (72) hours does not constitute outside storage.

Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above. A basement shall be counted as a story.
 

Street: A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, through way, street, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and  which  affords  principal means of access to abutting property.

Street, Arterial - Minor: Streets defined as such and mapped accordingly within the City's duly adopted Comprehensive Plan

Street, Arterial - Principal: Streets defined as such and mapped accordingly within the City's duly adopted Comprehensive Plan.

Street, Collector: Streets defined as such and mapped accordingly within the City's duly adopted Comprehensive  Plan.

Street, Local: Streets defined as such and mapped accordingly within the City's duly adopted Comprehensive Plan.

Street Width: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of­ way of a street.

Structural Alteration: Any change, other than incidental  repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations .

Structure:   Anything which is built, constructed or erected; an edifice or building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner whether temporary or permanent in character. Among other things, structures include but are not limited to buildings, gazebos, decks, retaining walls, walls, fences over six (6) feet in height, and swimming pools, but excluding patios and similar at-grade improvements.

Structure, Public: An edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner which is owned or rented, and operated by a federal, state, or local government agency.

Subdivision: The separation of an area, parcel, or tract of land under single ownership into two (2) or more parcels, tracts, lots, or long term leasehold interests where the division necessitates the creation of streets for residential, commercial, industrial, or other use or any combination thereof, except those separations:

1.	Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests shall be twenty
(20)  acres  or  larger  in size  and five  hundred  (500) feet  in width for
 
residential  uses and five  (5) acres  or larger in size for  commercial  and industrial uses.

2.	Creating cemetery  lots.

3.	Resulting  from  court  orders,  or  the  adjustment  of  a  lot  line  by  the relocation of a common boundary.

Surveyor:  A land surveyor registered under Minnesota State laws.

Swimming Pool: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches deep. This includes in-ground, above ground and on-ground swimming pools; hot tubs; portable and non­ portable spas; and fixed-in-place wading pools.

T.	Tillable Land: Any land capable of producing small grains, row crops or may with normal tillage practices, woodland excluded .

Tower:	Any ground mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus above grade.

Tower, Temporary Mobile: Any mobile tower, pole, or structure located on a trailer, vehicle, or temporary platform intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus for personal wireless services, which is commonly referred to as cellular on wheels (COW) .

Tree, Significant: Trees which are healthy, measure a minimum of eight (8) inches in diameter at a distance of fifty-four (54) inches above ground, and are a minimum of four (4) inches in diameter for conifers.

U.	Use: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained.

Use, Substandard: A legal use existing prior to the enactment of  the  St. Augusta Zoning Ordinance which is permitted or · conditional use within the applicable zoning district but does not meet the minimum lot area, water frontage, structure setbacks, or other dimensional standards .

V.	Variance: A modification of or variation from the strict prov1s1ons of  this Ordinance consistent with the state enabling statute for municipalities, as applied to a specific piece of  property, in order to provide  relief for a property  owner because of undue hardship or peculiar difficulty imposed upon him by this Ordinance, except that modification in the allowable uses within a district  shall not be considered a variance. Variances shall normally be limited to height, bulk, density, and yard requirements .
 

Veterinary Clinic: Those uses concerned with  the diagnosis, treatment, and medical care of animals including animal or pet hospitals.

W.	Warehousing:	The  storage  of  materials  or  equipment  within  an  enclosed building.

Waste Facility: All property, real or personal, including negative and positive easements and water and air rights, which is or may be needed or useful for the processing, disposal, transfer and/or storage of hazardous and/or solid wastes, except property used primarily for the manufacture of scrap  metal  or  paper. Waste facility includes but is not limited to transfer and storage stations, processing facilities, and disposal sites and facilities. Waste facility does not include drop off centers which are accessory to allowable uses and which are operated by a governmental unit, civic organization or similar non-profit group expressly for the collection of recyclable waste including paper, clean glass and metal containers, yard waste for composting, and  other  eligible  household wastes from individuals.

Waste, Hazardous:  Any refuse or discarded material or combinations of refuse or discarded materials in solid, semi-solid, liquid, or gaseous form which cannot be handled by routine waste management techniques because they pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or other living organisms because of their chemical, biological, or physical properties. Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but are not limited to,  explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants, and corrosives.

Waste, Solid: Any garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other discarded solid materials, except animal waste used for fertilizer, including solid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial, and agricultural operations, and from community activities. Solid waste does not include earthen fill, boulders, rock, and other materials normally handled in construction operations, solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, or other common water pollutants.

Waterbody:	A body of water (lake, pond) or a depression of land or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed basis holds water and is surrounded by land.

Watershed:	The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage system, bounded peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage areas.

Wetland Related:

SEE ATTACHED APPENDIX B
 

Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS): Any device that is designed to convert wind power to another form of energy such as electricity or heat (also referred to by such common names of wind charger, wind turbine, and windmill) .

Wholesaling: The selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business that in turn sells to the final customer.

X.	No definitions.

Y.	Yard:   Any space on the same lot with a building, open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky.

Yard, Front: The area extending across the width of the front lot line between the side yard lines and from the front lot line to the nearest line of the principal building in depth.

Yard, Rear: An open space unoccupied except for accessory buildings on the same lot with a building between the rear lines of the. building and the rear line of the lot, for the full width of the lot.

Yard, Required: The open space between a lot line and the buildable area within which no structure may be located except as provided by this Ordinance.

Yard, Side: An open unoccupied space on a lot between the main building and the side line of the lot, extending from the front of the lot to the rear of the lot.

Z.	Zoning	Administrator:	The	duly	appointed	officer	charged	with	the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.

Zoning Amendment: A change authorized by the City, either in the allowed use within a district or in the boundaries of the district.

Zoning District: An area or areas of the City (as delineated on the Zoning Map) set aside for specific uses with specific regulations ·and provisions for use and development as defined by this Ordinance.

Zoning District Overlay: A zoning district containing regulations superimposed upon other zoning district regulations and where the more restrictive district use regulations shall apply.

Zoning District Underlying (Base): All zoning districts except overlay zoning districts.

Zoning Map: The map or maps incorporated into this Ordinance as part thereof, designating the zoning districts.
 
SECTION 3.	ADMINISTRATION - AMENDMENTS (TEXT AND MAP)

Subdivision

3.1	Amendments to Zoning Ordinance
3.2	Procedures
3.3	Amendments - Initiation
3.4	Certification of Taxes Paid



3.1	AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE: The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed; provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties with interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least ten (10) days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Any action taken pursuant to this section shall also be in compliance and accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Natural Resources, State of Minnesota, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



3.2	PROCEDURE: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, an application for an amendment shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless extended pursuant to Statute or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty
(60)	days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional procedural requirements are as follows:

A.	Requests for rezoning (text or map) shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided by City Council resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development of use and list of property owners located within one-half (1/2) mile of the subject property. Said property owners list shall be certified by the County or City. The request for amendment shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting. The request shall be considered officially submitted when all the informational requirements are complied with.

B.	The applicant shall supply proof of title of the property for which the rezoning is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioner acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested rezoning.

3-1
 

C.	Upon receipt of said application, the Zoning Administrator shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of the request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to hearing and written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within one-half (1/2) mile of the subject property.

D.	Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.

E.	The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.

F.	The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed amendment. Its judgement shall be based upon (but not limited to) the following factors:

1.	The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific polices and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with the official City Comprehensive Plan.

2.	The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future land uses of the area.

3.	The proposed use conforms with all performance standards contained herein.

4.	The proposed use will not tend to or actually depreciate the area in which it is proposed.

5.	The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public services and will not overburden the City’s service capacity.

6.	The proposed use is in conformance with the City’s water connection and assessment policies or is contiguous to existing development of a similar zoning.

G.	The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said information to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.

3-2
 
Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.

H.	The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed request.

I.	The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request.

J.	The City Council shall not act upon an amendment until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or until sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.

K.	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Zoning Administrator shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.

L.	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary.

M.	If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may, before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide the Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular action.

N.	Approval of a proposed amendment shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
Approval of a proposed zoning map amendment which changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either business, industrial, or planned unit development that allows for commercial or industrial uses shall require a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council.



O.	The amendment shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves an ordinance reflecting said amendment and after said ordinance is published in the official newspaper.

P.	Whenever an application for an amendment has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for the amendment affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City
 
Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial, unless a decision to reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.



3.3	AMENDMENTS - INITIATION: The City Council or Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text or the district boundaries of this Ordinance. The procedural requirements of Sections 3.02.A and 3.02.B of this Ordinance shall not apply to such proposed amendments except to the extent required by State Statute. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein, within the City, may initiate a request to amend the district and map boundaries or text of this Ordinance as to affect the same real estate.



3.4	CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for an amendment, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the rezoning application relates.
 
SECTION 4.	ADMINISTRATION - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS



Subdivision

4.1	Purpose
4.2	Procedure
4.3	Information Requirement
4.4	General Performance Standards
4.5	Lapse of Conditional Use Permit by Non-Use
4.6	Performance Security
4.7	Conditional Use Permits - Initiation
4.8	Certification of Taxes Paid



4.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of a conditional use permit is to provide the City of St. Augusta with a reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of certain designated uses upon the general welfare, public health, and safety. In making this determination, whether or not the conditional use is to be allowed, the City may consider the nature of the adjoining land or buildings, the effect upon traffic into and from the premises, or on any adjoining streets, and all other or further factors as the City shall deem a prerequisite of consideration in determining the effect of the use on the general welfare, public health and safety.



4.2	PROCEDURE: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, an application for a conditional use permit shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless extended pursuant to Statute or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal agencies extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60) days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional procedural requirements are as follows:

A.	Request for conditional use permits, as provided within this Ordinance shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use and a list of property owners located within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the subject property, obtained from and certified by Stearns County or the City. The request for conditional use permit shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when all the information requirements are complied with.
B.	The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the conditional use permit is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or
 
registered property abstract currently certified together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested conditional use permit.

C.	Upon receipt of said application, the Zoning Administrator shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing, and report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of the request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and written notification of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the boundary of the property in question.

D.	Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.

E.	The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.

F.	No conditional use shall be recommended by the Planning Commission or granted by the City Council unless all the following findings are made:

1.	That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted.

2.	That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property for predominant uses in the area.

3.	That adequate utilities, access streets, drainage, and other necessary facilities have been or will be provided for the proposed conditional use.

4.	That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide sufficient off- street parking and loading space to serve the proposed conditional use.







5.	That adequate measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise, and vibration, so that none of these will constitute a nuisance, and to control lighted signs and other lights in such a manner that no disturbance to neighboring properties will result from the

4-2
 
proposed conditional use.

6.	That proper facilities are or will be provided which would eliminate any traffic generation or traffic hazard which may result from the proposed conditional use.

7.	That there is a demonstrated need for the proposed use.

8.	That the proposed use is in compliance with any land use plan adopted by the City.

9.	That the affected property does not contain any wetlands or public waters over which the United States, the State of Minnesota, or their respective agencies or political subdivisions have control or jurisdiction, or which are otherwise regulated by the United States, the State of Minnesota, or their respective agencies or political subdivisions.

G.	The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.

H.	The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed request.

I.	The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the Ordinance.

J.	The City Council shall not grant a conditional use permit until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or until sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.

K.	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Zoning Administrator shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.

L.	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed

4-3
 
necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

M.	If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide the Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one (1) time on a singular action.

N.	Approval of a request shall require passage by a majority vote of the entire City Council.

O.	Whenever an application for a conditional use permit has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the conditional use permit affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial, unless a decision to reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.

P.	If a request for a conditional use permit receives approval of the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the County Registrar of Titles. The applicant, immediately upon recording such or as soon as is reasonably possible, shall furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.



4.3	INFORMATION REQUIREMENT: The information required for all conditional use permits shall be as specified in Section 10.06 of this Ordinance.



4.4	GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: As may be applicable, the evaluation of any proposed conditional use permit request shall be subject to and include, but not limited to, the following general performance standards and criteria:



A.	The use and the site in question shall be served by a street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the type and volume of traffic which would be generated.

B.	The site design for access and parking shall minimize internal as well as external traffic conflicts and shall be in compliance with Section 20 of this Ordinance.

C.	If applicable, a pedestrian circulation system shall be clearly defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachment by parked or moving vehicles.
 

D.	Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading shall be provided in compliance with Sections 20 and 21 of this Ordinance.

E.	Loading docks and drive-up facilities shall be positioned so as to minimize internal site access problems and maneuvering conflicts, to avoid visual or noise impacts on any abutting residential use or district, and are in compliance with Section 21 of this Ordinance.

F.	Whenever a non-residential use abuts a residential use or district, a buffer area with screening and landscaping shall be provided in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

G.	General site screening and landscaping shall be provided in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

H.	All exterior lighting shall be so directed so as not to cast glare toward or onto the public right-of-way or neighboring residential uses or districts, and shall be in compliance with Section 15.10 of this Ordinance.

I.	Potential exterior noise generated by the use shall be identified and mitigation measures as may be necessary shall be imposed to insure compliance with Section
15.14 of this Ordinance.

J.	The site drainage system shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.

K.	The architectural appearance and functional design of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing or potential buildings and area so as to cause impairment of property values or a blighting influence. All sides of the principal and accessory structures are to have essentially the same or coordinated, harmonious exterior finish materials and treatment.



L.	Provisions shall be made for an interior location for recycling and trash handling and storage or an outdoor, enclosed receptacle area shall be provided in compliance with Section 15.15 of this Ordinance.

M.	All signs and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Section 31 of this Ordinance.

N.	The use and site shall be in compliance with any federal or state laws or regulations which are applicable and any related permits are obtained and documented to the City.
 
O.	Any applicable business licenses mandated by City regulations are approved and obtained.

P.	The hours of operation may be restricted when there is potential negative impact upon a residential use or district.

Q.	The use complies with all applicable performance standards of the zoning district in which it is located.



4.5	LAPSE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT BY NON-USE: Whenever within one (1)
year after granting a conditional use permit, the use as allowed by the permit shall not have been initiated or utilized, then such permit shall become null and void unless a petition for an extension of time in which to complete or utilize the use that has been granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the original conditional use permit. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the conditional use permit. Such petition shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a decision.



4.6	PERFORMANCE SECURITY:

A.	Except in the case of non-income producing residential property (excluding related structures), upon approval of a conditional use permit the City shall be provided, where deemed necessary, with an irrevocable letter of credit, cash escrow, certificate of deposit payable to the City, or cash deposit prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall be non-cancelable and shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the conditional use permit and the ordinances of the City.
B.	The security shall be in the amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the City Engineer’s, City Building Official’s, or City Council’s estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or development. Said project can be handled in stages upon the discretion of the City Engineer and Building Official.

C.	The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the conditional use permit and regulations of the City has been issued by the City Building Official.

D.	Failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit or the regulations of the City shall result in forfeiture of the security.
 

4.7	CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS - INITIATION: The City Council or Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request for a conditional use permit in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein, within the City may initiate a request for a conditional use permit for real estate in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.



4.8	CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for a conditional use permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the conditional use permit application relates.
 
SECTION 5.	ADMINISTRATION - INTERIM USE PERMITS

Subdivision

5.1	Purpose and Intent
5.2	Procedure
5.3	General Standards
5.4	Termination
5.5	Certification of Taxes Paid




5.1	PURPOSE AND INTENT:  The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:

A.	To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.

B.	To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City Council, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the respective district.

C.	To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change to an area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan provided that said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing uses and development.



5.2	PROCEDURE: Uses defined as interim uses which do not presently exist within a respective zoning district shall be processed according to the standards and procedures for a conditional use permit as established by Section 4 of this Ordinance.



5.3	GENERAL STANDARDS:  An interim use shall comply with the following:

A.	Meet the standards of a conditional use permit set forth in Section 4 of this Ordinance.

B.	Conform to the applicable general performance standards of Section 4.04 of this Ordinance.

C.	The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning district.

D.	The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty.
 

E.	The use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on the public.

F.	The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deems appropriate for permission of the use.



5.4	TERMINATION: An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever occurs first:

A.	The date stated in the permit.

B.	Upon violation of conditions, as determined by the City Council and under which the permit was issued.

C.	Upon  change  in  the  City’s  zoning  regulations  which  renders  the  use  non- conforming.

D.	The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning district.



5.5	CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for an interim use permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the interim use permit application relates.
 
SECTION 6.	ADMINISTRATION - ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS AND APPROVALS

Subdivision

6.1	Purpose
6.2	Administrative Permits
6.3	Non-Permit Approvals



6.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and procedures for the processing and consideration of activities allowed by administrative permit, and of matters requiring the approval of the Zoning Administrator with the goal of protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City.



6.2	ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS:

A.	Procedure:

1.	Application for an administrative permit shall be filed by the property owner or designated agent with the Zoning Administrator on forms to be provided by the City.

2.	The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as set forth by a resolution of the City Council. Applications for amending permits shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council for administrative permits.

3.	The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and related materials and shall determine that the proposal is in compliance with all applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and applicable performance standards set forth in this Ordinance.

4.	The Zoning Administrator shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed events or activity. Judgment shall be based upon (but not limited to) the following factors:

a.	Compliance with and effect upon the Comprehensive Plan and public facilities plans.




b.	The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use, event or
 
activity will promote and enhance the general public welfare and will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals or comfort.

c.	The use, event, or activity will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.

d.	The establishment of the use, event or activity will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.

e.	Adequate public facilities and services are available or can be reasonably provided to accommodate the use, event or activity which is proposed.

f.	The use, event or activity shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.

g.	The use, event or activity and site conform to all applicable performance standards of this Ordinance.

5.	The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination on approval or denial of the administrative permit within sixty (60) days from the date of submission of a complete application.

6.	A written permit shall be issued to the applicant when a determination of compliance has been made. Specific conditions to assure compliance with applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and the standards of this Ordinance shall be attached to the permit.

7.	Determination of non-compliance with applicable codes, ordinances, and the standards in this subdivision shall be communicated to the applicant in writing and the application for the permit shall be considered denied; unless, within ten (10) days of the date of such notice, the applicant submits revised plans and/or information with which the Zoning Administrator is able to determine compliance.

8.	Unresolved disputes as to administrative application of the requirements of this paragraph shall be subject to appeal as set forth within Section 8 of this Ordinance.
B.	Information Requirement:  The information required for all administrative permit applications shall include:
 
1.	A concise statement describing the proposed use, event or activity, including the purpose, type of merchandise involved, dates and times of operation, number of employees involved, provisions for on-site security, provisions for on-site parking, and other pertinent information required by the Zoning Administrator to fully evaluate the application.

2.	A copy of the approved site plan for the property or an “as built” survey which accurately represents existing conditions on the site, including entrances and exits, bona fide parking and driving areas, and which accurately indicates any proposed temporary structures, including tents, stands, and signs.

3.	An accurate floor plan, when in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, such a plan is necessary to properly evaluate the location of the event and the effectiveness of available entrances and exits.

4.	A copy of the current sales tax certificate issued by the State of Minnesota, if applicable.

5.	Information identified in Section 10.06 of this Ordinance, as may be applicable.

C.	Performance Standards: All uses, events or activities allowed by administrative permit shall conform to the applicable standards outlined in the zoning district in which such use, event or activity is proposed.

D.	Administration and Enforcement:

1.	The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of applications and administrative permits.

2.	A copy of all administrative permits issued shall be forwarded to appropriate staff as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

3.	Enforcement of the provisions of this paragraph shall be in accordance with Section 12 of this Ordinance. Violation of an issued permit or of the provisions of this section also shall be grounds for denial of future permit applications.



E.	Certification of Taxes Paid: Prior to approving an application for an administrative permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the administrative permit application relates.
 
6.3	NON-PERMIT APPROVALS: In cases where the Zoning Administrator is given approval authority without a requirement for an administrative permit, determinations shall be based upon the criteria outlined in Section 6.02.A.4 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 7.	ADMINISTRATION - VARIANCES

Subdivision

7.1	Purpose
7.2	General Provisions and Standards
7.3	Procedures
7.4	Lapse of Variance
7.5	Performance Security
7.6	Certification of Taxes Paid



7.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to provide for deviations from the literal provisions of this Ordinance in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of physical circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration, and to grant such variances only when it is demonstrated that such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance.



7.2	GENERAL PROVISIONS AND STANDARDS:

A.	The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.

B.	Conditions governing considerations of both major and minor variance requests:

1.	In considering all requests for a variance and in taking subsequent action, the City staff, the Planning Commission and the City Council shall make a finding of fact that the proposed action will not:

a.	Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.

b.	Unreasonably increase the congestion in the public street.

c.	Increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety.

d.	Unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the neighborhood, or in any way be contrary to the intent of this Ordinance.

e.	Violate the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan.

f.	Violate any of the terms or conditions of Item 2, below.

2.	A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted unless it can be demonstrated that:
 

a.	Undue hardship will result if the variance is denied due to the existence of special conditions and circumstances which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved:

1)	Special conditions may include exceptional topographic or water conditions or, in the case of an existing lot or parcel of record, narrowness, shallowness, insufficient area or shape of the property.

2)	Undue hardship caused by the special conditions and circumstances may not be solely economic in nature, if a reasonable use of the property exists under the terms of this Ordinance.

3)	Special conditions and circumstances causing undue hardship shall not be a result of lot size or building location when the lot qualifies as a buildable parcel.

b.	Literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this Ordinance, or deny the applicant the ability to put the property in question to a reasonable use.

c.	The special conditions and circumstances causing the undue hardship do not result from the actions of the applicant.

d.	Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.

e.	The request is not a use variance.

f.	Variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to accomplish the intended purpose of the applicant.

3.	Application for a variance shall set forth reasons that the variance is justified in order to make reasonable use of the land, structure or building.




4.	Should the City Council find that the conditions outlined heretofore apply to the proposed lot or parcel, the City Council may grant a variance from the strict application of this Ordinance so as to relieve such difficulties or hardships to the degree considered reasonable, provided such relief may be

7-2
 
granted without impairing the intent of this Ordinance. In the case of major variance, the Planning Commission, based upon a report and recommendation by the City staff, shall have the power to advise and recommend such conditions related to the variance regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable in the interest of the intent and purpose of the Ordinance.



7.3	PROCEDURE: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, an application for a variance shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless extended pursuant to Statute or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60) days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional procedural requirements are as follows:

A.	Minor Variances:

1.	Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for an expeditious method of processing variance requests.

2.	Qualifications:	Requests qualifying as minor variances must meet one of the following criteria:

a.	Cases where hardship to existing buildings or platted property are created as a result of public action or change in City regulations (exception: shoreland and wetland regulations).

b.	Structure or setback deviations which are characteristics of and common to neighboring uses and which do not exceed five (5) feet.



3.	Processing:

a.	Requests for a minor variance shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of detailed written and graphic materials necessary for the explanation of the request.

b.	The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports when appropriate and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City
 
Council.

c.	The City shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said information to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure of any applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.

d.	The City Council shall review the application and may upon its option conduct a public hearing (no notice or publication required) on the request. The City Council may also make a determination and require that the matter be processed as a major variance.

e.	The applicant or a representative shall appear before the City Council in order to answer questions concerning the proposed variance request.

f.	The City Council shall make findings of fact and shall decide whether to approve or deny a request for variance within forty (40) days after the public hearing on said request or forty (40) days after the date at which the matter was first considered.

g.	A variance of this Ordinance shall be by a majority vote of the entire City Council.

h.	All decisions by the City Council involving a variance request shall be final except that an aggrieved person or persons shall have the right to appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision to the Stearns County District Court.

i.	If a request for variance receives approval of the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the County Registrar of Titles. The applicant, immediately upon recording such, or as soon as reasonably possible, shall furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.

B.	Major Variances:

1.	Classification:	All variances which are not classified as “minor” shall be deemed “major” variances.
 
2.	Processing:

a.	Request for variances, as provided within this Ordinance, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use and a list of property owners located within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the subject property, obtained from and certified by Stearns County or the City. The request for variance shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when all the information requirements are complied with.

b.	Upon receipt of said application, the Zoning Administrator shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing, and report its finding and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and written notification of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the boundary of the property in question.

c.	Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.

d.	The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.




e.	The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said information to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure of an applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.

f.	The  applicant or representative thereof  shall appear before the
 
Planning Commission to answer questions concerning the proposed variance.

g.	The Planning Commission shall makes findings of fact and recommend approval or denial of the request. The Planning Commission shall reach a decision within sixty (60) days after the first regular meeting at which the variance request was considered by the Commission. The Commission’s recommendation and the City staff’s report shall be presented to the City Council.

h.	The City Council shall not grant a variance until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission or until sixty (60) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered.

i.	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Zoning Administrator shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.

j.	The City Council shall review the application and may at its option conduct a public hearing on the request.

k.	The City Council shall make findings of fact and approve or deny a request for variance within sixty (60) days after receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation.

l.	A variance of this Ordinance shall be by a majority vote of the entire City Council.



m.	All decisions by the City Council involving a variance request shall be final except that an aggrieved person or persons shall have the right to appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision to the Stearns County District Court.

n.	Whenever a variance for an amendment has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for the variance affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial, unless a decision to reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.
 
o.	If a request for variance receives approval of the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the County Registrar of Titles. The applicant, immediately upon recording such, or as soon as reasonably possible, shall furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.



7.4	LAPSE OF VARIANCE: If within one (1) year after granting a variance the use as allowed by the variance shall not have been initiated or utilized, then such a variance shall become null and void unless a petition for an extension of time in which to complete or utilize the use has been granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the original variance or appeal. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or use the permitted in the variance or appeal. Such petition shall be presented to the City Council for decision.



7.5	PERFORMANCE SECURITY:

A.	Upon approval of a variance, the City shall be provided, where deemed necessary by the City Council, with an irrevocable letter of credit, cash escrow, certificate of deposit payable to the City Council, or cash deposit prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the variance and City Ordinance provisions.

B.	The security shall be in the amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the City Engineer’s, Building Official’s, or City Council’s estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or development.
C.	The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the variance and City regulations has been issued by the Building Official.

D.	Failure to comply with the conditions of the variance or appeal and City regulations shall result in forfeiture of the security.

E.	Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the City, the applicant shall be required to enter into a performance agreement with the City. This agreement is to provide authorization to the City to utilize the posted security and complete stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms and conditions of the permit. Said agreement shall hold harmless the City for completion of the work and address other matters as may be determined by the City Attorney.
 

7.6	CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for a variance, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the variance application relates.
 
SECTION 8.	ADMINISTRATION - APPEALS

Subdivision

8.1	Board Designation
8.2	Applicability
8.3	Procedures
8.4	Stay of Proceedings
8.5	Appeal



8.1	BOARD DESIGNATION: The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



8.2	APPLICABILITY: An appeal shall only be applicable to an interpretation of legislative intent of provisions of this Ordinance. City staff opinions and evaluations as they pertain to the impact or result of a request are not subject to the appeal procedure.



8.3	PROCEDURES:

A.	An appeal from the ruling of an administrative officer of the City shall be made by the property owner or their agent within thirty (30) days after the making of the order being appealed.

B.	The property owner or their agent shall file with the City a notice of appeal stating the specific grounds upon which the appeal is made.

C.	Any appeal filed shall be comprehensive and include all matters subject to question.
Subsequent appeals filed by the same individual or group which are intended to cause unjustifiable delay in the decision-making process shall not be accepted by the City.

D.	The filing of an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council resolution.

E.	The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall make a finding of fact and its decision by resolution within forty-five (45) days from the date at which the City Council first considered the appeal.




8.4	STAY OF PROCEEDINGS: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
 
action being appealed unless it is certified to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record on application, on notice to the City.



8.5	APPEALS  FROM  DECISIONS  OF  THE  BOARD  OF  ADJUSTMENT  AND
APPEALS: Any person or persons of any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, shall have the right to seek review within thirty (30) days of the decision with a court of record of such decision in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota, and particularly Minnesota Statutes, Section 462, as such statute may be from time to time amended, supplemented or replaced.
 
SECTION 9.	ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW

Subdivision

9.1	Purpose
9.2	General Provisions
9.3	Environmental Assessment Worksheets (EAWs)
9.4	Environmental Impact Statements (EISs)



9.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to determine whether certain projects have or may have the potential for significant environmental effects and should undergo special procedures of the Minnesota Environmental Review Program.



9.2	GENERAL PROVISIONS:

A.	No development project shall be approved prior to review by the Zoning Administrator to determine the necessity for completion of an Environmental Assessment Worksheet (EAW) or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). Procedures for EAWs and EISs are set forth in the Minnesota Environmental Quality Review Board (EQB) regulations for the Environmental Review Program authorized by Minnesota Statute 116D.04 and 116D.04S and specified in Minnesota Rules Parts 4410.0200 to 4410.7800.

B.	Environmental reviews (EAWs and EISs) shall be conducted as early as practical in the processing of a development project. Time delays in the normal permit process caused by the filing and review of the EAW or EIS shall not be considered part of the permit approval time requirements set forth within this Ordinance. Such delays shall be considered as additional required time for each required permit. The permit process for the proposed project may be continued from the point it was interrupted by the EAW/EIS process. No decision on granting a permit or other approval required to commence the project may be issued until the EAW/EIS process is completed.



9.3	ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT WORKSHEETS (EAWs):

A.	Purpose: The purpose of an EAW is to rapidly assess, in a worksheet format, whether or not a proposed action has the potential for significant environmental effects.



B.	Mandatory EAWs:   The preparation of an EAW shall be mandatory for those
 
projects that meet or exceed the thresholds contained in the State Environmental Review Program regulations, Minnesota Rules 4410.4300, as may be amended.

C.	Discretionary EAWs: A discretionary EAW may be required when it is determined that, because of the nature or location of a proposed project, the project may have the potential for significant environmental effects. The Zoning Administrator may suggest and/or the City Council may require the preparation of a discretionary EAW if it is determined that a development project may have some significant environmental impact or when there is a perception of such, provided that the project is not specifically exempted by Minnesota Rules 4410.4600, as may be amended.

D.	Procedures:

1.	Preparation and Distribution:

a.	If the Zoning Administrator determines that an EAW shall be prepared, the proposer of the project shall submit an “Application for Environmental Review” along with the EAW prepared in draft form. The applicant shall agree in writing, as a part of the application, to reimburse the City prior to the issuance of any permits for all reasonable costs, including legal and consultants’ fees, incurred in preparation and review of the EAW.

b.	Pursuant to Minnesota Rules 4410.1400, within thirty (30) days of submission of the Application for Environmental Review, the Zoning Administrator shall review the draft EAW for completeness and accuracy, add supplementary material if necessary and approve the EAW for distribution.

c.	If the EAW is ordered to be prepared pursuant to the petition process of Minnesota Rules 4410.1100, the EAW must be prepared within twenty-five (25) working days of the date of that decision, unless an extension of time is agreed upon by the proposer of the project and the Zoning Administrator.

d.	Within five (5) days of approving the EAW for distribution, the Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies of the EAW to the EQB for publication of the notice of availability of the EAW in the EQB Monitor. Copies shall be distributed at the same time to the official EAW distribution list maintained by the EQB staff. Within five (5) days of submission of the EAW to the EQB, the Zoning Administrator shall provide a press release to the City’s official newspaper, containing notice of availability of the EAW for public review.
 
2.	Neighboring Property Owner Notification:

a.	Upon completion of the EAW for distribution, the Zoning Administrator shall provide mailed notice of the availability of the EAW and date of the meeting at which the Planning Commission will consider the matter to all property owners within at least five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of the property which is the subject of the EAW. Said notice shall be mailed at minimum ten (10) days before the date of the Planning Commission meeting during which the EAW will be considered.

b.	Failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.

3.	Review by Planning Commission: During the thirty (30) day comment period that follows publication of the notice of availability of the EAW in the EQB Monitor, the Planning Commission shall review the EAW. The Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council regarding potential environmental impacts that may warrant further investigation before the project is commenced and the need for an EIS on the proposed project.

4.	Decision by City Council: The City Council shall make its decision on the need for an EIS for the proposed project at its first meeting more than ten
(10) days but not more than thirty (30) days after the close of the comment period. The Board shall base its decision on the need for an EIS and the proposed scope of an EIS on the information gathered during the EAW process and on the comments received on the EAW. Pursuant to Minnesota Rules 4410,1700, in deciding whether a project has the potential for significant environmental effects, the following factors shall be considered:

a.	Type, extent and reversibility of environmental effects.

b.	Cumulative potential effects of related or anticipated future projects.

c.	The extent to which the environmental effects are subject to mitigation by ongoing public regulatory authority.






d.	The extent to which environmental effects can be anticipated and controlled as a result of other environmental studies undertaken by public agencies or the project proposer, or of EISs previously prepared on similar projects.
 
5.	Within five (5) days of City Council’s decision on the need for an EIS, notice shall be provided to all persons on the EAW distribution list, to all persons who commented in writing during the thirty (30) days comment period, to the EQB staff for publication of the decision in the EQB Monitor and to any person upon written request.

E.	Mitigation Measures: Any measures for mitigating that are considered by the City Council in making their EIS need decision may be incorporated as conditions for approval of conditional use permits, interim use permits, variances, planned unit development, and/or site plan requests as required by this Ordinance.



9.4	ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS (EISs):

A.	Purpose: The purpose of an EIS is to provide information for governmental units, the proposer of the project and other persons to evaluate proposed projects which have the potential for significant environmental effects, to consider alternatives to the proposed projects and to explore methods for reducing adverse environmental effects.

B.	Mandatory EISs: An EIS shall be prepared for any project that meets or exceeds the thresholds of any of the EIS categories listed in Minnesota Rules 4410.4400, as may be amended.

C.	Discretionary EISs: An EIS shall be prepared when the City Council determines that, based on the EAW and any comments or additional information received during the EAW comment period, the proposed project has the potential for significant environmental effects, or when the City Council and the proposer of the project agree that an EIS should be prepared.



D.	Procedures:

1.	All projects requiring an EIS must have an EAW on file with the City, which will be used to determine the scope of the EIS. All EISs shall be prepared according to the procedures and requirements of the State Environmental Review Program, Rules 4410.2100-4410.3000, as may be amended. The costs of preparation of an EIS shall be assessed to the project proposer in accordance with Minnesota Rules Parts 4410.6000 to 4100.6500, as may be amended.

2.	Any proposal, project or use on which an EIS is required shall be considered a conditional use as defined in Section 2.02 of this Ordinance and shall comply with the procedure for approval of a conditional use permit. Mitigating measures identified in the EIS shall be incorporated as conditions
 
of issuance of the conditional use permit.
 


Subdivision
 
SECTION 10.	SITE PLAN REVIEW
 

10.1	Purpose
10.2	Exceptions to Review
10.3	Procedures
10.4	Certification of Taxes Paid
10.5	Evaluation Criteria
10.6	Information Requirement
10.7	Plan Modifications
10.8	Lapse of Approval
10.9	Site Improvement, Performance Agreement, and Security
10.10	Building and Other Permits
10.11	Inspections During Development



10.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to establish a formal site plan review procedure and provide regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site design standards consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance.



10.2	EXCEPTIONS TO REVIEW:  The following shall be excepted from the foregoing requirements:

A.	Agricultural developments in the A-1 and A-2 Zoning Districts.

B.	Single family detached dwellings.



10.3	PROCEDURES: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, an application for site plan approval shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless extended pursuant to Statute or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional sixty (60) days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional City requirements are as follows:

A.	Application: An application for site plan approval shall be filed with the City for all developments (except for agricultural developments in A-1 and A-2 Zoning Districts and single family dwellings) within the City. Such application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form and shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by the City Council resolution. The proposed site plan shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible new business Planning Commission meeting occurring after fourteen (14) days from the date of official submission. The
 
plan shall be considered as officially submitted only when all of the information and fee requirements are complied with.

B.	Preliminary Site Plan:

1.	Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary site plan is to provide a specific and particular plan upon which the Planning Commission will base its recommendation to the City Council and with which substantial compliance is necessary for the preparation of the final plan.

2.	Schedule.

a.	The developer shall meet with the Zoning Administrator and/or City staff to discuss the proposed development.

b.	The developer shall submit to the Zoning Administrator the necessary application data in site plan form as required herein, and filing fee at least fourteen (14) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting on which the proposal is tentatively scheduled to be heard.

c.	The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.

d.	The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to obtain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors; said information to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.

e.	The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission to present the proposal and answer any questions concerning the proposed development.

f.	The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation of approval or denial on the preliminary site plan to the City Council within sixty
(60) days of the date of the initial Planning Commission meeting at which the case was heard. If the Planning Commission fails to act within the time specified herein, it shall be deemed to have recommended the plan for approval.
g.	The Planning Commission shall recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
 

h.	Such recommendation shall be in writing and be accompanied by the report and recommendation of the City Engineer.

i.	The City Council shall not grant site plan approval until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission and the City Engineer. The City Council shall review all recommendations and approve or deny the application for site plan approval within thirty (30) days of the initial City Council meeting at which the case was heard.

j.	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City Council shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made a part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.

k.	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

l.	If, upon reviewing said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may, before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide the Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reason for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular action.

m.	Whenever an application for site plan review has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial; and a subsequent application affecting substantially the same property shall likewise not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for an additional six (6) months from the date of the second denial unless a decision to reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.

C.	Final Site Plan:
 

1.	Purpose. The final site plan is to serve as a complete, thorough, and permanent public record of the manner in which the subject site is to be developed. It shall incorporate all prior approved plan revisions resulting from the site plan review process.

2.	Schedule. Upon receiving all required final approvals through the site plan review process, the developer shall prepare a final site plan reflecting all revisions and conditions of approval. Three (3) copies of this final site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval.

3.	City staff shall review the final site plan for consistency with the conditions of approval outlined by the City Council. If all conditions for approval have been met, the Zoning Administrator shall grant final site plan approval. Failure to meet the specific conditions shall result in denial of final site plan approval.

4.	Any modifications of the proposal, not specified as a condition for approval by the City Council, shall result in review of the proposal by the Planning Commission and City Council pursuant to the procedures outlined in Section
10.03.B.2 of this Ordinance.

D.	If, after one (1) year from being granted site plan approval, the plan as permitted by the approval shall not have been initiated, then such approval shall become null and void unless a request by petition for an extension of time has been made to and granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing thirty (30) days before the expiration of the original site plan approval. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition.

E.	The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the site plan approval. Such petition shall be presented to the City Council for a decision.



10.4	CERTIFICATION OF TAXES PAID: Prior to approving an application for a final site plan, the applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the site plan application relates.

10.5	EVALUATION CRITERIA: The Planning Commission and City Council shall evaluate the effects of the proposed site plans. This review shall be based upon, but not be limited to, compliance with the City Comprehensive Plan and provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
 

10.6	INFORMATION REQUIREMENT: The information required for all site plan applications generally consists of the following items, and shall be submitted when requested and specified by the Zoning Administrator.

A.	Site Plan:

1.	Name and address of developer/owner.

2.	Name and address of architect/designer.

3.	Date of plan preparation.

4.	Dates and description of all revisions.

5.	Name of project or development.

6.	Scale of plan (engineering scale only, at one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or less).

7.	North point indication.

8.	Lot dimension and area.

10.	Required and proposed setbacks.

11.	Location, setback and dimension of all buildings on the lot including both existing and proposed structures.

12.	Location of all adjacent buildings, wells and septic systems located within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property in question.

13.	Location, number, and dimensions of existing and proposed parking spaces.

14.	Location, number, and dimensions of existing and proposed loading spaces

15.	Curb cuts, driveways.
16.	Vehicular circulation.

17.	Sidewalks, walkways.

18.	Location and type of all proposed lighting.

19.	Location of recreational and service areas.
 
20.	Location of rooftop equipment and proposed screening.

21.	Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage, and recyclables.

22.	Location of proposed well and sewage treatment systems.

B.	Grading/Storm Water Drainage Plan:

1.	Existing contours at two (2) foot intervals.

2.	Proposed grade elevations, two (2) foot maximum intervals.

3.	Drainage plan including configuration of drainage areas and calculations.

4.	Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevations, type of castings, and type of materials.

5.	Spot elevations.

6.	Proposed driveway grades.

7.	Surface water ponding and treatment areas.

8.	Erosion control measures.

9.	Wetland boundaries.

C.	Landscape Plan:

1.	Planting Schedule (table) containing:

a.	Symbols.

b.	Quantities.

c.	Common names.

d.	Botanical names.

e.	Sizes of plant material.

f.	Root specification (bare root, balled and burlapped, potted, etc.)

g.	Special planting instructions.
 
2.	Location, type and size of all existing significant trees to be removed or preserved.

3.	Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature crown diameter or spread for local hardiness zone).

4.	Typical sections in details of fences, tie walls, planter boxes, tot lots, picnic areas, berms and the like.

5.	Other existing or proposed conditions which could be expected to affect landscaping.

D.	Other Plans and Information: (May be submitted in combination pursuant to approval by the Zoning Administrator)

1.	Legal description of property under consideration.

2.	Proof of ownership of the land for which a site plan approval has been requested.

3.	Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings (type, color, and materials used in all external surfaces).

4.	“Typical” floor plan and “typical” room plan.

5.	Extent of and any proposed modifications to land within the Shoreland, Wetland, or Floodplain Overlay Districts as described and regulated in Sections 64, 65 and 66 of this Ordinance.

6.	Type, location and size (area and height) of all signs to be erected upon the property in question.

7.	Restrictive covenants.
10.7	PLAN MODIFICATIONS:

A.	Minor Changes: Proposed minor structural additions involving ten (10) percent or less of the total existing floor area and proposed minor site expansions or modifications involving ten (10) percent or less of the total existing site area which meet all ordinance requirements may be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to a building permit being issued and shall not require Planning Commission or City Council review, subject to the following:

1.	This Section shall apply in the cases of new developments which have received City Council plan approval, but for which building permits have yet to be taken; and this Section shall apply to existing developments on file
 
which have City Council approved site plans.

2.	Compliance with all Ordinance requirements shall be construed to include all adopted policies and codes.

3.	Any major variances from Ordinance and policy requirements shall be subject to the established review and hearing procedures for site plan and variance approval.

4.	Plans submitted for minor structural additions or minor site alterations under the terms of this Section shall be the same as those required for site plan approval.

5.	A copy of the plans approved under this Section shall be appropriately certified by the Zoning Administrator and placed on file with the City Council approved plans.

B.	Major Changes:

1.	Plans not qualifying as minor shall be classified as major.

2.	An amended site plan involving major changes shall be applied for and administered in a manner similar to that required for a new site plan.



10.8	LAPSE OF APPROVAL:

A.	Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Administrator or City Council as may be applicable, the site plan approval shall become null and void one (1) year after the date of approval, unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started the construction of any building, structure, addition or alteration, or use requested as part of the approved plan. The property owner or applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension in accordance with this section.

B.	An application to extend the approval of a site plan for up to an additional one (1) year shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator not less than thirty (30) days before the expiration of said approval. Such an application shall state the facts of the request, showing a good faith attempt to utilize the site plan approval, and it shall state the additional time being requested to begin the proposed construction. The request shall be heard and decided by the Zoning Administrator prior to the lapse of approval of the original request. A request pertaining to a major project involving a longer period of time than one (1) year or a second request for a time extension shall be presented to the Planning Commission for recommendation and to the City Council for a decision.
 
C.	In making its determination on whether an applicant has made a good faith attempt to utilize the site plan approval, the Zoning Administrator or the City Council, as applicable, shall consider such factors as the type, design, and size of the proposed construction, any applicable restrictions on financing, or special and/or unique circumstances beyond the control of the applicant which have caused the delay.



10.9	SITE IMPROVEMENT PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT AND SECURITY:

A.	Upon City Council approval of a site plan and prior to the issuance of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvement or development, the developer shall execute a performance agreement setting out site improvement items and terms of completion of said items. The performance agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney.

B.	Except in the case of non-income producing residential property (excluding relocated structures), upon approval of the site plan, the City shall be provided, where deemed necessary, with an irrevocable letter of credit, cash escrow, certificate of deposit payable to the City, or cash deposit prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall be non-cancelable and shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the site plan approval and the ordinances of the City.

C.	The security shall be in the amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the City Engineer’s or City Building Official’s estimated cost of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or development. Said project may be handled in stages upon the discretion of the City Engineer or Building Official.

D.	The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the conditional use permit and regulations of the City have been issued by the City Building Official.

E.	Failure to comply with the conditions of the site plan approval or the regulations of the City shall result in forfeiture of the security.



10.10	BUILDING AND OTHER PERMITS: Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, upon receiving notice from the Zoning Administrator that the final site plan has been approved and a properly executed performance agreement has been received, and upon application of the applicant pursuant to the applicable ordinances of the City, all appropriate officials for the City may issue building and other permits to the applicant for development, construction, and other work in the area encompassed by the final site plan provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued unless the appropriate official is first
 
satisfied that the requirements of all codes and ordinances which are applicable to the permit sought, have been satisfied.



10.11	INSPECTIONS DURING DEVELOPMENT:

A.	Site Improvements:

1.	Following preliminary site plan approval by the City Council and final site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator, the City Engineer shall specify those site improvement items requiring inspections and approval by the City.

2.	Within thirty (30) days of such notice, the Board shall revoke the site plan approval or shall take such steps as it shall deem necessary to compel compliance with the final site plan as approved or shall require the landowner or applicant to seek an amendment of the final site plan.

B.	Compliance with Overall Plan: Following final plan approval of a site plan, or a stage thereof, the Building Official shall, periodically until the completion of the development, review all permits issued, and construction undertaken and compare actual development with the approved site plan.

1.	If the Building Official finds that development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved plan, he or she shall immediately notify the City Council.



2.	Within thirty (30) days of such notice, the City Council shall either by the provisions of the Ordinance revoke the site plan approval or shall take such steps as it shall deem necessary to compel compliance with the final site plan as approved; or shall require the landowner or applicant to seek an amendment of the final site plan.
 
SECTION 11.	CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

Subdivision

11.1	Certificate Required
11.2	Application



11.1	CERTIFICATE REQUIRED: Except for farm and residential buildings, no building or structure hereafter erected or moved, or that portion of an existing structure of building erected or moved shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy of zoning shall have been issued by the City Building Official stating that the building or structure complies with all of the provisions within this Ordinance and applicable state building code sections.



11.2	APPLICATION: Said certificate shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit, conditional use permit, interim use permit, and/or variance and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the City Building Official shall have found the building or structure satisfactory and given final inspection. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution.
 
SECTION 12.	ADMINISTRATION - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



Subdivision

12.1	Administration
12.2	Violations
12.3	Application to City Personnel
12.4	Additional Equitable Remedies
12.5	Enforcement Procedures



12.1	ADMINISTRATION: This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator who is appointed by the City Council or his or her designee as approved by the City Council.



12.2	VIOLATIONS: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor prescribed under state law. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



12.3	APPLICATION TO CITY PERSONNEL: The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official duty imposed by this Ordinance shall not invalidate this Ordinance.



12.4	ADDITIONAL EQUITABLE REMEDIES: In the event of a violation of the threatened violation of any provision of this Ordinance, or any provision or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator in the name of St. Augusta may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violation or threatened violation.



12.5	ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:

A.	Upon receipt of complaint, identification of a violation of this Ordinance, or by the direction of the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall investigate said violation to determine its validity.




B.	If it is determined that a condition or provision of this Ordinance or a permit issued
 
pursuant to this Ordinance has been violated, the investigator shall submit a report to the City Council and the Building Official identifying the violation, the location, and the property owner(s) responsible for the violation.

C.	Upon submission of the report, the City Building Official shall, on behalf of the City, send the property owner(s) a letter of citation informing them of said violation and ordering compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The letter of citation shall include a time frame in which the property owner(s) must bring the property in compliance with this Ordinance.

D.	The City Building Official shall inspect the property for compliance with this Ordinance upon expiration of the time frame outlined in the letter of citation. If the violation has not been corrected, the City Building Official shall notify the City Council.

E.	Upon notification by the City Building Official of failure to comply with this Ordinance, the City Council shall instruct the City Attorney to begin legal proceedings for enforcement of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 14.   NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS

Subdivision

14.1	Purpose
14.2	General Provisions
14.3	Non-Conforming Uses
14.4	Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures
14.5	Non-Conforming Lots
14.6	Special Protection Districts



14.1	PURPOSE: It is the purpose of this section to provide for the regulation of non- conforming buildings, structures, uses, and lots, and to specify those requirements, circumstances, and conditions under which non-conforming buildings, structures, uses, and lots will be operated, maintained, and regulated. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of this Ordinance that non-conforming buildings, structures, uses, and lots not be allowed to continue without restriction. Furthermore, it is the intent of this section that all non-conformities shall be eventually brought into conformity.



14.2	GENERAL PROVISIONS:

A.	Conditional Uses: Any established use, building or lot legally existing prior to October 7, 2003 and which is herein classified by this Ordinance as requiring a conditional use permit may be continued in like fashion and activity and shall automatically be considered as having received conditional use permit approval. Any change to such a use or building shall however require a new conditional use permit be processed according to this Ordinance.

B.	Interim Uses: Any established use, building or lot legally existing prior to October 7, 2003, and which is herein classified by this Ordinance as requiring an interim use permit may be continued in like fashion and activity and shall automatically be considered as having received interim use permit approval. Any change to such a use or building shall, however, require a new interim use permit be processed according to this Ordinance.

C.	Threats to General Welfare: Non-conforming buildings, structures, and/or uses, which based upon documented study and evidence, pose a danger and/or threat to the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, shall:

1.	Be legally declared a nuisance by the City Council.

2.	Upon being identified by the City Council and upon the owner being notified in writing by the Zoning Administrator, the owner shall provide to the City
 
Council a documented time schedule and program with rationale to support the proposed amortization of the building, structure, or use investments which will result in the termination or correction of the non-conformity.

a.	The termination/correction time schedule shall be based upon, but not be limited to factors such as the initial investment and the degree of threat or danger being posed.

b.	The acceptability of the time schedule shall be determined by the City Council with right of appeal.

c.	In no case shall a time schedule exceed two (2) years.



14.3	NON-CONFORMING USES:

A.	Effective Date: The lawful use of buildings or land existing at the effective date of this Ordinance which does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance may be continued; provided, however, that no such non-conforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased, nor shall any such non-conforming use be expanded to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, nor shall any such non-conforming use be moved to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was conducted at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.

B.	Continued Use: A lawful, non-conforming use shall not be enlarged, but may be continued at the same size and in the same manner of operation as it existed on the date it became legally non-conforming except as hereinafter specified.

C.	Changes to Non-Conforming Uses:

1.	When a lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use.

2.	A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed to lessen the non-conformity of use. Once a non-conforming structure or parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter be so altered to increase the non-conformity.



D.	Discontinuance: In the event that a non-conforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
 
E.	Normal Maintenance: Maintenance of a building or other structure containing or used by a non-conforming use will be permitted when it includes necessary non- structural repair and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the non- conforming use.



14.4	NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:

A.	Restoration: No lawful non-conforming building or structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or a public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its value, as determined by the City Building Official, shall be restored, except in conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance.

B.	Alterations: Alteration and normal maintenance to a lawful non-conforming building or structure may be made provided:

1.	The alterations do not expand the building size.

2.	The alterations do not change the building occupancy capacity or parking demand.

3.	The alteration does not increase the non-conformity of the building or the use.

C.	Expansion of Non-Conforming Buildings or Structures:

1.	Administrative Approvals: The following expansions of lawful non-conforming building and structures may be approved through the administrative permit process by the Zoning Administrator subject to provisions of Section 6 of this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination that the building expansion will have not external negative impacts upon adjacent properties or public rights-of-way.

a.	Expansion of buildings found to be non-conforming only by reason of height, yard setback, or lot area may be permitted provided the structural non-conformity is not increased and the expansion complies with the performance standards of this Ordinance.



b.	Lawful non-conforming single family and two family units may be expanded to improve the livability provided the non-conformity of the structure is not increased.

2.	Conditional Use Permit: Lawful non-conforming commercial, industrial, public, semi-public, and multiple family structures may be expanded on the
 
same lot by conditional use permit provided:

a.	The expansion will not increase the non-conformity of the building or site.

b.	The new building expansion will conform with all the applicable performance standards of this Ordinance. A conditional use permit shall not be issued under this section for a deviation from other requirements of this Ordinance unless variances are also approved.

c.	The request for conditional use permit shall be evaluated based on standards and criteria set forth in Section 4 of this Ordinance.



14.5	NON-CONFORMING LOTS:

A.	Vacant or Redeveloped Lots:

1.	Lot Combination: If an owner has an interest in more than one (1) lot of record contiguous to other lots of record, all such lots shall be combined to meet the requirements of this section or the applicable zoning district standards. If sufficient contiguous property is held in one ownership to comply with the standard of the applicable zoning district, then those more restrictive provisions will apply. In no circumstances will there be approval of any proposal for multiple lot developments based upon lots of record, and not conforming with the provisions of the existing zoning district.

2.	Single Family Detached Dwellings: Legal non-conforming, vacant, substandard sized lots of record may be developed for single family detached dwellings upon approval of an administrative permit by the Zoning Administrator, provided that:

a.	The lot in question was legally established in accordance with Ordinance requirements existing at the time of its creation and is a separate, distinct tax parcel with a parcel identification number.

b.	The lot is properly zoned for single family land uses.

c.	Minimum Lot Size.

(1)	Sewered Lots: A lot of record having direct access to municipal sewer  and water shall be considered buildable provided measurements for lot area and/or width are within seventy (70) percent of the requirements of the base zoning district.
 

(2)	Unsewered Lots: A lot of record not having access to municipal sewer  and water shall be considered buildable provided it can be demonstrated by means satisfactory to the City that no ground water, soil or other contamination will result.

d.	The lot in question has frontage on a public street.

e.	Public health concerns (potable water and sewage collection and treatment) can be adequately provided.

f.	The setback and yard requirements of the applicable zoning district or Section 16.04 of this Ordinance can be achieved while simultaneously resulting in development which complies with the character and quality of the immediate area and the objectives of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance.

g.	The lot in question and related potential development is evaluated based upon criteria outlined in Section 4.02.F and is found to be acceptable per these standards.

B.	Developed Lots: An existing conforming use on a lot of substandard size and/or width may be expanded or enlarged if such expansion or enlargement meets all other provisions of this Ordinance.



14.6	SPECIAL PROTECTION DISTRICTS: Non-conforming buildings and uses within the special protection districts as described in Section 64 through 67 of this Ordinance shall be subject to the applicable regulations and standards relating to such buildings and uses in that section.
 
SECTION 15
GENERAL BUILDING AND PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS



Subdivision

15.1	Purpose
15.2	Dwelling Unit Restriction
15.3	Platted and Unplatted Property
15.4	Accessory Buildings
15.5	Swimming Pools
15.6	Fences
15.7	Required Fencing, Screening and Landscaping
15.8	Traffic Visibility
15.9	Drainage Plans
15.10	Glare
15.11	Smoke
15.12	Dust and Other Particulated Matter
15.13	Air Pollution
15.14	Noise
15.15	Refuse
15.16	Outside Storage, Residential, Commercial and Industrial Uses
15.17	Sewage  Disposal   ·
15.18	Waste Material
15.19	Bulk Storage (Liquid)
15.20	Radiation Emission
15.21	Electrical Emission
15.22	Temporary Storage of Fill
15.23	Sales in Residential and Agricultural Zoning Districts



15.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to establish general development performance standards . These standards are intended and designed to assure compatibility of uses; to prevent blight, deterioration, and decay; and to enhance the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City.



15.2	DWELLING UNIT RESTRICTION:

A		No garage, tent , accessory building, travel trailer or motor home shall at any time be used as  living quarters,  temporarily  or permanently,  except  as allowed  by
------sr""-e c=t1on  15.02.D of this  Ordinance.	- --	-    -
 
B.	The basement portion of finished home may be used for habitation purposes provided it is properly damp-proofed, complies with applicable sections of the Fire and Building Codes, and is otherwise approved by the City Building Official.

C.	Tents, play houses, recreational camping vehicles (travel trailers}, motor homes or similar structures may be used only for play or recreational purposes.

D.	Temporary establishment of dwelling units is allowed by administrative permit on residential lots during reconstruction of the principal structure damaged by fire or natural disaster, provided that:

1.	The temporary dwelling unit is not established  prior to  building  permit approval for the reconstruction of the principal structure.

2.	Occupancy of the temporary dwelling unit is limited to the residents of the prior or future principal structure.

3.	The applicant  demonstrate  an intent to  proceed with  reconstruction  of principal structure, including construction contracts, proof of financial or other evidence of intended project completion.

4.	The temporary dwelling unit meet all setback requirements within the Zoning District for which the property is located, unless determined impractical by the City Building Official.

5.	The temporary dwelling unit shall not exceed one (1) story or fifteen (15)
feet in height, whichever is least.

6.	The temporary dwelling housing unit is connected to a private water and sewer	system approved by the City, Stearns County, and State Department of Health.

7.	A security is provided to ensure removal of the temporary dwelling unit upon completion of the reconstruction project. The security shall be in the amount equal to Zoning Administrator's estimated costs for removal of the temporary dwelling unit.

8.	The applicant  submit  a  permit  application  and  a  site  plan  (to  scale) showing the location of lot lines, the proposed location of the temporary dwelling unit, the principal structure and other prominent site features.

9.	The administrative permit provisions of Section 6 of this Ordinance are cur rsidet ed ar rd salisfactor ily met.
 
15.3	PLATTED AND UNPLATTED PROPERTY:

A		Except if determined unnecessary by the City Council, any person desiring to improve property shall submit to the City Building Official a Certificate of Survey of said premises and information on the location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings, location of easements crossing the property, encroachments, and any other information which may be necessary to ensure conformance to City zoning provisions .

8.   All buildings shall be so placed so that they will not obstruct future streets which may be constructed by the City in conformity with existing streets and according to the Comprehensive Plan and to the system and standards employed by the City. Furthermore, all buildings shall be placed so that they will not obstruct future utility routes or the potential resubdivision of the property.

C.	Except in the case of farm and hobby farm operations, or by conditional use permit, no more than one (1) principal  building shall be located on a lot. The words "principal building" shall be given their common, ordinary meaning as defined in Section 2.02 of this Ordinance.

D.	On a through lot, both street lot lines shall be front yards for applying the yard and parking setback regulations of this Ordinance.

E.	When a development is proposed which is to be located on two (2) or more lots, and such lots are required to meet the minimum district area and frontage requirement and/or are required to accommodate the use, the lots shall be combined in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance, prior to the issuing of a building permit.

F. When two (2) or more lots are located in the same residential district, one (1) or more of which lack adequate area or dimensions to qualify for residential use under the current Ordinance requirements and are contiguous and held in one ownership, they shall be combined for use in order to meet the lot requirements by resubdividing the property in accordance with the City Subdivision Ordinance .



15.4	ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, USES AND EQUIPMENT:

A		Farms are exempt from the requirements of this Subsection and are regulated by Section 23 of this Ordinance.

 	8.	Detached Single Family Uses: 	

1.	No accessory use, building, structure or equipment shall be allowed within a required front yard. With the exception of an attached garage, no accessory  building,  structure,  use or equipment  may be placed within  a
 
front yard on lots less than five (5) acres. On lots of five (5) acres or larger accessory buildings or structures may be located in a front yard if it is no closer to the front lot line than the residence or principal building of adjoining properties and in no case closer than 150 feet from the front lot line

2.	The area of an accessory building, structure, and/or detached garage for a single family dwelling shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the required rear yard.

3.	For lots less than five (5) acres, no building permit shall  be issued for more than one (1) detached accessory building or detached garage for each single family dwelling.

4.	Attached  garages  shall  not  exceed  one  thousand  one  hundred  (1,100) square feet.

4 5. The combined total floor area of  a  detached  accessory  building  or buildings or detached garages shall not exceed the following maximum area requirements :

a.	Within  the  urban service  area  designated  by the  Comprehensive Plan.

	Lot Area	Maximum Total Floor Area of All Detached Accessory Structures
1/3 acre or smaller	480 square feet
1/3 acre to 1/2 acre	624 square feet
1/2 acre to 213 acre	816 square feet

b.	Within  the  rural  service  area  designated  by  the  Comprehensive Plan:


Lot Area	
Maximum Total Floor Area of All Detached Accessory Structures

1.00 ac. or smaller	
1,250 square feet

1.01 to 2.00 acres	
1,500 square feet

2.01 to 4.99 acres	
2,000 square feet

5.00 to 6.99 acres	-
2,500 square feet

7.00 ac. or larger	
4,000 square feet
 

c.	Within the  rural service  area designated  by the  Comprehensive Plan:


Lot Area	
Maximum Total Floor Area of All Detached Accessory Structures
1.00 ac. or smaller	1,250 square feet

1.01 to 2.00 acres	
1,500 square feet

2.01 to 4.99 acres	
2,000 square feet
5.00 to 6.99 acres	2,500 square feet
7.00 to 9.99 acres	4,000 square feet

10.00 acres or larger	
No Limit

6.	Accessory buildings with an area of one thousand (1,000) square feet or less may encroach into the required side and rear yard setbacks within the rear yard of a lot, except, however, that no such encroachment may occur on required easement, or in a required side yard setback abutting a street in the case of a corner lot.  In no case shall the setback be less than ten
(10) feet.

C.	Except as was otherwise noted, accessory buildings and uses for all principal uses other than single family detached dwellings shall conform to the setback requirements specified for the respective zoning district in which they are located.

D.	No accessory uses or equipment such as air conditioning cooling structures or condensers which generate noise beyond established state standards may be located in a required side yard except for side yards abutting streets where equipment is fully screened from view.

E.	Height:
1.	Accessory buildings shall comply with the following height limitations: Zoning	Maximum Height
District
A-1	20 feet
A-2	20 feet	-	-
-	R-1	20 feet
R-2	20 feet
R-3	20 feet
 

R-4	20 feet
R-5	20 feet
B-1	35 feet
B-2	35 feet
B-3	35 feet
B-W	35 feet
1-1	35 feet
1-2	35 feet

2.	Accessory	buildings	may · exceed	the	height	limitations	in   Section
15.04.E.1 by conditional use permit subject to the provisions of Section
16.02.A of this Ordinance.

G.	Building Type and Standards :

1.	Architectural details for accessory buildings are to be the same or similar as for the principal building based upon (but not limited to) the following criteria:

a.	Scale and detailing.

b.	Roof pitch orientation §md slope.

c.	Overhang depth and details.

d.	Window and exterior door proportion and types .

e.	Building material.

f.	Exterior color.

2.	Pole buildings, as defined by this Ordinance, are allowed as a permitted accessory structure within the A-1 District and A-2 District provided that:

4	a.	The  lot  is  within  the  urban  service  area  or  rural  service  area designated by the Comprehensive Plan.

b.	The lot on which the building is to be located is larger than five (5) acres.
 
15.5	SWIMMING POOLS:

A	Swimming pools shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Section 15.04
of this Ordinance.

8.	A permit shall be required for all permanently constructed swimming pools with a capacity of five thousand {5,000) gallons and/or two (2) feet or more of depth. Each  application  for  a permit to  construct  or  erect  a swimming  pool shall  be accompanied by plans of sufficient detail to show:

1.	The proposed location and its relationship to the other principal buildings on the lot.

2.	The size of the pool.

3.	Fencing and other fixtures existing on the lot, including utility location and trees.

4.	The location, size and types of equipment to be used in connection with the pool, including but not limited to filter unit, pump, fencing and the pool itself.

5.	That the requirements contained in Subd. 15.05.C and 15.05.D of this section will be satisfied.

C.	All below  ground  pools for  which  a  permit  is  required  and  granted  shall  be provided with safeguards  to prevent children from gaining uncontrolled access. This  may  be accomplished  with  fencing,  screening  or  other  enclosure, or  any combination thereof, of sufficient density as to be impenetrable. If fences  are employed, they shall be at least four (4) feet in height.  The opening between the bottom of the fence and the ground or other surfaces shall not be more than four
(4)	inches. Fences shall be of a non-corrosive material and shall be constructed
so as to be not easily climbable . All fencing openings or points of entry into the pool enclosure shall be equipped with gates or doors. All gates or  doors to swimming pools shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at a sufficient height so as to be inaccessible to all small children. All fence posts shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases or other suitable protection.

D.	All above  ground  pools  for  which  a  permit  is required  and  granted  shall  be provided with safeguards to prevent children from gaining uncontrolled access.
 
15.6	FENCES:  Fences shall be permitted in all yards subject to the following:

A.		Location:   All  boundary  line fences  shall be located entirely within  the  private property	of  the  person,  firm  or   corporation   constructing   or   causing   the construction of such fence.

8.	Construction and Maintenance:

1.	Every fence shall be constructed in a professional and substantial manner and of substantial material reasonably suitable for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. The materials and design shall also be compatible with other structures in the area in which the fence is located and shall not cause blight or a negative impact.

2.	Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence which is or has become dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare is a public nuisance, and the City shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof.

3.	All posts or similar supporting instruments used in the construction of fences shall be faced inward toward the property being fenced .

4.	The decorative side of any fence which abuts an agricultural use may face inwards towards the property being fenced.

C.	Access: All fences shall be provided with a gate which affords reasonable and convenient access for public safety.

D.	Barb Wire and Electric Fences: Except as specified in this - subsection , barbed wire fences and electric fences shall only be allowed when related to farming and hobby farms.

E.	All fences shall not obstruct natural drainage.

F.	Grade Modifications: Any modifications to the grade or drainage of a property in conjunction with the construction of a fence shall be subject to Subd. 15.09 of this Ordinance .

G.	Residential District Fences:   All residential district fences shall be placed within
 	the property being fenced. 	

1.	Except in the case of a side yard on a corner lot which abuts a street, fences along side property lines shall not be more than six (6) feet in height for the distance  commencing from a point on such side property
 
line located along the rear lot line and proceeding thence along such side property line to a point thereon which would be intersected by the front wall line of the existing principal structure on the lot.

2.	Fences along or paralleling any rear property line which is also the rear property line of an abutting lot shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.

3.	Except in the case of a side yard on a corner lot which abuts a street, fences along a rear property line which line constitutes the side lot line of an abutting lot shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.

4.	The required screening provisions for residential districts shall supersede, where applicable , the provisions of this subdivision.

5.	Fences extending across required front yards or a required side  yard which abuts a street on a corner lot shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height and shall be at least seventy-five  (75) percent open space for passage	of air and light, and shall maintain the traffic visibility requirements of Subd. 15.08 of this Ordinance .

H.	Commercial and Industrial District Fences:  All commercial and industrial fences shall be placed within the property being fenced .

1.	Fences extending across a required front yard or a required side yard which abuts a street on a corner lot shall be at least seventy-five (75) percent open for the passage of air and light and shall maintain the traffic visibility requirements of Subd. 15.08 of this Ordinance.

2.	Business and  industrial fences may be erected up to eight (8) feet in height. Fences in excess of eight (8) feet shall require a conditional use permit.

3.	Fences which are primarily erected as a security measure may have arms projecting into the applicant's property on which barbed wire can be fastened commencing at a point at least seven (7) feet above the ground.

4.	The screening provisions for commercial  and  industrial  districts  shall supersede , where applicable, the provisions of this Subsection .

I.	Special  Purpose Fences:   Fences for special purposes and fences  differing in construction,  height or length  may be permitted by the  City by issuance  of a
conditional use permit as regulated by Section 4 of this Ordinaoc i:idings ---'-==--=­
shall be made  that the fence is necessary to protect, buffer or improve the premises for which such fence is intended. The City may stipulate the height, location, construction and type of special fence thereby allowed.
 
15.7	REQUIRED FENCING, SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING:

A	Fencing and Screening: Except as may be otherwise allowed  by  the  City Council, any non-residential use except agriculture and farming (i.e., structure, parking or storage) which abuts property zoned for residential use, shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a non-residential use is across the street from a residential zone, but not on  that side of a non-residential use considered to be the  front  (as defined by this Ordinance) . All fencing and screening specifically required by this Ordinance shall be subject to Subd. 15.08 of this Ordinance and shall consist of either a fence or a green belt planting strip as provided for below:

1.	A green belt planting strip shall consist of coniferous trees and/or deciduous trees and plants and shall be of sufficient width and density to provide an effective visual screen. This planting strip shall be designed to provide complete visual screening to a minimum height of  six (6) feet. Earth mounding or berms may be used but shall not be used to achieve more than three (3) feet of the required screen. The planting  plan and type of plantings shall require the approval of the City Council.

2.	A required screening fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick, wood or metal. Such fence shall provide a solid screening effect six (6) feet in height.	The design and materials used in constructing a required screening		fence shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator and the Building Official. Fences in excess of six (6) feet in height shall require approval of the City Council.

8.		Landscaping, General Residential: Fences or  trees  placed  upon  utility easements are subject to removal at the cost of the property owner if required for the maintenance or improvement of the utility. Trees on utility easements containing overhead wires shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. (The planting of large trees is not recommended under overhead wires.)  The amount of hard surfacing provided on a lot shall qe limited to the size and area necessary to accommodate ordinance requirements-and allowances.

C.	Landscaping, Semi-Public, and All Income Producing Property Uses: Except as may be otherwise allowed by the City Council, all above referenced uses shall be subject to mandatory landscape plan prior to approval of a building permit.

1.	Said landscape plan shall be developed with an emphasis upon the following areas:

a.	The boundary or perimeter  of the proposed site at points adjoining other property.
 
b.	The immediate perimeter of the structure.

c.	The perimeter of parking and loading areas.

2.	All  landscaping  incorporated  in said  plan shall  conform  to the following standards and criteria:

a.	All plants must at least equal the following minimum size:

Balled and Burlapped, Container Grown, or Bare Root*

 
Shade Trees
Ornamental Trees (Flowering
Crab, Hawthorn, etc.) Coniferous Trees
Large Deciduous Shrubs (Dogwood, Viburnum, etc,)
Large Coniferous Shrubs (Globe arborvitae, migho pine, etc.)
Small Deciduous Shrubs (spirea, potentilla, etc.)
Small Coniferous Shrubs (spreading evergreens)
 
1.5	to 2 inch diameter

1 inch diameter
4-6 feet

2-4 feet

·	2 feet

18-24 inches

18-24 inches (spread)
 

*	All trees shall be balled and burlapped (B&B) and shrubs shall be container grown unless otherwise approved by City staff.

Type and mode of planting  are  dependent upon time of planting season, availability, and site conditions (soils, climate,  ground water, irrigation, grading, etc.).

b.	Spacing:

(1)	Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three
(3) feet from the fence  line or property line and shall not be planted to conflict with public plantings based  on the judgment of the Zoning Administrator .

(2)	Where plant materials are planted in two (2) or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator.

(3)	Where plants or screening is intended, large deciduous and coniferous shrubs shall not be planted  more  than four  (4) feet on center.
 
c.	Types of New Trees.	Plantings, suitable trees include, but are not limited to the following:
Botanical Name		Common Name Quercus (varieties)		Oak
Acer platanoides (and	Norway Maple
varieties)
Acer rubrum (varieties)	Red Maple
Acer saccharum	Sugar Maple
Celtis occidentalis	Hackberry
Betula (varieties)	Birch Gleditsia Triacanthos	Honeylocust
inermis (varieties)
Tilia cordata	Little Leaf Linden (and varieties)
Tilia americana	American Linden (and varieties)
Fraxinus pennsylvania	Green Ash
(varieties)
Ginkgo biloba (male	Ginkgo
tree only)
Gymnocladus dioicus	Kentucky Coffee Tree

d.	Design:

(1)	The landscape plan must show some form of designed site amenities	(i.e., composition of plant materials, and/or creative grading, decorative lighting, exterior sculpture, etc., which are largely intended for aesthetic purposes).

(2)	All areas within the property lines (or beyond, if side grading extends  beyond)  shall  be treated.  All  exterior  areas  not paved or designated as drives, parking or storage, must be planted with ornamental vegetation (lawns, ground covers or shrubs) unless    otherwise    approved    by   the    Zoning Administrator.

(3)	Slopes that are to be maintained as turf in excess of 2: 1 are prohibited unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.

(4)	All grouna  areas under the ·bundingroof overhang  must be treated with a decorative mulch and/or foundation planting.
 
(5)	All  principal  use structures  shall  provide  an exterior  water supply for use in landscape purposes."

e.	Landscape Guarantee :  All new plants shall be guaranteed for two
(2)	full years from the time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive and in satisfactory growth at the end of the guarantee period or be replaced.

f.	Existing Trees: With respect to existing trees in new developments, all trees on the site are to be  saved which do not have to be removed	for street, buildings, utilities, drainage or  active recreational purposes. Trees over six (6) inches in diameter that are to remain, are to be marked with a red band, and to be protected with snow fences or other suitable enclosure , prior to any excavation.	The City may further require that the property owner and/or developer retain a professional forester to prepare a forest inventory and management plan for the development, in order to control and abate any existing or potential shade tree disease and to save trees from construction loss.

D.	Mechanical Equipment:	All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical equipment of non-residential buildings shall comply with the following standards :

1.	All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be buffered so as to mitigate noise in compliance with Section 15.14 of this Ordinance.

2.	All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be designed (including exterior color) and located so to  be aesthetically harmonious and compatible with the building. Screening of the equipment may be required where the design, color, and location of the equipment are found to	not effectively buffer noise or provide aesthetic harmony and compatibility.	Screening shall be constructed of durable materials which are aesthetically compatible with the structure and which may be an integral part of the structure. Applicable requirements for access to the equipment shall be observed in the design and construction of the screening.

3.	Rooftop mechanical equipment less than three (3) feet in height shall be exempt from the screening requirements of Section 15.07.D.2 of this Ordinance.



15.08  TRAFFIC VISIBILITY:

A	Corner Lots:	On corner lots in all zoning districts, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede
 
vision between a height two (2) feet and eight (8) feet within twenty (20) feet from the intersecting property lines. Said obstruction shall not be wider than two (2) feet.

B. Fences, Walls , and Hedges:  Except  as may be erected by a governmental agency, no fence, wall or hedge shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two (2) feet and eight (8) feet where it will interfere with traffic or pedestrian visibility from a driveway or alley to a public way. In required front yards or a required side yard abutting a street on a corner lot, fences, walls , hedges, or structures shall be at least seventy-five (75) percent open space for passage of air and light. These regulations shall apply unless it can be demonstrated that the structure provides an unobstructed view so as not to create a safety hazards.



15.9	DRAINAGE PLANS, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:

A		No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water runoff causing flooding, erosion, or deposit of minerals on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water course, ponding area, or other public facilities subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer and in accordance with storm drainage plans as  may  be established by the City.

B.	In the case of all residential subdivisions of three (3) or more lots, business and industrial developments, the drainage plans with appropriate spot site elevations shall be submitted  to the City Engineer for review and the final drainage plan shall be subject to written approval. In the case of such uses, no modifications in grade and drainage  flow through fill, erection of retaining walls or other such actions shall be permitted until such plans have been reviewed and  received written approval from the City Engineer.

C.	The  following  standards  shall  apply  to  all   development  and  activity  that necessitates the grading, stripping, cutting, filling, or exposure of soils.

1.	General Standards :

a.	The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented	
	by topography  and soil so as to create the least potential for soil	
	erosion.	

b.	
Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the different stages of development.	Appropriate   control meas'--u"""r"e--"s'"--	

--
shall be installed prior to development  when  necessary to control
erosion.
 
c.	Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate	erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one period of time.

d.	The  drainage  system  shall  be  constructed   and  operational  as quickly as possible during construction.

e.	Whenever  possible,  natural  vegetation  shall   be  retained  and protected.

f.	Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall  be set aside for re-spreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored to a depth of four (4) inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to development.

g.	When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time. No exposure shall be planned to exceed sixty (60) days. Said time period shall be extended only if the City Engineer	is satisfied that adequate measures have been established and will remain in place.

h.	The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible for the storage and flow of runoff. Storm water drainage shall be discharged to marshlands, swamps, retention basins or other treatment facilities. Diversion of storm water to marshlands or swamps shall be considered for existing or planned surface drainage.	Marshlands and swamps used for storm water shall provide for natural or artificial water level control.  Temporary storage areas or retention basins scattered throughout developed areas shall be encouraged to reduce peak flows, erosion damage, and construction costs.

2.	Exposed Slopes:  The following control measures shall be taken to control erosion during any activity where soils are exposed:

a.	No slope should be steeper in grade than four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical

b.	Exposed slopes steeper in grade than ten (10) feet  horizontal to one (1) foot vertical should be contour plowed to minimize direct runoff of water.

c.	At the foot of each exposed slope, a channel and berm should be constructed  to  control  runoff.    The  channelized  water  should  be
 
diverted to a sedimentation  basin (debris basin, silt basin or silt trap) before being allowed to enter the natural drainage system.

d.	Along the top of each exposed slope, a berm should be constructed to prevent runoff from flowing over the edge of the slope. Where runoff collecting behind said berm cannot be diverted elsewhere and must be directed down the slope, appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion. Such measures should consist of either an asphalt paved flow apron and drop chute laid down the slope or a flexible slope drain. At the base of the slope drain or flow apron, a gravel energy dissipater should be installed to prevent erosion at the discharge end.

e.	Exposed slopes shall be protected by whatever means will effectively prevent erosion considering the degree of slope, soils material, and expected length of exposure. Slope protection shall consist of mulch, sheets of plastic, burlap or jute netting, sod blankets, fast growing grasses or temporary seedings of annual grasses.	Mulch consists of hay, straw, wood chips, corn stalks, bark or other protective material. Mulch should be anchored to slopes with liquid asphalt, stakes , and netting, or should be worked into the soil to provide additional slope stability.

f.	Control measures, other than those specifically stated above, may be used in place of the above measures if it can be demonstrated that they will as effectively protect exposed slopes.

3.	Design Standards :

a.	Waterways:

(1)	The natural above ground drainage system shall be utilized to the extent possible to dispose of runoff. Storm sewers are only be used where it can be demonstrated that the use of the	above ground natural drainage system will not adequately dispose of runoff. Above ground runoff disposal waterways	may be constructed to augment the natural drainage system. To the extent  possible, the natural and constructed waterways shall be coordinated with an open space trail system.


(2)	The widths of a constructed waterway shall be sufficiently large to adequately channelrunoff from a ten (10) inch storm.  Adequacy shall be determined by the expected runoff
when full development of the drainage area is reached.
 
(3)	No fences or structures shall be constructed across the waterway that will reduce or restrict the flow of water .

(4)	· The banks of the waterway shall be  protected  with  a permanent turf vegetation.

(5)	The banks of the waterway shall  not exceed five  (5) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical in gradient.

(6)	The gradient of the waterway bed shall not exceed a grade that will result in a velocity that will cause erosion of the banks of the waterway.

(7)	The bed of the waterway shall be protected with turf , sod, or concrete. If turf or sod will not function properly, rip rap may be used. Rip rap shall consist of quarried limestone, fieldstone	(if random rip rap is used) or  construction materials provided said construction materials are limited to asphalt cement and concrete. The rip rap shall be  no smaller than two (2) inches square nor no larger than two (2) feet square . Construction materials shall be used only in those areas where the waterway is not used as part of a recreation trail system.

(8)	If the flow velocity in the waterway is such that erosion of the turf sidewall will occur and said velocity cannot be decreased via velocity control structures , then other materials may replace turf on the sidewalls. Either gravel or rip rap may be allowed to prevent erosion at these points.

b.	Water Velocity:

(1)	The flow velocity of runoff in waterways shall be controlled to a velocity that will minimize erosion of the waterway.

(2)	Flow velocity shall be controlled through the installation of diversions, berms, slope drains, and other similarly effective velocity control structures .

c.	Sediment Control:

 	_.i.(..1.;..)ir    ----T;- o    p.:..:r..-e7--v=-e;:_n:-'-t''--s':_e:: diment=a:tion _ of   waterways,	pervious    aod	_
impervious sediment traps and other sediment control structures shall be incorporated · throughout the contributing watershed .
 
(2)	Temporary pervious sediment traps could consist of a construction of bales of hay with a low spillway embankment section of sand and gravel that permits a slow movement of water while filtering sediment. Such structures may serve as temporary sediment control features during the construction stage of a development.

(3)	Permanent impervious sediment control structures consist of sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps) and shall be utilized to remove sediment from runoff prior to its disposal in any permanent body of water.

d.	Maintenance of Erosion Control System:

(1)	The erosion and velocity control structures shall be maintained	in a condition that will insure continuous functioning according to the provisions of this Ordinance.

(2)	Sediment basins shall be maintained as the need occurs to insure continuous desilting action.

(3)	The areas utilized for runoff waterways and sediment basins shall  not be allowed to exist in an unsightly condition.   The banks  of  the  sediment  basins  and  waterways  shall  be landscaped.

(4)	Prior to the approval of any development, the developer shall make provision for continued maintenance of the erosion and sediment control system.

D.	The top of any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of the street, gutter  or inlet of an approved drainage device a minimum of twelve (12) inches plus two (2) percent.  Exceptions to this standard may be approved by the City Building Official when it can be demonstrated that required drainage to the point of discharge and away from the structure is provided at all locations on the site.



15.10	GLARE: Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign or other structure, shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential use or zone and from public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding shall not be directed
into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall bJLb.o_g_cled  or_c,o_ntr...olledJn..same	_
manner so as not to light adjacent property or the public right-of-way . Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one (1) foot candle (meter reading) as measured from the center line of said
 
street. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on residential property shall not exceed four (4) foot candles (meter reading) as measured from said property.



15.11	SMOKE: The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards , Minnesota Regulation APC 7017.



15.12	DUST AND OTHER PARTICULATED MATTER: The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulated matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulation APC 7011 , as amended.



15.13	AIR POLLUTION: The emission of air pollution, including potentially hazardous emissions , by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by Minnesota Statutes 116, as may be amended.



15.14	NOISE: Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 7010, as amended .



15.15	REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL:

A      Removal:

1.	Upon properties less than five (5) acres in size,  passenger automobiles and trucks not currently licensed by the state, or which are because of mechanical deficiency incapable of movement under their own power, parked or stored outside for a period in excess of twelve (12) months, and all materials stored outside in violation of City regulations are considered refuse or junk and shall be disposed of.

2.	Upon properties five (5) acres or greater in size, no more than three (3) passenger automobiles and trucks, not currently licensed by the State or which are, because of mechanical difficulty, incapable of movement under their own power, shall be parked or stored outside.

..........--3.	Any accumulation of refuse an any...i)remjses -not -Stored ·n--containers---	-
which comply with City regulations, or any accumulation of refuse on any
premises which has remained thereon for more than one (1) year  is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated by order of the Health Officer,  as provided by Minnesota Statutes,  Sections  145.22 and
 
145.23 as may be amended, and the cost of abatement may be assessed
on the property where the nuisance was found, as provided by law.	_,,

4.	Waste resulting from the handling, storage, sale, preparation, cooking and serving of foods with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing is considered refuse. The storage and removal of this refuse shall meet the requirements of St. Augusta.

8.	Location and Screening:

1.	All refuse and refuse handling equipment including but not limited to garbage cans and dumpsters shall be stored within the principal structure, within an accessory building, or totally screened from eye level view for all uses, except for single family residences.

2.	Screening shall be at least six (6) feet in height and provide a minimum opaqueness of eighty (80) percent. Said facility shall comply with minimum setback requirements. All dumpsters, trash handling equipment, recycling containers, and enclosures shall be kept in a good state of repair with tight-fitting lids to prevent spilling and spread of debris. The construction of trash enclosures shall be per standards established by the City Building Official and all designs and construction of such enclosures shall be subject to the Building Official's approval.

3.	For public health purposes, uses existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall come into compliance no later than October 7, 2004.

C.	Dumping and Disposal:

1.	Except if associated with a permitted use and approved by the City Council, the use of land within the City for dumping and disposal of sewage, rubbish, scrap iron, junk garbage, ashes, slag industrial waste by-products, and petroleum contaminated soil is not permitted in any zoning district of the City.



15.16	OUTSIDE	STORAGE,	RESIDENTIAL,	COMMERCIAL	AND	INDUSTRIAL USES:

A	General Standards:

1.	Except for temporary construction trailers and mobile services operated by public service agencies (i.e., bookmobile, bloodmobiles, etc.) as allowed by the City, and trailers parked in a designated and improved loading area,	no vehicle may be used for office, business, industrial manufacturing, testing,  or storage of items used with or in a business,


St. Augusta Zoning Ordinance	General Building and PerfonTiance
 
commercial or industrial enterprise, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator.

2.	The City Council may order the owner of the property to cease or modify open storage uses including existing uses, provided it is found that such use constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare.

B.	Residential Uses:

1.	Exceptions: Except as provided in this Ordinance, all outside storage of materials and equipment for residential uses (excluding farms) shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following:

a.	Clothes lines pole and wire .

b.	Play and recreational facilities .

c.	Agricultural materials and  equipment  if_ these are  used or  intended for  use on the premises within  a period of twelve  (12) months.

d.	Construction and landscaping materials or equipment if these are intended for use on the premises within a period of twelve (12) months.

e.	On and off-street parking of currently registered and operable passenger vehicles and trucks not to· exceed a gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds.

f.	Rear or side yard exterior storage of firewood for the purpose of consumption only by the person or persons on whose property it is stored.

2.	Recreational Vehicle and Equipment Storage: Unless approved by the Zoning Administrator through an administrative permit, not more than four
(4) recreational vehicles, as defined by Section 2.2 of this Ordinance, may be parked or stored on a residential site less than five (5) acres in size provided:

a.	Such vehicles or  equipment  have affixed thereto  current  registration or license plates as required by law.                                    ·

b.	Except upon established driveways  suchvehicles  shall  be stored so as to comply with accessory building setbacks of the residential district.
 
c.	Parking   and   storage	comply	with	any   other	applicable	City regulations.

3.	Temporary  Parking- of Recreational Vehicles:	Temporary  parking of one
(1) recreational vehicle per residential parcel shall be allowed upon established driveways for a period not exceeding seven (7) days within a thirty (30) day period.

C.	Non Residential Uses:

1.	Exterior Storage/Display: Outside storage shall be governed by the respective zoning district in which such use is located.

2.	Additional Standards: All outside storage shall be screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets except for the following:

a.	Merchandise  being  displayed  for  sale  in accordance  with  zoning district requirements.	·

b.	Materials and equipment  currently  being used for  construction  on the premises.

3.	Parking of Commercial Vehicles: Up to three  (3) commercial  vehicles such as delivery and service trucks up to twelve thousand (12,000) pounds in gross vehicle weight may be parked without screening if such vehicles relate to the principal use. Construction equipment, trailers, and vehicles over twelve thousand (12,000) pounds in gross vehicle  weight shall	require screening in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.



15.17	SEWAGE DISPOSAL: The installation  of  on-site  sewage  treatment  systems shall be in compliance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7080, the State Plumbing Code and applicable State, County and City regulations.



15.18	WASTE MATERIAL: Waste material resulting from or used in industrial or commercial manufacturing, fabricating, servicing, processing or trimming shall not be washed into the public storm  sewer system, the sanitary sewer system or any public water body, but shall be disposed of in a manner approved .by the Minnesota State Fire Marshal, the Pollution Control Agency, and the Department of Natural Resources and the 2011ir rg Adi 11ir ristr atur.
 
15.19	BULK STORAGE (LIQUID): All uses associated with the bulk storage of all gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemical , flammable and similar liquids shall comply with requirements of the Minnesota State Fire Marshall's, . Minnesota Department of Agriculture Offices and have documents from those offices stating the use is in compliance.



15.20	RADIATION EMISSION: All  activities  that  emit  radioactivity  shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency .



15.21	ELECTRICAL EMISSION: All activities which create electrical emissions shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications Commission.



15.22	TEMPORARY  STORAGE OF FILL:

A		Limitations: The temporary storage of fill from building  excavations  or construction projects shall be allowed in all zoning districts subject to the following conditions:

1.	Storage shall not exceed the term of the building permit.

2.	The storage  shall  be in compliance  with  requirements  and approved  by the City Building Inspector and/or City Engineer.

3.	Provisions  as  approved   by  the   City   Building   Inspector   and/or   City Engineer shall be made for erosion control.

B.	The storage of fill beyond that defined in Subd. 15.22.A of this Ordinance shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 22 of this Ordinance as may be applicable and allowed only within those zoning districts of the City where outside storage is allowed.



15.23	SALES IN AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:

A      Personal Vehicles, Trailers, Recreational Equipment, and Similar Items:

1.	Merchandise items for sale shall not be placed in any portion of the public right-of-way, public boulevard.

2.	For sale signs on or in such merchandise shall be limited to two (2) square feet.
 
B.	Garage or Rummage Sales:

1.	Sales shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) consecutive days and occurring no more than two (2) times within one (1) calendar year per property, unless approved by the Zoning Administrator .

2.	Merchandise items for sale shall not be placed in any portion of the public right-of-way, or public boulevard.

3.	Signs shall be governed by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 16.  GENERAL YARD, LOT AREA AND BUILDING REGULATIONS

Subdivision

16.1	Purpose
16.2	Height
16.3	Building Type and Construction
16.4	Yards
16.5	Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit
16.6	Minimum Floor Area; Commercial and Industrial Structures
16.7	Single Family Dwellings
16.8	Two Family, Townhouse, Quadraminium, Manor Home, Multiple Family Uses



16.1	PURPOSE:  This section identifies yard, lot area, building size, building type and height requirements in each zoning district.



16.2	HEIGHT:

A.	Allowable Increases: Building heights in excess of those standards contained in the district provisions and any other sections of this Ordinance may be allowed through a conditional use permit, provided that:

1.	Demonstrated need is established for the increase in height and said increase will not violate the intent and character of the zoning district in which the structure is located.

2.	The site is capable of accommodating the increased structure size.

3.	The potential increased intensity and size of use does not cause an increase in traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.

4.	Public utilities and services are adequate.

5.	For each additional story over the district limitation or for each additional ten
(10) feet above the maximum allowed per district, front and side yard setback requirements shall be increased by ten (10) percent.

6.	The construction does not limit solar access to abutting and/or neighboring properties.



7.	The provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met.
 

B.	Exceptions: Building height limits established for the respective zoning districts shall not apply to the following:

1.	Belfries.

2.	Chimneys or flues.

3.	Church spires.

4.	Cooling towers.

5.	Cupolas and domes which do not contain usable floor space.

6.	Elevator penthouses.

7.	Flag poles.

8.	Monuments and statues - public and semi-public only.

9.	Parapet walls extending not more than three (3) feet above the limiting height of the building.

10.	Poles, towers and other structures for essential services.

11.	Necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenances.

12.	Farm buildings.

13.	Wind energy conversion system towers as regulated by Section 30 of this Ordinance.

14.	Antennas and antenna support structures as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

C.	No excluded roof equipment or structure element extending beyond the limited height of a building may occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of such roof nor exceed ten (10) feet unless otherwise noted.




16.3	BUILDING TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION:

A.	General Provisions:
 
1.	Metal Buildings: No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalum or unfinished aluminum buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to have a corrosive designed finish such as corten steel or engineered designed roofs of less than two-twelve (2/12) pitch shall be permitted in any zoning district, except in association with farming operations or as allowed by this subdivision.

2.	Quality: Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of architectural and aesthetic compatibility and harmony with surrounding properties to ensure that they will not adversely impact the property values of the abutting properties as intended by this Ordinance or adversely impact the public health, safety, and general welfare.

3.	Finishes: Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following:

a.	Brick.
b.	Natural stone.
c.	Decorative concrete block.
d.	Cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete panels.
e.	Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood, cypress.
f.	Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum (non-structural, non-load bearing), provided such panels are factory fabricated and finished with a durable non-fade surface and their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design.
g.	Glass curtain wall panels.
h.	Stucco.
i.	Vinyl.
j.	Other materials as determined by the City Building Official but not including galvanized or unfinished metal.

B.	Business and Industrial Uses and Zoning Districts:

1.	For all uses within the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-W Zoning Districts, all principal buildings which abut public rights-of-way, residential uses, and/or public areas, shall have a decorative front on such exposure which is comprised of at least fifty (50) percent of materials specified in Section 16.03.A.3.a-e. Any metal finish utilized in the building shall be a minimum of twenty-six (26) gauge steel. The roof slope shall be limited to a minimum slope of one- quarter (1/4) inch per foot.

2.	Within the I-1 Zoning District, exterior finish of all buildings shall comply with Subd. 16.03.A.3 of this Ordinance.
 
3.	In the I-2 Zoning District, all buildings constructed of curtain wall panels of finished steel, aluminum or fiberglass shall be required to be faced with brick, wood, stone, architectural concrete cast in place, pre-cast concrete panels, or concrete block on wall surfaces abutting a public right-of-way, residential uses, or public areas. The required wall surface treatment may allow a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the metal or fiberglass wall to remain exposed if it is coordinated into the architectural design.

4.	The City may grant a deferment to the requirements of Subd. 16.03.B.2 and
16.03.B.3 of this Ordinance when a building or building addition will be constructed in more than one (1) phase. Any such deferment shall be processed as a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 4 of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the following:

a.	The deferment shall be until the completion of construction or five (5) years, whichever is less.

b.	Property owner shall provide the City with an irrevocable letter of credit for an amount one and one-half (1-1/2) the City Building Official's estimated cost of the required exterior wall treatment. The bank and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The letter of credit shall assure compliance with this section of this Ordinance.

C.	Exceptions to the provisions of Subd. 16.03 of this Ordinance may be granted as a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 4 of this Ordinance, provided that:

1.	The proposed building maintains the quality and value intended by the Ordinance.

2.	The proposed building is compatible and in harmony with other existing structures within the district and immediate geographic area.

3.	The provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.

16.4	YARDS: No lot, yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such lot, yard or open space less than the minimum required by this Ordinance. No required open space provided about any building or structure shall be included as part of any open space required for another structure.

A.	The  following  shall  not  be  considered  as  encroachments  on  yard  setback requirements:

1.	Cantilevers up to ten (10) feet in width, and chimneys, window wells and
 
covers, flues, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters, and the like, provided they do not project more than two and one-half (2-1/2) feet into a required yard setback.

2.	Terraces, steps, decks, uncovered porches, stoops or similar features provided they do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal structure or to a distance less than five (5) feet from a side or rear lot line. No encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required drainage and utility easements.

3.	In rear yards, recreational equipment (non-vehicular), laundry drying equipment, arbors and trellises, detached outdoor living rooms and gazebos not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet, and air conditioning or heating equipment not exceeding established state noise levels, provided they are at a distance not less than ten (10) feet from any lot line. No encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required drainage and utility easements.

B.	Where adjacent structures have front yard setbacks different from those required, the minimum front yard setback shall be no less than the average setback of the two (2) adjacent principal structures. If only one (1) adjacent lot is occupied by a structure, the minimum front yard shall be the average of the adjacent principal structure and the district minimum setback, but in no case shall a setback greater than the minimum established for the respective zoning district be required.



16.5	MINIMUM FLOOR AREA PER DWELLING UNIT: Except as otherwise specified in the zoning district provisions or allowed as a conditional use permit, single family homes as classified below shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit.

A.	Single Family Dwelling Units: Except as otherwise specified in the zoning district provisions or allowed as a conditional use permit, single family homes as classified below shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit.



One Bedroom	720 square. Two Bedroom
Three Bedroom

B.	Multiple Dwelling Units: Except for elderly housing or as allowed by conditional use permit, living units classified as multiple dwelling shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit:

Efficiency Units	500 square feet
One Bedroom Units	700 square feet More than one bedroom
 
units - an additional
80 square feet for each additional bedroom

C.	Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing: Living units classified as elderly (senior citizen) housing units, except as allowed by conditional use permit, shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit:

Efficiency Units	440 square feet
One Bedroom	520 square feet

D.	Two Family Dwellings, Quadraminiums, Townhouses and Manor Homes: Except as otherwise specified in the zoning district provisions or allowed as a conditional use permit, two family dwellings, quadraminiums and townhouses, as classified below, shall have the minimum floor area per one bedroom unit:

Two Family	650 square feet first floor
Dwellings	above grade, plus 100 addi- tional square feet for each additional bedroom

Quadraminiums,	600 square feet first floor Townhouses and	above grade, plus 100 add-
Manor Homes	tonal square feet for each additional bedroom

E.	Efficiency Apartments: Except for elderly (senior citizen) housing, the number of efficiency apartments in a multiple dwelling shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total number of apartments. In the case of elderly (senior citizen) housing, efficiency apartments shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total number of apartments, except by conditional use permit.



16.6	MINIMUM FLOOR AREA, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL  STRUCTURES:
Commercial and industrial buildings (principal structure) which are to be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 4 of this Ordinance.



16.7	SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS:  All single family detached homes shall:

A.	Be constructed upon a continuous perimeter foundation that meets the requirements of the State Uniform Building Code.

B.	Not be less than thirty (30) feet in length and not less than twenty-four (24) feet in
 
width over that entire minimum length. Width measurements shall not take account of overhang and other projections beyond the principal walls. Dwellings shall also meet the minimum floor area requirements as set out in this Ordinance.

C.	Have a minimum roof overhang of one (1) foot.

D.	Have an earth covered, composition, shingled or tiled roof or other comparable quality materials determined to be appropriate by the City Building Official.

E.	Receive a building permit. The application for a building permit in addition to other information required shall indicate the height, size, design and the appearance of all elevations of the proposed building and a description of the construction materials proposed to be used. The exterior architectural design of a proposed dwelling may not be so at variance with, nor so similar to, the exterior architectural design of any structure or structures already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, nor so at variance with the character of the surrounding neighborhood as to cause a significant depreciation in the property values of the neighborhood or adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare.

F.	Meet the requirements of the State Uniform Building Code.



16.8	TWO FAMILY, TOWNHOUSE, QUADRAMINIUM, MANOR HOME, MULTIPLE FAMILY USES:

A.	No single townhouse structure shall contain more than eight (8) dwelling units.

B.	Minimum unit lot frontage for townhouses shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.

C.	Subdivision of Two-Family Double Bungalows, Townhouse or Quadraminium Lots: The subdivision of base lots containing two-family dwellings, townhouses, or quadraminiums to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling within such a structure is acceptable upon the approval of a conditional use permit, provided that:

1.	Two family, townhouses, and quadraminiums intended for owner occupancy shall be subdivided on an individual unit lot basis subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

2.	Prior to subdivision, such units shall fully comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code.

3.	Prior to a two-family double bungalow dwelling, townhouse, or quadraminium subdivision, the base lot must meet all the requirements of the zoning district.
 
4.	Permitted accessory uses as defined by the zoning districts are acceptable provided they meet all the zoning requirements.

5.	A property maintenance agreement must be arranged by the applicant and submitted to the City Attorney for review and subject to the Attorney's approval. The agreement shall ensure the maintenance and upkeep of the structure and lots to meet minimum City standards. The agreement is to be filed with the County Recorder's Office as a deed restriction against the title of each unit lot.

6.	Separate public utility service shall be provided to each subdivided unit and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.

7.	The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in conformance to requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City.

D.	Subdivision of multiple family, two family duplex dwellings, manor homes and other such units:

1.	The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in conformance with the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City as applicable.

2.	The subdivision shall comply with applicable cooperative or condominium laws of the State of Minnesota.
 
SECTION 17. PUBLIC PROPERTY/RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Subdivision

17.1	Coverage
17.2	Liability



17.1	COVERAGE: Excepting newsstands, the erection and/or placement of any structure in the public right-of-way or on City property by any person, or group other than a governmental unit shall be in compliance with applicable City regulations and shall require the processing of a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 4 of this Ordinance.



17.2	LIABILITY: As a condition of approval for the erection or placement of a structure in the public right-of-way, or on City property by any party other than a governmental unit, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate a significant need for such structure placement and that it will not interfere or conflict with the public use and/or purpose of the right-of-way. Additionally, the applicant shall hold harmless the City for any potential liability and shall demonstrate to the Zoning Administrator proof of adequate liability insurance.
 
SECTION 18.	BUILDING RELOCATION

Subdivision

18.1	Review Process
18.2	Exemptions
18.3	Performance Standards
18.4	Performance Security



18.1	REVIEW PROCESS: The relocation of any building or structure onto a lot within the City shall be subject to the requirements, regulations and conditions of Section 4, conditional use permit of this Ordinance as well as Section 18.02 of this section.



18.2	EXEMPTIONS:  The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:

A.	Relocations which occur solely within the confines of a single lot or parcel.

B.	Manufactured homes within manufactured home parks.

C.	Prefabricated and industrialized/modular buildings as defined by the State Building Code being relocated to their first permanent building site.



18.3	PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: The following performance standards shall apply:

A.	Upon relocation, the building shall comply with the applicable requirements of the State Building Code.

B.	The  proposed  relocated  building  shall  comply  with  the  character  of  the neighborhood in which it is being relocated as determined by the City Council.

C.	The relocated use will not result in a depreciation of neighborhood or adjacent property values.

D.	The relocated structure shall be similar to the market valuation of adjacent principal structures.

E.	The relocated structure shall be ready for occupancy within six (6) months from the date of location on the site.



18.4	PERFORMANCE SECURITY: A performance security shall be provided to the City
 
as specified in Section 4.06 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 19. MODEL HOMES/TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE OFFICES

Subdivision

19.1	Purpose
19.2	Procedure
19.3	Special Requirements



19.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to provide for the erection of model homes and temporary real estate offices in new subdivisions without adversely affecting the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods or creating a general nuisance. As model homes represent a unique temporary commercial use, special consideration must be given to the peculiar problems associated with them and special standards must be applied to ensure reasonable compatibility with their surrounding environment.



19.2	PROCEDURE: The erection of a model home(s) and temporary real estate offices shall require approval of an administrative use permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.



19.3	SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:

A.	Model homes and temporary real estate offices shall be allowed as provided for in the applicable zoning district in which they are located.

B.	Temporary parking facilities equal to four (4) spaces per model home dwelling unit or temporary real estate office shall be provided. The overall design, drainage, and surfacing of the temporary parking facility shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.

C.	Access from a temporary parking facility onto a local, residential street shall be minimized. Where this requirement is physically impractical, access shall be directed away from residential neighborhoods to the greatest extent possible.

D.	No model home or temporary real estate office shall incorporate outside lighting which creates a nuisance due to glare or intensity, as provided for in Section 15.10 of this Ordinance.

E.	All model home and temporary real estate office signage shall comply with the sign regulations as contained in Section 31 of this Ordinance.

F.	The administrative permit shall terminate three (3) years from its date of issuance or
 
until eight-five (85) percent of the development is completed, whichever occurs first.

G.	No residential occupancy permit shall be issued for a model home until such time as the structure has been fully converted to a residence. Such conversion shall include but not be limited to parking lot restoration and the removal of signage and lighting.

H.	The restoration of all temporary parking areas with appropriate landscaping shall be completed by the end of the next growing season.

I.	All criteria for interim use consideration but not procedural requirements, as contained in Section 5 of this Ordinance, shall be considered and satisfactorily met.
 
SECTION 20.	OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Subdivision

20.1	Purpose
20.2	Scope of Regulations
20.3	General Provisions
20.4	Off-Street Parking Restrictions
20.5	Parking Area Design
20.6	Maintenance
20.7	Location
20.8	Use of Required Area
20.9	Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
20.10	Space Reductions
20.11	Joint Facilities
20.12	Off-Site Parking
20.13	Off-Street Bicycle and Motorcycle Parking



20.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the regulation of off-street parking spaces in these zoning regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land or structures.



20.2	SCOPE OF PARKING REGULATIONS: The regulations and requirements set forth herein shall apply to all off-street parking facilities in all of the zoning districts of the City.



20.3	GENERAL PROVISIONS:

A.	Application: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the off-street parking provisions of this section shall apply to all motorized vehicles including, but not limited to, passenger automobiles, trucks, vans and motorcycles, unless otherwise specified herein.

B.	Site Plan: All applications for a building or an occupancy permit in all zoning districts shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension indicating the location of off-street parking and loading spaces in compliance with the requirements set forth in this Section. All site plans for single family homes shall provide for the location of a two (2) stall garage in compliance with this Ordinance, whether or not construction is intended.
C.	Reduction of Existing Off-Street Parking Space or Lot Area: Off-street parking
 
spaces and loading spaces or lot area existing upon the effective date of this Section shall not be reduced in number or size, unless said number or size exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.

D.	Change of Use or Occupancy of Land: No change of use or occupancy of land already dedicated to a parking spaces, driveways, or loading spaces shall be made, nor shall any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be made which reduces area necessary for parking, parking stalls, or parking requirements below the minimum prescribed by this Section.

E.	Change of Use or Occupancy of Buildings: Any change of use or occupancy of any building or buildings including additions thereto requiring more parking area shall not be permitted until there is furnished such additional parking spaces as required by this Section.

F.	Disability-Accessible Parking: Disability-accessible parking spaces shall be provided as applicable pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 168.021, as may be amended.



20.4	OFF-STREET PARKING RESTRICTIONS:

A.	Except where otherwise allowed as exterior storage or in a zoning district, or as provided in Subd. 20.04.C below, trucks of more than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds in gross vehicle weight or greater than thirty (30) feet in length, and contracting or excavating equipment may not be parked, stored or otherwise located on any property within the City unless being used in conjunction with a temporary service benefiting the premises.

B.	No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with exposed off-street parking facilities, except for minor repairs of vehicles owned by the occupant or resident of the principal use for which the parking space is intended.  No exterior storage of car parts are allowed at any time.

C.	For detached single family uses in residential zoning districts, the off-street parking of vehicles greater than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds in gross vehicle weight or greater than thirty (30) feet in length and contracting or excavating equipment may be allowed as an interim use permit pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance, provided that:



1.	The property fronts on an improved public street which is determined by the City Engineer to be capable of carrying the vehicles in question without undue damage.

2.	The type of vehicle to be parked does not create an unreasonable safety
 
hazard to neighboring residents or the public utilizing the street(s) servicing the property.

3.	The site upon which the vehicle is parked has adequate space to allow turning movements and parking which does not result in the backing of vehicles from or onto the public street.

4.	The parking of such vehicles does not adversely affect neighboring property owners as it relates to noise.

5.	The parking of such vehicles is screened from neighboring properties and the public right-of-way to the extent determined as necessary by the City Council in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

6.	The provisions of Section 5 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.



20.5	PARKING AREA DESIGN:

A.	Calculating Space.

1.	Floor Area: The term “floor area” for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined on the basis of the exterior floor area dimensions of the buildings, structure or use times the number of floors, minus ten (10) percent except as may be hereinafter modified, and where a gross floor area calculation is specified.

2.	Computation: When determining the number of off-street parking spaces, any fraction of a number shall constitute an additional space.

3.	Places of Public Assembly: In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each eighteen (18) inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining parking requirements.




4.	Snow Storage in Parking Stalls: Provision shall be made in the parking area for adequate snow storage or removal in order to ensure that the required number of spaces are available at all times during the year.

5.	Use of Required Area: Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, or

20-3
 
storage of inoperable vehicles unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.

B.	Design.

1.	Circulation: Traffic circulation systems shall be designed to accommodate anticipated traffic demands. Vehicular traffic generated by a use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner which will avoid congestion or interference with other vehicular transportation systems and pedestrians and which will avoid creating traffic hazards or excessive traffic. The adequacy of any proposed traffic circulation system to accomplish these objectives shall be determined by the City, which may require additional measures for traffic control as it may deem necessary, including but not limited to the following: directional signage, channelization, standby turn lanes, sidewalks, illumination and other facilities within the site to prevent a backup of vehicles on public streets.

2.	Parking Space Size: All required off-street parking spaces shall comply with the minimum dimension requirements of Section 20.05.B.5 of this Ordinance.

3.	Pedestrian Provision: All off-street parking areas shall be designed with due regard to pedestrian circulation. Off-street parking areas shall be designed such that vehicle and pedestrian circulation is accommodated in a safe, complementary, and orderly fashion.

4.	Compact Car Spaces: Up to twenty (20) percent of the parking spaces in a parking lot may be permanently marked for compact cars only, provided that:

a.	The parking lot contains forty (40) or more off-street parking spaces.

b.	All compact car spaces are a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in length.

c.	Signs and markings, as approved by the City, are placed and maintained in each compact car space.

d.	All required off-street parking aisle widths are maintained.

e.	The compact car stalls not displace preferred handicap parking stall locations.

f.	The design, layout, and location of designated compact car spaces shall not encourage utilization by oversized vehicles and shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.

5.	Dimensional Requirements:  Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance,
 
stall, aisle and driveway design for required off-street parking shall comply with the standards provided on page 20-6 of this Ordinance.

6.	Street Access: Except as allowed by a conditional use permit or property subdivision, each off-street lot shall have access directly onto an abutting, improved and City accepted public street.

7.	Within Structures: The off-street parking requirements may be furnished by providing a space so designed within the principal building or one (1) structure attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no building permit shall be issued to convert said parking structure into a dwelling unit or living area or other activity until other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this Ordinance.

8.	Lot Circulation: Except in the case of single family dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley. Except in the case of single family dwellings, parking area design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited.

9.	Intersection Separation: No curb cut access shall be located less than sixty
(60) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more street rights-of-way.  This distance shall be measured from the intersection of lot lines.

10.	Curb Cut Size: No curb cut access shall exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width unless approved by the City Engineer.

11.	Side Yard Setback: Except with special approval from the Zoning Administrator, curb cut openings shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from the side yard property line in all districts.

12.	Curb Cut Spacing: Except for single family dwellings, driveway access curb openings on a public street shall not be located less than forty (40) feet from one another.
 

 
 
13.	Grade: The grade elevation of any parking area or driveways shall not exceed four (4) percent.

14.	Driveway Access Minimum: Each property shall be allowed one (1) driveway access for each one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of street frontage. All property shall be entitled to at least one (1) driveway access. Single family uses shall be limited to one (1) driveway access per lot, except when the property exceeds the required street frontage per zoning district requirements, a second driveway access may be allowed by approval of the Zoning Administrator. Except as otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator, single family uses shall not access arterial and collector streets. In cases where a lot does not have frontage upon a local street and where driveway access to arterial and collector streets is determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator, joint access through the use of shared curb cuts and access easements shall be utilized to the extent possible.

15.	Surfacing.

a.	Farmsteads, farming operations, and detached single family residential uses: Driveways and parking area shall be surfaced with materials suitable to control dust and drainage.

b.	Other Uses:

(1)	Except as otherwise determined by the City Council, all uses other than those specified in Subsection 15.a. above shall have customer parking areas and driveways which are surfaced with asphalt, concrete, cobblestone, or paving bricks.

(2)	For legal, nonconforming uses existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance, at any time an improvement is made to property requiring a conditional use permit, interim use permit, variance, and/or building permit, all nonconforming design and surfacing of parking areas or driveways existing on the lot in question shall be brought into full compliance with this Subdivision.

(3)	Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways and stalls for parking areas of five (5) or more vehicles shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and the final drainage plan shall be subject to written approval.

(4)	For industrial uses which experience frequent heavy equipment utilization which could be expected to destroy or
 
damage required surfacing materials, an exemption to the surfacing requirements may be allowed by administrative permit provided that:

(a)	General public and employee access driveways and parking areas shall not be included in the exemption.

(b)	At such time as the presence of heavy equipment is reduced or eliminated, the surfacing of exempted areas shall be completed in compliance with this Ordinance.

(c)	All other performance standards related to parking and driveways shall be met.

(d)	The provisions of Section 6 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.

16.	Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be hooded and so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting residential uses, and public rights-of-way, and shall be in compliance with Section 15.10 of this Ordinance.

17.	Required Screening: All open off-street parking areas of five (5) or more spaces shall be screened and landscaped from abutting or surrounding residential districts and uses, and the public right-of-way in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

18.	Snow Storage: Adequate space for snow storage shall be provided on the site so as not to reduce the required minimum number of parking spaces. In those cases where excessive snow cannot be properly stored on site, it shall be immediately removed from the site.

19.	Driveway Turn Around: In the case of single family dwellings which front on streets designated as collector, minor arterial, and principal arterial by the City's Comprehensive Plan, the installation of a vehicle turn-around space, immediately adjacent to the access driveway is allowed and may be required by the City Council. Where possible, said space shall be located away from the principal structure and shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet from the street surface. Said space shall not to be utilized for parking or storage purposes.

20.	Signs: No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking lot or driveway. All signs shall be in conformance with Section 31 of this Ordinance.
 
21.	Cart Storage: Retail commercial uses exceeding fifty-five thousand (55,000) square feet in gross floor area may be required to provide ample space for the storage of customer service carts within off-street parking areas. The need and specific amount of required cart storage space shall be determined as part of site plan review. When required, cart storage areas shall not occupy required off-street parking space, shall be clearly delineated, and include facilities for cart confinement.



20.6	MAINTENANCE: It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the lessee and owner of the principal use, uses or buildings to maintain in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, access ways, striping, landscaping and required screening.



20.7	LOCATION: All accessory off-street parking facilities as required by this Section shall be located and restricted as follows:

A.	Required accessory off-street parking shall be on the same lot under the same ownership or lease as the principal use being served, except under the provisions of Subd. 20.11 and 20.12 of this Section.

B.	Except for single family dwellings, head-in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a public street, with each stall having its own direct access to the public street, shall be prohibited.

C.	There shall be no off-street parking within fifteen (15) feet of any street surface.

D.	The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall not be used for parking.

E.	Required accessory off-street parking for non-residential uses shall not be provided in front yards (or in side yards in the case of a corner lot) in any residential district, except as allowed for model homes and temporary real estate offices by Section 19 of this Ordinance.

F.	In the case of single family dwellings, parking shall be prohibited in any portion of the front yard, except designated driveways leading directly into a garage or one (1) open, surfaced space located on the side of a driveway, away from the principal use. Said extra space shall be surfaced with either concrete, asphalt or in cases of existing gravel driveways, gravel may be used for such additional parking. At any time an improvement is made to property requiring a building permit, all non- conforming surfacing of parking areas or driveways existing on the lot in question shall be brought into full compliance with this Section.

G.	With the exception of seasonal recreational equipment of limited size and weight, the same parking standards for seasonal recreational equipment shall apply as
 
outlined herein. In cases of seasonal recreational equipment of limited size and weight, the surfacing required herein shall not apply and the equipment may be parked over what is traditionally grass. Seasonal recreational equipment of limited size and weight may include boats, campers designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles, snowmobiles, boat trailers, motorcycle trailers and tent or travel trailers.

H.	Violations may be enforced through tagging.



20.8	USE OF REQUIRED AREA: Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, repair work, storage of inoperable vehicles, and/or storage of snow.



20.9	NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED: The  following
minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement, and/or lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth.




















 
Studio, Libraries, Museums
 
square feet of floor area.
 

School, Elementary and Junior High (Public or Private)	Three (3) spaces for each classroom. This requirement may be reduced at the Zoning Administrator’s discretion to reflect facility use and/or parking policy. Adequate space shall be allowed for the dropping off and/or picking up of students as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
School,  High  School	(Public  or Private)	One (1) space for each two (2) students based on the design capacity. This requirement may be reduced at the Zoning Administrator’s discretion to reflect facility use and/or parking policy. Adequate space shall be allowed for the dropping off and/or picking up of students as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 3.	Non-Residential:
Animal Hospitals or Kennels	Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet.
Automobile Washes:	Shall be determined by the type of automobile wash as listed below:
Automatic Drive Through Service	Five (5) spaces or one (1) per employee on maximum shift, whichever is greater.
Self-Service Car Wash	One (1) space per bay.
Motor Fuel Station Automobile Washes	One (1) space in addition to that required for the station.
Beauty or Barber Shops	Two (2) spaces for each beauty or barber chair.
Bowling Alleys	Five (5) spaces for each lane or alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses contained within the principal structure.
Drive-In Convenience Food Establishment	One (1) space for each two and one-half (2.5) seats plus one (1) space for each fifteen (15) square feet of public service and counter area.
Drive-In Banks	One (1) space for every three hundred fifty
(350) square feet of floor area.
Furniture Sales	One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area for the first twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet, plus one (1) space for each six hundred (600) square feet thereafter.
 

Group Day Care Centers	One (1) space for each employee, plus one (1) space for each four (4) children of licensed capacity.
Manufacturing	One (1) space for each employee on the major shift or one (1) space for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet, whichever is greater, plus one (1) space for each company motor vehicle on the premises.
Medical,	Chiropractic,	or	Dental Offices or Clinics	One (1) space for every two hundred (200) feet of floor area.
Motels, Hotels, Lodging or Boarding Houses	One (1) space per sleeping unit, plus one (1) space per day shift employee plus one (1) space for each forty (40) square feet devoted to meeting or banquet rooms.
Motor Fuel Stations	Four (4) spaces plus two (2) spaces for each service stall. Those facilities designed for sale of other items than strictly automobile products, parts or service shall be required to provide additional parking in compliance with other applicable sections of this Ordinance.
Office Buildings and Professional Offices, Other Than Any Area for Doctors, Chiropractors, or Dentists; Banks, Public Administration Offices	One (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area.
Restaurants, Private Clubs, Lodges, Food Dispensing Establishments (Except Drive-In Restaurants)	One (1) space for each forty (40) square feet of floor area of dining and bar area and one (1) space for each eighty (80) square feet of kitchen area.
Retail Commercial Uses, Except as Prescribed Herein	One (1) space for each two hundred	(200) square feet of floor area.
Retail Sales and Service Business with 50 Percent or More of Gross Floor Area Devoted to Storage, Warehouses, and/or Industry	Eight (8) spaces or one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet devoted to public sales or service plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of storage area.
Shopping Center	One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of leasable floor area.
Truck Wash	Three (3) spaces plus one (1) space per bay.
Warehousing	One (1) space for each two (2) employees of the largest shift or one (1) space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Subd. 4.	Non-Specified Uses:
 
For uses not specifically listed above, off-street parking requirements shall be computed by the Zoning Administrator on the same basis as required for the most similar listed uses. In such cases, the Zoning Administrator shall also consult off-street parking reference materials including, but not limited to, manuals prepared by the American Planning Association, and Institute of Transportation Engineers.



20.10	SPACE REDUCTIONS: Subject to the review and processing of an interim use permit as regulated by Section 5 of this Ordinance, the City may reduce the number of required off-street parking spaces and/or loading spaces when the use can demonstrate in documented from a demand which is less than required by this Ordinance. In such situations, the City may require land to be reserved for parking development should the use or needs change.



20.11	JOINT FACILITIES: The City Council may, after receiving a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, approve an interim use permit for one (1) or more businesses to provide the required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one
(1)	or more sites where the total number of spaces provided are less than the sum of the total required for each business should they provide them separately. Such a permit shall not be granted except when the following conditions are found to exist:

A.	Entertainment Uses: Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required for a theater, bowling alley, or other commercial recreational facilities may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by type of uses specified as primarily daytime uses in Subd. 20.12.D.

B.	Night Time or Sunday Uses: Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking facilities required for any use specified under Subd. 20.12.D below, as primarily daytime uses may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following uses which typically have their major parking demand occurring during night time or weekends; auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, theaters, or apartments.

C.	Schools, Auditorium and Church Uses: Up to eighty (80) percent of the parking facilities required by this section for a church, or an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified under Subd. 20.12.D below as primarily daytime use.

D.	Daytime Uses: For the purpose of this section, the following uses are considered as primary daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair, service shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses.
 
E.	Additional Criteria for Joint Parking: In addition to the preceding requirements, the following conditions are required for joint parking usage:

1.	Proximity: The building or use which application is being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of such parking facilities, excluding public rights-of-way.

2.	Conflict in Hours: The applicant shall demonstrate in documented fashion that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two
(2)	buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.

3.	Written Consent and Agreement: A legally binding instrument, executed by the parties concerned, for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to title of grantors or lessors, and in a form and manner of execution approved by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded with the Stearns County Recorder or Registrar of Titles, and a certified copy of the recorded document shall be filed with the City within sixty (60) days after approval of the joint parking use by the City or the interim use permit shall be considered null and void.



20.12	OFF-SITE PARKING:

A.	Any off-site off-street parking which is used to meet the requirements of this Ordinance shall be an interim use as regulated by Section 5 of this Ordinance.

B.	Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all requirements and standards of this Ordinance.

C.	The parking lot is to be used only for the parking of passenger automobiles of employees, customers or guests of the person or firm controlling and operating the lot, said person to be responsible for its maintenance.

D.	The parking lot is not to be used for sales, repair work or servicing of any kind.

E.	Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use being served shall be provided.

F.	No advertising sign or material is to be located on the property where the parking lot is located.

G.	All parking is to be kept back of the setback building line by barriers unless otherwise specifically authorized by the City Council.
 

H.	Except as provided below, the site used for meeting the off-site parking requirements of this Section shall be under the same ownership as the principal use being served or under public ownership.

I.	Except as provided below, off-site parking for non-residential uses shall not be located more than three hundred (300) feet from the main public entrance of the principal use being served.

J.	Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this Section shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the off-site location until such time as on-site parking is provided or a site in closer proximity to the principal use is acquired and developed for parking.

K.	Compliance with off-street parking requirements provided through leased off-street parking may be approved by the City Council, subject to the following conditions:

1.	The lease shall specify the total number and location of parking spaces under contract and this number, when added to any on-site parking required, must be equal to the total number of parking spaces required.

2.	The lease instrument shall legally bind all parties to the lease and provide for amendment or cancellation only upon written approval from the City.

3.	The lease agreement shall incorporate a release of liability and any other provisions, as recommended by the City Attorney that are deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this Section.



L.	Any such other conditions as may be deemed necessary by the City Council to protect the welfare and character of the nearby land uses.




20.13	OFF-STREET BICYCLE AND MOTORCYCLE PARKING:	Provisions  shall be
made for the off-street parking of bicycles and motorcycles in all multiple family and non- residential developments and uses. Plans for such facilities shall be reviewed and evaluated on an individual project or use basis as part of site plan review provisions of Section 10 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 21.	OFF-STREET LOADING

Subdivision

21.1	Purpose
21.2	Design
21.3	Number of Loading Spaces Required
21.4	Landscaping and Screening of Loading Spaces
21.5	Location



21.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the regulation of loading spaces in these zoning regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for off- street loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the specific and appropriate utilization of various parcels of land or structure.



21.2	DESIGN:

A.	Dimensional Requirements:

1.	Non-Residential Uses: Required off-street truck loading or unloading spaces for non-residential uses shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width, fourteen
(14) feet in height, and sixty (60) feet in length, in accordance with the requirements of Subd. 21.02.2.B of this Ordinance. Where a loading space parallel to a building is to be utilized, such area shall not be less than twelve
(12) feet in width nor less than sixty-five (65) feet in length. In no instance shall any designated side loading space encroach upon a fire lane or driving aisle or parking spaces.

2.	Reductions: Reductions to loading space size may be granted by the Zoning Administrator upon demonstration of facility need.

B.	All maneuvering for off-street loading shall be accomplished on private property.

C.	In addition to the required loading space, all loading spaces shall include a maneuvering area. The maneuvering area shall not use any of that portion of the site containing parking stalls or customer service areas. Maneuvering areas shall be of such size as to permit the backing of truck tractors and coupled trailers into the loading space, without blocking the use of other loading spaces, drives, parking spaces, or maneuvering areas on public right-of-way.

D.	The construction and setback standards listed in Section 20 of this Ordinance shall apply to all loading spaces.
 

E.	Customer drop off spaces shall not constitute off-street loading spaces as may be required by Section 20 of this Ordinance.



21.3	NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES REQUIRED: The number of required off-street loading spaces shall be as follows:

GROSS FLOOR AREA OF NON-RESIDENTIAL USE (SQUARE FEET)	REQUIRED NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES*
Less than 10,000	1
10,001 to 20,000	2
20,001 to 50,000	3
50,001 to 75,000	4
75,001 to 100,000	5
For each additional 50,000 over 100,000	1

*  Reductions to loading space quantity requirements may be granted by the Zoning Administrator upon determination of facility need.



21.4	LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING OF LOADING SPACES: Loading spaces shall
be screened from all property lines. Said screening shall be accomplished by a solid wall or fence and shall be so designed as to be architecturally harmonious with the principal structure and in conformance with Section 15.06 of this Ordinance. Screening plantings may be substituted, provided such plantings are in conformance with Section 15.07 to this Ordinance.



21.5	LOCATION:

A.	Off-Street: All required loading spaces for a non-residential use shall be off-street and located on the same lot as the building or use to be served.

B.	Distance from Intersection: All loading space curb cuts shall be located at minimum fifty (50) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more street rights-of-way. This distance shall be measured from the property line.



C.	Distance   from   Residential   Use:    Loading   areas   established   after  	 shall be prohibited within three hundred (300) feet of residentially zoned or guided property  excluding  public  rights-of-way,  unless  completely  screened  by  an
 
intervening building. Loading areas not requiring screening by an intervening building shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned or property or property designated for such use by the Comprehensive Plan by the use of berms, fences, or walls to provide one hundred (100) percent opacity to a height of at least ten (10) feet.

D.	Pedestrians: Loading spaces shall not conflict with pedestrian movement.

E.	Visibility: Loading spaces shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from off-street parking access.

F.	General Compliance: Loading spaces shall comply with all other requirements of this section.

G.	Traffic Interference: Each loading space shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will cause the least interference with traffic.

H.	Accessory Use, Parking, and Storage: Required loading spaces shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or snow and shall not be included as part of the space requirements to meet off-street parking requirements.
 

 
SECTION 22
LAND FILLING AND LAND EXCAVATION/GRADING OPERATIONS

Subdivision

22.1	Permit Required
22.2	Application and Required Information
22.3	Technical Reports
22.4	Issuance of Permit
22.5	Conditions of Permit
22.6	Security
22.7	Failure to Comply
22.8	Completion of Operation
22.9	Operations in Process



22.1	PERMIT REQUIRED:

A.		Except for City landfilling and land excavation/grading operations, and in cases where a grading and drainage plan for a private development has been approved as part of a subdivision or other development plan approved by the City, or as may be otherwise stipulated by this Ordinance, any person who proposes to add landfill or extract sand, gravel, black dirt, or other natural material from the land or grade land in excess of fifty (50) cubic yards within the City limits, shall apply to the City for a permit as specified below:



Cubic Yards Of Landfill or Land to be Excavated/ Graded		Permit Requirement
Less than 50	No  permit  required  ·
51 - 250	Administrative   permit  as  provided in Section 6 of this Ordinance
Greater than 250	Interim  use  permit  as  provided  in Section 5 of this Ordinance

B.	Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, no permit will be required for depositing landfill or excavation/grading on a lot for which a building permit has been issued for construction thereon provided that such activity is in accordance with an approved grading plan.

C.	Activities which qualify as mining operations shall be subject to this section.

0.		Except for mining activities, landfilling  and  land  excavation/grading  operations are an allowable activity within all zoning districts .
 
1 E. The use of any explosive or incendiary device shall be prohibited in m1rnng operations in the City, provided however, that the use of explosive or incendiary devices may be used when necessary for the purpose of constructing roads or installing municipal sanitary sewer or municipal water service.



22.2	APPLICATION AND REQUIRED INFORMATION:

A		Any person desiring a permit hereunder shall file an application on such forms as shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City resolution and one (1) large scale copy and one (1) reduced scale (not less than 11 inches by 17 inches) copy of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed land filling or land excavation operation. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, reduced scale drawings (11 inches by 17 inches) are determined to be illegible, the submission of larger scale materials shall be required. The scale of such materials shall be the minimum necessary to ensure legibility. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted and complete when the applicant has submitted and complied with all the following required information, as applicable and specified by the Zoning Administrator:

1.	The name and address of the applicant.

2.	The name and address of the owner of the land.

3.	The address and legal description of the land involved.

4.	The purpose of the landfill or excavation/grading activity.

5.	A  description  of the type  and amount  of material to  be placed upon or excavated/graded from the premises.

6.	The source of fill material.

7.	The highway, street or streets, or other public ways  in the City upon and along which any material is to be hauled or carried.

8.	An	estimate	of	the	time	required	to	complete	the	landfill	or excavation/grading .

9.	A site plan showing present topography  (with a minimum interval of two
(2)  feet)   and  also  including  boundary  lines  for  all  properties,  water courses, wetlands  and other significant features within three hundred fifty
(350) feet.
 
10.	A site plan showing the proposed finished grade (with a minimum interval of two  (2) feet) and landscape plan. Erosion control measures shall be provided on  such   plan.     Final  grade  shall  not  adversely   affect  the surrounding  land  or the development of the site on which the  landfill  is being conducted.  Top  soil shall  be of a quality capable of establishing normal vegetative growth.

11.	A plan and/or statement demonstrating the proposed activity will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare or is appropriately fenced to provide adequate protection.

12.	A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions prescribed by the City.

13.	A written right-of-entry is provided to the Zoning Administrator to enter the land  for the purpose of determining  compliance  with  all  applicable conditions imposed on the operation.

14.	Other information as may be specified by the Zoning Administrator.



22.3	TECHNICAL REPORTS: The Zoning Administrator shall immediately, upon receipt of a completed application, as determined by preliminary staff review, forward a copy thereof to the City Engineer and the City Building Official. Where protected watersheds, floodplains, and/or protected wetlands are in question, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and Army Corps of  Engineers  shall  also  be contacted. These technical advisors shall be requested to prepare reports, as applicable, for the City Council and/or Zoning Administrator.



22.4	ISSUANCE OF PERMIT: Upon receiving information and reports from the City staff and other applicable agencies, as applicable, the City Council or the Zoning Administrator shall make its determination as to whether, and when, and under what conditions such permit for a landfill or excavation/grading activity is to be issued to the applicant.



22.5	CONDITIONS  OF PERMIT:

A.	Landfill Operations:

1.	Under no circumstances shall any landfill operation be conducted or permitted if the contents of the landfill or any part thereof shall consist of garbage, animal or vegetable refuse, poisons, contaminants, chemicals, decayed material, filth, sewage or similar septic or biologically dangerous material deemed to be unsuitable by the City.
 
2.	Unless expressly extended by permit, the hours of operation  shall be limited to 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM, Monday through Saturday.

8.	Land Excavation/Grading Operations:

1.	The City, as a prerequisite to the granting of a permit, or after a permit has been granted, may require the applicant to whom such permit is issued, or the owner or user of the property on which the excavation/grading is located to:

a.	Properly fence the excavation.

b.	Slope the banks, and otherwise properly guard to keep the excavation in such condition as not to be dangerous from caving or sliding banks.

c.	Properly drain, fill in or level the excavation, after it has been created, so as to make the same safe and healthful as the City shall determine.

d.	Keep the excavation/grading within the limits for which the particular permit is granted.

e.	Remove excavated/graded material from the excavation, away from the premises upon and along such highways, streets or other public ways as the City shall order and direct.

f.	Retain and store top soil from the site in question and to utilize such materials in the restoration of the site.

2.	Unless expressly  extended by permit, the hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM, Monday through Saturday.



22.6	SECURITY: The City shall require either the applicant or the owner or user of the property on which the landfill or excavation/grading is occurring to post a security in such form and sum as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The amount of the security shall be sufficient to cover the extraordinary costs of the City or any other Road Authority for the expense of repairing, from time to time, any highways, streets or other public ways where such repair work is made necessary by the special burden from hauling and travel in transporting fill or excavated material. The amount of the security shall also be sufficient to insure compliance with all requirements of this section, and the particular permit, and to pay the expense the City or any other Road Authority may incur as a result of the permit."
 
22.7	FAILURE TO COMPLY: The City may, for failure of any person to comply with any requirement made of them in writing under the provisions of such permit, as promptly as same can reasonably be done, proceed to cause said requirement to be complied with, and the cost of such work shall be certified as an assessment against the property whereon the landfill or excavation/grading operation is located, or the City may at its option proceed to collect such costs by an action against the person to whom such permit has been issued, and their superiors if a bond exists.  In the event that landfilling or excavation/grading operations requiring a permit are commenced prior to City review and approval, the City may require work stopped and all necessary  applications filed and processed.   In such cases, application fees shall be double the normal charge.



22.8	COMPLETION  OF OPERATION:       All  landfill and excavation  operations  shall be completed within three hundred sixty five (365) days of the issuance of the permit. Upon completion the permit holder shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of the date of completion. If additional time beyond the three hundred sixty five (365) days is need for completion, the permit holder may apply to the Zoning Administrator  and upon a satisfactory showing of need, the  Zoning Administrator  may grant  an extension  of time.  If such extension is granted, it shall be for a definite period.  Extensions shall not be granted in cases where the permit holder fails to - show that good faith efforts were made to complete the landfill or excavation/grading operation within three hundred sixty five (365) days and that failure to complete the operation was due to circumstances beyond the permit holder's control such as shortage of fill or excavated material, labor strike, unusually inclement weather, illness or other such valid and reasonable excuse for non-completion. In the event a request for an extension is denied, the permit holder shall be allowed a reasonable time to comply with other provisions  of  this  section relating to grading, leveling and seeding or sodding. What constitutes such "reasonable time" shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator after inspecting the premises.



22.9	OPERATIONS IN PROCESS: All landfill and excavation/grading operations for which a permit has previously been issued shall terminate such operations on the date specified by the permit.
 
SECTION 23 FARMS

Subdivision

23.1	Allowed Use
23.2	Building Permits
23.3	Irrigation Systems
23.4	Accessory, Second Residential Dwellings (Temporary)
23.5	Animals
23.6	Temporary, Seasonal Sale of Products Produced on Site
23.7	Animal Feedlots



23.1	ALLOWED  USE:   Farms, farmsteads,  and farming shall be allowed pursuant to respective zoning district provisions.



23.2	BUILDING PERMITS: The construction of any building or applicable structure on a farm, unless specifically exempted shall require a building permit  and be in compliance with the Uniform Building Code.



23.3	IRRIGATION SYSTEMS: All proposed irrigation systems shall require a permit from the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.



23.4	ACCESSORY, SECOND RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS (TEMPORARY):

A		Such structures and uses are classified as an interim use and regulated pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance.

B.	Such structures  may only  be manufactured  (mobile home) housing units which can be readily removed from the site.

C.	Such structures  may only be allowed for and occupied by a family, one (1) member of which is an employee of the farm on which it is located.

D.	Conditions of approval shall include, but not be limited to:

1.	The structure meets all applicable zoning distrrct performance standards.







St. Augusta Zoning Ordinance                                                                                                        Fanns
 
2.	The established property access is jointly utilized by the interim use and the principal residence on the farmstead unless specifically exempted by the City Council.

3.	The existing on site sewer system and well is used by the temporary dwelling, unless specifically exempted by the City Council.

4.	Before the temporary dwelling is located on the site, it shall be inspected by and subject to the approval and requirements of the City Building Official.

5.	The  manner  in which  and the  requirements  for  securing  the  temporary dwelling on the site shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Building Official.

6.	Upon termination of occupancy by a qualified individual or family, the temporary dwelling shall be removed within ninety (90) days of such date unless a time extension, requested in writing by the property owner is approved by the City Council.

E.	The occupant of the temporary dwelling or the property owner shall provide proof of employment of the occupant of the temporary dwelling by the farm on which the interim use is located by submitting a federal income tax 1040 form each year between the dates of 1 January and 15 April. Failure of the occupant to qualify as an employee of the farm shall constitute a termination  of  the  interim  use permit and shall require the removal of the temporary dwelling within ninety (90) days from such date unless a time extension, requested in writing by the property owner, is approved by the City Council.



23.5	ANIMALS:	The keeping of animals on farms shall be regulated by  Sections
23.07 and 24 of this Ordinance as may be applicable.



23.6	TEMPORARY, SEASONAL SALE OF PRODUCTS PRODUCED ON SITE:

A	A-1, Agricultural Zoning District: Within the A-1 Zoning District, the temporary seasonal sale of products produced solely on site of the respective farm is a permitted accessory  use, provided that:

1.	Only members of the family occupying the residence on the farmstead are engaged in such activity.

2.	Only temporary, unenclosed display facilities are used to exhibit such items.
 
3.	Adequate  off-street  parking  is provided  and  no parking  related to  such sales occurs on the public right-of-way.

4.	Signs:

a.	Are located only on the private property of the farm owner/operator and are no more than one hundred (100) feet from the point of sale.

b.	Are limited to no more than two (2) structures totaling no more than sixteen (16) square feet.

c.	Are erected and removed daily and are not to be displayed at times when the sales operation is closed.

8.	Other Zoning Districts: The temporary, seasonal sale  of  products  produced solely on the site of the respective farm may be allowed in zoning districts other than Agriculture A-1 Districts subject to the approval of an administrative permit, provided that:

1.	The  standards  and  requirements  are  specified  in  Subd.  23.06.A  are complied with.

2.	The  provisions   of  Section  6  of  this   Ordinance   are  considered   and determined to be satisfied.



23.7	ANIMAL FEEDLOTS:

A	Purpose:  The purpose and intent of this section is to:

1.	Establish a procedure for the allowance of feedlots within t e City.

2.	Regulate the location, development, and expansion of feedlots.

3.	Promote best farm management practices.

4.	Protect valuable ground water and surface water resources.

5.	Protect human and animal health.

6.	Promote compatibility of uses.

7.	Coordinate  and assist  state  agencies  in the administration  of state-wide statutes and regulations governing livestock operations .
 
B.	Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) Feedlot Permit Requirements: The owner of an existing animal feedlot of greater than ten (10) animal units shall make an application to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) for an animal feedlot permit when any of the following conditions exist:

1.	A new feedlot is proposed where a feedlot did not previously exist.

2.	A change in operation of an existing animal feedlot is proposed.

3.	A  National  Pollutant  Discharge  Elimination  System  (NPDES)  permit  is required under state or federal rules and regulations.

C. Allowed Feedlots:  Those feedlots which do not constitute a potential pollution hazard and meet the applicable requirements of this Ordinance shall be allowed within the City on the condition that they obtain a certificate of compliance by the MPCA, as required.

4 D.	Prohibited Feedlots:

1.	New feedlots or expansions  of existing feedlots that exceed the following cumulative number of animal units:
 

District Designation
 
Maximum Number
of Animal Units
 

a.	Urban                Service                Area 	140
b.	Rural                Service                Area 	350
NOTE: See St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan for District Boundary designations. Expansions over the maximum number of animal units shall require a permit from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and a conditional use permit.
E.		Destruction of Animal Feedlots: Notwithstanding Section 14.04.A of this Ordinance, any animal feedlot lawfully existing as a non-conforming use and any structures or buildings lawfully existing and which are used for the purpose of containing animals associated with a non-conforming animal feedlot use, which are destroyed or partially destroyed to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its fair market value, may be restored and the same use resumed (if such use was lawfully existing as a non-conforming use prior to such damage and destruction) or any conforming use established,  provided  that  such reconstruction be completed within twelve (12) months after the date  of such damage or destruction.
 
F.	Pollution Control Requirements:

1.	Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide restrictions on feedlot operations as restrictive as, or more so, than existing State regulations regarding pollution or potential pollution hazards.

2.	General Requirement: No animal feedlot or manure storage area shall be constructed, located, or operated so as to create or maintain a potential pollution hazard unless a certificate of compliance or an animal feedlot permit has been issued by the MPCA.

3.	Vehicles and Spreaders: All vehicles used to transport animal manure on City,  County, State, and interstate highways shall be leak-proof. Manure spreaders  with end gates shall be  in  compliance  with  this  provision provided the end gate works effectively to restrict leakage and the manure spreader is leak-proof.    This shall not apply to animal manure being hauled  to  fields  adjacent  to  feedlot   operations   or  fields   divided   by roadways provided the animal manure is for use as domestic fertilizer.

4.	Manure Storage: Animal manure, when  utilized  as  domestic  fertilizer, shall not be stored for longer than one (1) year and shall be applied at rates not  exceeding local agricultural crop nutrient requirements except where allowed by permit.  Local agricultural  crop  nutrient  requirements can be obtained at the Stearns County Soil Conservation Service office or local Agricultural Extension Service office.

5.	Animal Manure: Any animal manure not utilized as domestic fertilizer shall be treated or disposed of in accordance with applicable State rules.

6.	Owner's Duties: The owner of any animal feedlot shall be responsible for the storage, transportation, and disposal of all .animal manure generated in a manner consistent with the provisions herein.

7.	Odors: Feedlot operations shall take responsible measures to minimize odors.

8.	Variance: Any feedlot may request a variance in accordance with Section 7 of this Ordinance where rules may not apply or create a unique hardship due to conditions not created by the feedlot op·erator or owner.

G.	Information Requirement:

1.	A  map or aerial photograph indicating dimensions  of feedlot, showing all existing homes, buildings, lakes,  ponds,  water  courses,  wetlands,  dry runs,	rock   outcroppings,   streets,   wells,   contour   and   surface   water
 
drainage encompass ing the maximum setback distances of Section 23.06 of this Ordinance .

2.	A description of the geological condition, soil types and  seasonal  high water table.

3.	A plan indicating  operational  procedure,  the  location  and  specifics  of proposed animal waste facilities. The quantity and type of effluent to be discharged from the site.

4.	Method/plan for disposal of dead animals shall be consistent with the Minnesota Board of Animal Health regulations.

5.	Manure Utilization Plan which will include the location of all manure application sites, crop types, application rate in gallons/acre or tons/acre, and the resulting application rate of N, P and K in pounds/acre. Manure application shall not exceed agronomic rates or to build N, P and K levels beyond the soil capability of holding and utilizing them for crop use, for the prevention of leaching and potential non-point pollution problems, as determined by the Stearns County Extension Educator and the Minnesota Extension Service.

6.	Land spreading agreements shall be provided if the applicant does not own the minimum acreage to apply animal waste and the land application agreement must be signed by all owners of the property.

7.	Methods used to control or mitigate odor impact upon neighboring properties.

8.	A plan for proper closure of the facility including an estimated cost of the same.

9.	In cases of feedlot expansions, certification of existing animal units upon the property.

10.	Any other additional information  as  contained  in  the  application  and requested by the City or MPCA.

H.	Feedlot Setbacks:

1.	Existing Feedlots: Lawfully established feedlots existing prior to (effective date of ordinance) may be continued in the location existing on such date and are exempt from the setback requirements of this Ordinance . Expansions to existing feedlots shall be in compliance with the setback provisions as established by Section 23.07.G.2 below. Legal non­ conforming  feedlots  may  be  expanded  provided  the  degree  of  setback
 
non-conformity  is  not  increased  and  all  other  applicable  standards  of operation specified in this Ordinance are satisfactorily met.

2. New Feedlots and Feedlot Expansions :  All new feedlots and feedlot expansions shall comply with each and every one of the following setback requirements :

Category	Required Setback
Shorelands as defined by the Steams County Shoreland Management Ordinance	Prohibited unless otherwise allowed by the
MPCA
100 year floodplains as established on insurance rate maps and the flood insurance
study for Steams County	Prohibited
Public Parks	2,640 feet (1/2 mile)
Public Wells	1,000 feet
County, City and private drainage ditches	100 feet
Private Residences and Wells	500 feet*

*  Setbacks may be reduced to 150 feet upon the City's receipt of written permission of affected property owners .

I.		Manure  Stockpile/Application  Setbacks:  The  following  manure  stockpile  and application setbacks are required for all new and expanded feedlots:

1. SEPARATION DISTANCE {FEET}
	Surface
Spreading	Incorporation
or Injection	Irrigation
Streams or Rivers	*	50	200
Lakes	*	100	300
Water Wells	200	200  .	200
Sink Holes	100	50	200
Individual Dwelling**	100	50	2,000
Public Roadways	25	10	300
*	See Section 23.07.1.2 below for surface water setbacks .
**  Distance may be reduced with permission of owner.

2. SEPARATION DISTANCES FROM SURFACE WATERS FOR SURFACE APPLICATION
Slope
{%}	Soil Texture	Time of Year	Minimum
Separation
{feet}
0-6	Coarse	May-October			100
 

0-6	Coarse	November-April	200
0-6	Medium to fine	May-October	200
0-6	Medium to fine	November-April	300
Over6	Coarse	May-October	200
Over6	Medium to fine	May-October	300
Over6	All soils	November-April	Not recommended

J.	Conditional Use Permits:

1.	Requirement:	A conditional  use permit shall be obtained in a manner described in Section 4 of this Ordinance whenever :

a.	A new feedlot within the agriculture preserve-rural service area that exceeds three hundred fifty (350) animal units.

b.	Feedlot expansions that exceed the following cumulative number of animal units:
 

District Designation
 
Animal
Units
 

1)	Urban Service Area	140
2)	Rural Service Area	350

NOTE:  See St. Augusta  Comprehensive  Plan for district  boundary  ·
designations .

c.	The  proposed  expansion ,  or  modification  of  an  existing  feedlot located within a Shoreland or Floodplain Overlay District.

d.	A lagoon system, an earthen basin or any other outdoor liquid storage structure is proposed for the storage or treatment of animal waste.

e.	An abandoned feedlot located within the long range urban service area or urban service reserve area (defined by the Comprehensive Plan) area is re-established subject to the following conditions :

1)	The abandoned feedlot was legally established.

2)	The feedlot has been abandoned for a period greater than five (5) years.
 
3)	The re-established feedlot expansion takes place solely within feedlot-related buildings and facilities existing on the site on the effective date of this Ordinance.

4)	The  number  of  animals  units  is  limited  to  that  previously allowed	by the MPCA as  part  of  the  facility's  legal establishment.

5)	The conditions of Section 23.07.J.2 of this Ordinance  are considered and determined to be satisfied.

2.	Standards for Conditional Use Permits: To protect public health, safety and welfare, the City  shall impose (but not be limited to) the following conditions:

a.	Trees and/or shrubs are planted, as determined necessary by the City Council, for use as a wind break but not so as to interfere with the design and functioning of the feedlot operation.

b.	All provisions of the Manure Utilization Plan as outlined in Section
-   23.07.G.5 of this  Ordinance  are satisfactorily  met.

c.	All pollution control measures outlined  in Section 23.07.F of this Ordinance are satisfactorily met.

d.	As required by State regulations, the applicant shall provide adequate security to ensure compliance with any or all conditions of the permit, proper handling and storage of manure, and proper closure of the facility. The amount of said security shall be contained in a written agreement between the permittee and the City.

e.	All applicable setback requirements of Sections 23.07.F and 23.07.1 of this Ordinance  are satisfactorily  met. _

f.	All feedlots shall be operated in a nuisance-free manner consistent with the regulations of the City and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).

g.	Approval of the conditional use permit shall be contingent upon the successful  acquisition  of  a  Minnesota  Pollution  Control  Agency (MPCA) permit.

h.	The use is consistent with applicable provisions of Section 23, 24, and 45 of this Ordinance.
 
i.	The provisions of Section 4.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.

j.	All conditions of approval of the conditional  use permit  shall be recorded against the property.

K.	Standards for Earthen Storage Basins, Lagoons and Other Manure Storage Areas.	Earthen basins, lagoons and other manure storage areas shall be constructed in compliance with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) requirements.

L.	Facility Closure:

1.	Responsible Parties: The landowner, owner and operator of any animal feedlot shall be responsible for the ongoing management of manure and the final closure of the facility include the cleaning of buildings and the emptying and proper disposal of manure from all manure holding facilities.

2.	Environmental Financial Assurance: Financial security shall be posted with the City in the form of escrow, bond, or letter of credit in an amount established by State Rules or Regulations, or as amended, in order to assure proper closure of the facility .

3.	Closure Plan: If a permitted feedlot operation using a manure storage system ·ceases operation, the owner shall submit to the City and MPCA a closure plan.

a.	The plan shall be submitted at least sixty (60) days prior to the final day of operation of the manure storage system.  The plan shall be prepared  by  a professional engineer  registered  in  the  State  of Minnesota, or a person recognized as qualified for such work by the MPCA.

b.	Closure of the operation may be postponed for a period of twelve
(12) months if the property is posted for.sale or lease.

c.	Manure storage system closure shall include the removal of the sludge in the facilities and its disposal by proper land application at agronomic rates or by other legally permissible method.

d.	Manure storage system closure shall also include filling in a basin with material from the dikes or other earthen material that may be available . Only material allowed to bff buried under federal, state and local regulations may be used as fill. It is necessary to fill in the basin to prevent it from being a safety hazard when it fills in with rain and snow-melt waters.
 
e.	All wastes from the feedlot operation and its waste control system shall be removed and disposed of on land or in some other manner which is legally permissible as soon as practical, but no more than six (6) months, and in accordance with the approved plan in order to promote and protect public health.

f.	Each time ownership to the facility changes, the new owner must notify the MPCA and the City in writing within sixty (60) days of the transfer of ownership that the approved plan has been read and is understood and that all provisions of the plan will be implemented. The new owner must also provide the  City with written assurance that they have assumed all obligations undertaken by previous operators or owners, including posting of any necessary security.

g.	If the new ownership is to continue to operate the facility, closure shall not be necessary.

M.		Closure: Owners and operators of feedlots, either at the time of abandonment or after, shall have joint and several liability for clean up, closure or remediation of abandoned feedlot sites and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty requirements of Section 12 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 24.	ANIMALS

Subdivision

24.1	General Regulations
24.2	Domestic Animals
24.3	Dog Kennels and Cat Shelters
24.4	Farm Animals
24.5	Commercial Stables
24.6	Wild or Exotic Animals

24.1	GENERAL REGULATIONS:

A.	The size, number, species, facilities for and location of animals kept shall be maintained so as not to cause a nuisance or endanger the health, safety, or general welfare of the community and shall be in compliance with this Ordinance and all other applicable City regulations.

B.	Animals may only be kept for commercial purposes if such activities are authorized in the zoning district where the animals are to be located.

C.	Facilities for housing animal(s) shall be:

1.	Constructed of such material as is appropriate for the animal(s) involved.

2.	Maintained in good repair.

3.	Controlled as to temperature, ventilated and lighted compatible with the health and comfort of the animal(s).

4.	Of sufficient size to allow each animal to make normal postural and social adjustments with adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition of debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns.

5.	Cleaned as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the animal(s) contained therein and to minimize disease hazards and reduce odors.

6.	Excepting farm related facilities, subject to approval of a building permit by the City Building Official.

7.	In accordance with applicable Humane Society or State requirements regarding the leasing of animals.
D.	Animals kept in pet shops or kennels shall be kept in accordance with regulations for pet shops and kennels in addition to the regulations provided by this Ordinance.
 


24.2	DOMESTIC ANIMALS: The keeping of domestic animals, as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance, is an allowed use in all zoning districts.



24.3	DOG KENNELS AND CAT SHELTERS:

A.	No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a license.

B.	A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for operation of a kennel or shelter.

C.	Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.

D.	Both dog kennels or cat shelters shall be open for inspection by the City authorities at any time.

E.	It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep four (4) or more dogs and/or cats (excluding farm cats) over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this Section.



24.4	FARM ANIMALS:

A.	The keeping and maintaining of farm animals, including livestock and horses, shall be an allowed use within the A-1 Zoning District and on sites qualifying as farms in all other zoning districts.

B.	The keeping and maintaining of farm animals, including livestock and horses, shall be allowed by administrative permit in the A-2 Zoning District, provided:

1.	The provisions of Section 6 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.

2.	The minimum lot size upon which animals are to be located shall be two and one-half (2 ½) acres.




3.	Farm animals may not be confined in a pen, feedlot, or building within two hundred (200) feet of any residential structure not owned or leased by the operator.
 
4.	The keeping and care of animals is provided by City regulations.

5.	The density per acre of farm animals specifically allowed must not exceed the maximum densities, as specified below, unless permitted by conditional use permit:

 	Animals		Number/Acre

a.	Cattle, horses mules, donkeys		1
b.	Goats, sheep	5	
c.	Swine		10
d.	Turkeys, ducks, geese		25
e.	Chickens, rabbits, guinea		
	pigs, hamsters, pigeons		50

6.	A shelter or stabling facility shall provide a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet per acre of enclosed area per animal, or fractions thereof, as based upon the number of animals per acre listed above (example: 100 square feet divided by five goats/acre = 20 square feet of enclosed area per goat).

C.	Manure application and stockpiling activities shall comply with applicable provisions of Section 23.07 of this Ordinance.

D.	No manure or waste shall be deposited, stored, kept, or allowed to remain in or upon any site without reasonable safeguards adequate to prevent the escape or movement of such manure, waste, or a solution thereof from the site which may result in pollution of any public waters or any health hazard.

E.	All regulations imposed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) relating to the keeping of farm animals shall be adhered to and animal feedlots shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 23.07 of this Ordinance.



24.5	COMMERCIAL STABLES:

A.	Commercial stables (operations involving the boarding and care of ten (10) or more horses) shall be allowed only in the City’s A-1 Zoning District by conditional use permit.
B.	The minimum lot size for a commercial stable shall be ten (10) acres.

C.	The density of equine allowed on a commercial riding stable shall be in accordance with Section 24.04.B.5.

D.	Manure and other waste materials shall be removed and distributed so as to
 
minimize unsightly odors, insect, and rodent problems or any condition which otherwise operates as a public or private nuisance. The storage of manure and other waste materials must be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the property line of any residential structure, or any lake, pond, river, stream, or other body of water, well, or property line.

E.	All areas designated for equine sheltering shall be located at least two hundred
(200) feet from the property line. Any agricultural building or shelter which was being used in a commercial stable prior to the effective date of this Section is not required to comply with the requirements of this subparagraph, provided, however, that such agricultural building or shelter does not constitute a public nuisance as determined by the City Council.

F.	Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance shall be constructed and maintained so as to adequately and safely contain equine at all times.

G.	One (1) agricultural building upon the commercial stable property shall be permitted to contain no more than one (1) caretaker’s unit, subject to a demonstrated need and to the approval of a conditional use permit as regulated by Section 4 of this Ordinance.

H.	All equine shall be provided shelter sufficient to protect against potentially injurious weather. All such shelters shall be structurally sound, provide sufficient ventilation, and be maintained in good repair.

I.	Equine stalls shall provide sufficient space for the equine to lie or roll with a minimum danger of injury to itself. Stalls shall be cleaned and kept dry to the extent that the animal is not required to lie or stand in fluids. Bedding shall be provided in all stalls, kept reasonably clean, and periodically changed. The nature of the bedding shall not pose a health hazard to the animal.

J.	The Zoning Administrator shall inspect every commercial stable as frequently as the City may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Section and any conditions of the license for such commercial stable. Any person who operates a commercial stable shall, upon request of the Zoning Administrator and/or City Building Official, permit access to all parts of the commercial stable for the purpose of inspection. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a report of every inspection of a commercial stable. A copy of such report shall be mailed to the person operating the commercial stable and forwarded to the City Council.



24.6	WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS:

A.	Conditional Use Permit.
 
1.	Other than may be herein exempted, wild or exotic animals, as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance shall require a conditional use permit prior to its being kept in the City.

2.	Determination of acceptability shall include but not be limited to:

a.	The potential health or safety hazard posed.

b.	The provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.

3.	Conditions and limitations governing wild or exotic animals shall include but not be limited to:

a.	Full compliance with State Statutes and federal regulations governing such species.

b.	Provisions for the adequate and safe confinement of such animal, as may be warranted by the potential adverse impact upon neighboring properties and by safe consideration of the property residents and neighboring uses.

c.	Adequate screening, noise, and visual controls as deemed necessary by the City Council to maintain compatibility and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.

d.	Additional requirements and limitations as may be deemed necessary by the City Council so as to insure compatibility and maintain the health, safety and general welfare of the public.

B.	Zoological Programs. Wild or exotic animals being kept as part of the Minnesota Zoological Gardens, St. Paul Como Zoo, or similar institutional teaching programs are an allowed use in all zoning districts by administrative permit. Prior to permit issuance, the participant in the program shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of their participation in the program and identify all animals being kept.
 

 
SECTION 25.	HOME OCCUPATIONS

Subdivision

25.1	Purpose
25.2	Application
25.3	Procedures and Permits
25.4	Requirement; General Provisions
25.5	Non-Conforming Uses
25.6	Inspection
25.7	Revocations



25.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this Section is to provide a means through the establishment of specific standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted without jeopardizing land use harmony and compatibility, and the health, safety and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. In addition, this Section is intended to provide a mechanism enabling the distinction between permitted home occupations and interim or customarily "more sensitive" home occupations, so that permitted home occupations may be allowed through an administrative process rather than a legislative hearing process.



25.2	APPLICATION: Subject to the Non-Conforming Use Section and other applicable provisions of this Ordinance, all occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. This Section shall not be construed, however, to apply to home occupations related to farming.



25.3	PROCEDURES AND PERMITS:

A.	Permitted Home Occupations:

1.	“Permitted home occupations”, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be considered permitted accessory uses in the City’s agricultural and residential zoning districts and shall comply with the provisions of Section 25.04.A and
25.04.B of this Ordinance.

B.	Interim Home Occupations:

1.	Qualification: Any home occupation which does not meet the specific requirements for a “permitted home occupation” as defined in this Section shall require an "interim home occupation permit" which shall be applied for, reviewed and disposed of in accordance with the procedural provisions of
 
Section 5 of this Ordinance.

2.	Declaration of Conditions: The City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of an "interim home occupation permit" as may be necessary to ensure compatibility and to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section.

3.	Effect of Permit: An "interim home occupation permit" may be issued for a period of one (1) year after which the permit may be reissued for periods of up to three (3) years each. Each application for permit renewal shall be processed and subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator, except in cases where written complaints have been received concerning the operation or where there has been a change in conditions or violation, a renewal shall be processed in accordance with the procedural requirements of the initial interim home occupation permit.

4.	Transferability: Home occupation permits shall not run with the land and shall not be transferable.

5.	Renewal of Permit: An applicant shall not have a vested right to a permit renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. In applying for and accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees that the monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized over the life of the permit and that a permit renewal will not be needed to amortize the investment. Each application for the renewal of a permit will be reviewed without taking into consideration that a previous permit has been granted. The previous granting or renewal of a permit shall not constitute a precedent or basis for the renewal of a permit.



25.4	REQUIREMENT; GENERAL PROVISIONS: All home occupations shall comply with the following general provisions and according to definition, the applicable requirement provisions.

A.	General Provisions:

1.	No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, fumes, odor, or vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property.




2.	No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
 
receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the premises.

3.	Except in the case of State licensed day care facilities, any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises, not more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the conduct of the home occupation. The home occupation shall not change the residential character of the premises nor result in incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding residential uses.

4.	No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.

5.	There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation, except personal vehicles used in the home occupation which comply with applicable provisions of this Ordinance may be parked on the site.

6.	The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes.

7.	There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception of directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by the provisions of Section 31 of this Ordinance.

8.	All home occupations shall comply with all City regulations related to nuisances.

9.	No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM unless approved by the City Council.

10.	Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is parked closer than fifteen (15) feet from the curb line or edge of paved surface.








11.	No home occupation (permitted or interim) shall involve any of the following: body shops, welding, ammunition manufacturing, flea markets, motor vehicle sales or repairs, massage or escort business or other sexually oriented

25-3
 
businesses as defined by this ordinance, or other objectionable uses as determined by the City Council.

12.	Excepting incidental materials, no commodities shall be sold on the premises.

B.	Requirements, Permitted Home Occupation:

1.	No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises shall be employed.

2.	On-street parking facilities shall not be utilized to accommodate parking demand.

3.	Examples of permitted home occupations include: art studio, dressmaking, secretarial services, family day care, foster care, offices, teaching with musical, dancing and other instructions which consist of no more than two (2) pupils at a time, and similar uses.

4.	The permitted home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair service or manufacturing which requires equipment other than customarily found in a home; teaching which customarily consists of more than two (2) pupils at a time; over the counter sale of non-residential merchandise produced off the premises.

C.	Requirements, Interim Home Occupation:

1.	A maximum of one (1) full time employee or equivalent, other than those persons who customarily reside on the premises, shall be employed. This provision shall not apply where the interim home occupation is a meeting place for employees and the work is done off-premises.

2.	Examples of interim home occupations include: massage therapy, barber and beauty services, day care, group nursery, photography studio, lessons, saw sharpening, small appliances, and small engine repair and the like.




3.	The interim home occupation may involve any of the following: stock-in trade incidental to the performance of the service, repair service or manufacturing which requires equipment other than customarily found in a home, the teaching with musical, dancing and other instruction of more than two (2) pupils at a time.

4.	Interim home occupations may be allowed to accommodate their parking
 
demand through utilization of on-street parking. In such cases where on- street parking facilities are necessary, however, the Zoning Administrator shall maintain the right to establish the maximum number of on-street spaces permitted and increase or decrease that maximum number when and where changing conditions require additional review.



25.5	NON-CONFORMING USE: Existing home occupations lawfully existing on June 2, 1998 may continue as non-conforming uses. Any existing home occupation that is discontinued for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or is in violation of the provisions of the Ordinance under which it was initially established, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this Section.



25.6	INSPECTION: With reasonable cause and documentation, the City hereby reserves the right to inspect any home occupation during reasonable hours, with reasonable notice, the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with and provisions of this Section or any conditions additionally imposed.



25.7	REVOCATIONS:

A.	Permitted and interim home occupations may continue to exist until:

1.	Such time as the business is not in compliance with any portion of this ordinance, any other applicable City ordinance, or any applicable state or federal statute, rule or regulation.

2.	Such time as there is any violation of the terms and conditions of permit approval.

3.	Such time as there is any change in the conditions of operation of the business as it was originally approved; including any change in the nature of the business, any substantial change in the extent of business, any substantial change in the extent of business operations, any significant expansion of business facilities, or any other circumstances related to the business which have the potential to significantly effect surrounding properties, or which may pose a threat to the health, welfare or safety of the general public.

4.	Such time as License Expires: At such time that the City has cause to believe that any of the events listed in 1, 2 or 3 above have taken place, the City shall immediately notify the permit holder of the allegations of violation and the necessary corrections required to bring the license into compliance.
 

 
SECTION 26.	DAY CARE NURSERY FACILITIES

Subdivision

26.1	Purpose
26.2	Application
26.3	Declaration of Conditions
26.4	General Provisions
26.5	Inspection




26.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the regulation of day care nursery facilities in this section is to establish standards and procedures by which day care facilities can be conducted within the City without jeopardizing the health, safety and general welfare of the day care participants and/or the surrounding neighborhood. This section establishes the City’s minimum requirements for the establishment and operation of day care facilities which are not defined as permitted uses by State Statute or which are not located in single family homes. Day care facilities other than those defined as permitted uses by State Statutes which operate in a single family dwelling as an accessory use shall be subject to Section 25 of this Ordinance and processed as a home occupation.



26.2	APPLICATION: Day care nursery facilities shall be considered a permitted conditional use within all residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts of the City and shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of Section 4 of this Ordinance. In addition to the City regulation, all day care facility operations shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Minnesota Department of Human Services, as may be amended.



26.3	DECLARATION OF CONDITIONS: The Planning Commission and City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a day care facility conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this section.



26.4	GENERAL PROVISIONS: Day care facilities shall be allowed as a principal use or as an accessory use, provided that the day care facilities meet all the applicable provisions of this section.

A.	Lot Requirements and Setbacks: The proposed site for a day care facility as a principal use shall have a minimum lot area as set forth in the respective zoning district. The City Council may increase the required lot area in those cases where such an increase is considered necessary to ensure compatibility of activities and
 
maintain the public health, safety and general welfare.  The day care facility shall meet the setback requirements of the respective zoning district.

B.	Sewer and Water: All day care facilities shall have access to municipal sewer and water or have adequate private sewer and water to protect the health and safety of all persons who occupy the facility.

C.	Buffering: Unless exempted by the Zoning Administrator, where an outdoor play area of a day care facility which abuts any commercial or industrial use or zone, or public right-of-way, the day care facility shall provide screening along the shared boundary of such uses, zones, or public rights-of-way. All of the required fencing and screening shall comply with the fencing and screening requirements of Section
15.07 of this Ordinance.

D.	Parking:

1.	There shall be adequate off-street parking which shall be located separately from any outdoor play area and shall be in compliance with Section 20 of this Ordinance. Parking areas shall be screened from view of surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

2.	When a day care facility is an accessory use within a structure containing another principal use, parking for each use shall be calculated separately for determining the total off-street parking spaces required. An exception to this requirement may be granted by the Zoning Administrator in instances where no increase in off-street parking demand will result.

E.	Off-Street Loading: Off-street loading space in compliance with Section 21 of this Ordinance shall be provided.

F.	Signage: All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Section 31 of this Ordinance.

G.	Compliance with State Requirements: The structure and operation shall be in compliance with State of Minnesota Department of Human Services regulations and shall be licensed accordingly.



26.5	INSPECTION: The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any day care facility conditional use permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to insure compliance with the provisions of this section or any conditions additionally imposed.
 
SECTION 27.	SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES

Subdivision

27.1	Purpose
27.2	Sexually Oriented Use-General
27.3	Sexually Oriented Use-Principal
27.4	Sexually Oriented Use-Accessory



27.1	PURPOSE:	The purpose of this subdivision is to establish provisions for the opportunity as well as controls of sexually oriented uses within St. Augusta.



27.2	SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE - GENERAL: Sexually oriented uses, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be subject to the following general provisions:

A.	Activities classified as obscene under Minnesota State Law are not permitted and are strictly prohibited.

B.	Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.

C.	Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place which is also used to dispense or consume alcoholic beverages.

D.	Sexually oriented uses-principal which are defined in this Ordinance as sexually oriented stores, and which deal solely in the retail sales of novelties, shall be exempt from the requirements of Subd. 27.03 of this Ordinance.

E.	A sexually oriented use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as an sexually oriented use-principal.



27.3	SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES - PRINCIPAL:

A.	Sexually oriented use-principal shall be located at least two hundred (200) radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the building upon which the sexually oriented use-principal is located to the property line of:

1.	Residentially zoned property.
2.	Residential uses within Agricultural Zoning Districts.
 

3.	A licensed day care center.

4.	A public or private educational facility classified as an elementary, junior high or senior high.

5.	A public library.

6.	A public park.

7.	Another sexually oriented use-principal.

8.	An on-sale liquor establishment.

B.	Sexually oriented use-principal activities, as defined by this Ordinance, shall be classified as one use. No two (2) sexually oriented uses-principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same property and each use shall be subject to Subd. 27.03.A of this Ordinance.

27.4	SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES - ACCESSORY:

A.	Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall:

1.	Comprise  no  more  than  ten  (10)  percent  of  the  floor  area  of  the establishment in which they are located; and

2.	Comprise no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area in total; and

3.	Comprise no more than twenty (20) percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation; and

4.	Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise.

B.	Sexually oriented business-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general public access:

1.	Movie Rentals: Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation or shall be in catalogs under the direct control and distribution of the operator.

2.	Magazines:  Publications classified or qualifying as sexually oriented shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or
 
other means to prevent display of any  material other than the publication title.

C.	Sexually oriented business-accessory activities shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are admitted.
 

 
SECTION 28.	ESSENTIAL SERVICES

Subdivision

28.1	Purpose
28.2	Special Permit Required
28.3	Conditional Use Permit Required



28.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to provide for the installation of essential services such as telephone lines, pipelines, electric transmission lines and substations in such a manner that the health, safety, and welfare of the City will not be adversely affected. Essential services shall also be installed in recognition of existing and projected demands for such services.



28.2	SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED: All underground communication lines, pipelines for distribution to individual properties within the City, and all, underground electric transmission lines, overhead utility lines, electric transmission lines, and substations less than 33 KV, when installed in any location in the City, shall require a permit subject to review by the City Engineer and approval by the City Council and shall be processed according to the following:.

A.	Prior to the installation of any of the essential services defined above, the owner of such service shall file with the City Engineer, all maps and other pertinent information as deemed necessary by the City Engineer for review the proposed project.

B.	The City Engineer shall document in writing the findings as to the compliance of the proposed project with the Comprehensive Plan and any other applicable City regulations.

C.	In considering applications for the placement of essential services, as regulated in this section, the aforesaid City Engineer and City Council shall consider the effect of the proposed project upon the health, safety and general welfare of the City, as existing and as anticipated, and the effect of the proposed project upon the Comprehensive Plan.

D.	Upon approval of the City Council, a permit for the installation and operation of the applicant’s essential services shall be issued. If the City Council denies the permit, the applicant may appeal said decision to Stearns County District Court under the rules and procedures set forth in Section 8 of this Ordinance.”

28.3	CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED: All transmission pipelines (i.e., pipelines
 
not required for the St. Augusta local distribution network), and overhead and underground transmission and substation lines in excess of 33 KV shall require a conditional use permit.
 
SECTION 29.	ANTENNAS

Subdivision

29.1	Purpose and Intent
29.2	General Standards
29.3	Tower Design
29.4	Co-Location Requirement
29.5	Setbacks
29.6	Accessory and Secondary Use Antennas
29.7	Personal Wireless Service Antennas
29.8	Satellite Dishes
29.9	Commercial and Public Radio and Television Transmitting Antennas, and Public Utility Microwave Antennas



29.1	PURPOSE AND INTENT: The purpose of this section is to establish predicable, balanced regulations for the siting and screening of wireless communications equipment in order to accommodate the growth of wireless communicating systems within St. Augusta while protecting the public against any adverse impacts on the City's aesthetic resources and the public welfare. The provisions of this Ordinance are intended to maximize the use of existing towers, structures, and buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to minimize the number of towers needed to serve the community or area.



29.2	GENERAL STANDARDS: The following standards shall apply to all personal wireless service, public utility, microwave, radio and television broadcast transmitting, radio and television receiving, satellite dish and short-wave radio transmitting and receiving antenna.

A.	All obsolete and unused antenna shall be removed within twelve (12) months of cessation of operation at the site, unless an exemption is granted by the Zoning Administrator.

B.	All antenna shall be in compliance with all City building and electrical code requirements and as applicable shall require related permits.

C.	Structural design, mounting and installation of the antenna shall be in compliance with manufacturer’s specifications and as may be necessary, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be verified and approved by a professional engineer.



D.	When applicable, written authorization for antenna erection shall be provided by the property owner.
 

E.	No advertising message shall be affixed to the antenna structure.

F.	The height of the antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily, as verified by an electrical engineer or other appropriate professional.

G.	Antennas shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by law or by a governmental agency to protect the public’s health and safety.

H.	When applicable, proposals to erect new antenna shall be accompanied by any required federal, state, or local agency licenses.

I.	If a new tower is to be constructed, it shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least one (1) additional user, including but not limited to other cellular communication companies, local police, fire and ambulance companies. Towers shall be designed to allow for future re-arrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.

J.	Antenna support structures under two hundred (200) feet in height shall be painted a non-contrasting color consistent with the surrounding area, such as blue, gray, brown or silver, or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual impact.

K.	Except as may be applicable in cases where a conditional use permit is required, antennas and support structures for federally licensed amateur radio stations and used in the amateur radio service are exempt from sub-paragraphs C, F, and I above, and must comply with Subd. L. below.

L.	Amateur radio towers must be installed in accordance with the instructions furnished by the manufacturer of that tower model. Because of the experimental nature of the amateur radio service, antennas mounted on such a tower may be modified or changed at any time so long as the published allowable load on the tower is not exceeded and the structure of the tower remains in accordance with the manufacturers specifications.



29.3	TOWER DESIGN: Wireless communication towers shall be of a monopole design unless the City Council determines that an alternative design requested by the applicant would better blend into the surrounding environment. This provision does not apply to amateur radio towers or commercial and public radio or television towers.

29.4	CO- LOCATION REQUIREMENT: A proposal for a new tower shall not be approved unless the Zoning Administrator finds that the antennas cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower, building, or structure within a one mile search radius (one-half mile search radius for towers under one hundred (100) feet in
 
height) of the proposed tower due to one (1) or more of the following reasons:

A.	The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower, building or structure as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned for equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.

B.	The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a qualified engineer and interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.

C.	Existing or approved towers, buildings, or structures within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.

D.	Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the antennas upon an existing or approved tower or structure.

E.	Existing or approved towers, buildings, or other structures do not exist in the service area, or do not meet the needs of the user. Documentation shall be provided at the time of application clearly demonstrating why existing structures do not meet the needs of the users.

F.	The applicant shall demonstrate that a good faith effort to co-locate on existing towers or structures was made, but an agreement could not be reached.



29.5	SETBACKS: All towers shall comply with each of the minimum setback requirements:

A.	Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district with the exception of industrial zoning districts, where the tower may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another industrial zoning district and the tower does not encroach upon any easements.

B.	A tower’s setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied, at the discretion of the City Council, to allow the integration of the structure into an existing or proposed structure, such as a light standard, power line support device, or similar structure.



29.6	ACCESSORY AND SECONDARY USE ANTENNAS: The following standards shall apply to all accessory and secondary use antennas including radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic

29-3
 
equipment  including  radio  receivers,  federally  licensed  amateur  radio  stations  and television receivers.

A.	Accessory or secondary use antennas shall not be erected in any required yard (except a rear yard) or within public or private utility and drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all lot lines.

B.	Guy wires or guy wire anchors shall not be erected within public or private utility and drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all lot lines.

C.	Accessory or secondary use antennas and necessary support structures, monopoles or towers may extend a maximum of fifteen (15) feet above the normal height restriction for the affected zoning district, except support structures and antennas used in the amateur radio service may extend a maximum of seventy (70) feet for the affected zoning district.

D.	The installation of more than one (1) support structure per property shall require the approval of a conditional use permit.



29.7	PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE ANTENNAS:

A.	Agricultural and Residential District Standards:

1.	Antennas located upon public structures or existing tower: Personal wireless service antenna located upon public structures or existing towers shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards:

a.	The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a certified engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the antennas in a less restrictive district.

b.	Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.

c.	An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of

29-4
 
Section 6 of this Ordinance.

2.	Antennas not located upon a public structure or existing tower: Personal wireless service antenna not located upon a public structure or existing tower shall require the processing of a conditional use permit and shall comply with the following standards:

a.	The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/ interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a certified engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the antennas in a less restrictive district.

b.	If no existing, non-residential structure which meets the height requirements for the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be mounted on a monopole tower provided that:

(1)	The pole not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height.

(2)	The setback of the pole from the nearest residential structure is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such setback may be granted if a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.

c.	Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.

d.	At the discretion of the City, a security fence not greater than eight (8) feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be provided around the support structure.

e.	The conditional use permit provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.

B.	Business and Institutional District Standards:

1.	Antennas Located Upon An Existing Structure or Tower: Personal wireless service antenna located upon an existing structure or co-located on an existing tower shall require the processing of an administrative permit and

29-5
 
shall comply with the following standards:

a.	Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.

b.	Antennas mounted on public structures shall not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the structural height of the structure to which they are attached.

c.	Building-mounted antennas shall not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the roof, and shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the roof edge.

d.	Wall or facade mounted antennas may not extend more than five (5) feet above the cornice line and must be constructed of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building.

e.	An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of Section 6 of this Ordinance.

2.	Antennas Not Located Upon An Existing Structure or Existing Tower: Personal wireless service antennas not located upon an existing structure or tower shall require the processing of a conditional use permit and shall comply with the following standards:

a.	The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/ interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a certified engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service system and to provide adequate portable personal wireless service coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the antennas in a less restrictive district.

b.	If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be mounted on a monopole tower provided that:

(1)	The pole not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height.

(2)	The setback of the pole from the nearest residential structure is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such setback may be granted if a qualified  structural engineer

29-6
 
specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.

c.	Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.

d.	At the discretion of the City, a security fence not greater than eight (8) feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be provided around the support structure.

e.	The conditional use permit provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.

C.	Industrial District Standards:

1.	Antennas Located Upon An Existing Structure or Existing Tower: Personal wireless service antennas located upon an existing structure or co-located on an existing tower structure shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards:

a.	Building-mounted antennas shall not exceed more than fifteen (15) feet above the roof, and shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the roof edge.

b.	Wall or facade mounted antennas may not extend more than five (5) feet above the cornice line and must be constructed of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building.

c.	An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of Section 5 of this Ordinance.

2.	Antennas Not Located Upon An Existing Structure or Existing Tower: Personal wireless service antennas not located upon an existing structure or tower shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards:

a.	If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for mounting the antennas, the antennas may be mounted upon a monopole tower not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet in height. The tower shall be located on a parcel having a dimension equal to the height of the tower measured between the base of the tower located nearest the property line and said property line, unless a

29-7
 
structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of the tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.

b.	An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the provisions of Section 5 of this Ordinance.

3.	Temporary Mobile Towers: Personal wireless service antennas located upon a temporary mobile tower used on an interim basis until a permanent site is constructed shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards:

a.	Temporary mobile towers are exempt from co-location and permanent tower structure design standards contained in Sections 29.03 and
29.04 of this Ordinance.

b.	The termination date of the permit shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days. Temporary mobile towers located on a site longer than one hundred twenty (120) days shall require the processing of an interim use permit subject to the standards contained in Section 5 of this Ordinance.

c.	Guyed towers are prohibited.

d.	Mobile units shall have a minimum tower design wind load of eighty
(80) miles per hour, or be set back from all structures a distance equal to the height of the tower.

e.	All towers shall be protected against unauthorized climbing.

f.	The height of the tower shall not exceed ninety (90) feet.



29.8	SATELLITE DISHES:

A.	Agricultural and Residential District Standards: Single satellite dish TVROs greater than two (2) meters in diameter may be allowed as a conditional use within the agricultural and residential zoning districts of the City and shall comply with the following standards:

1.	All accessory and secondary use provisions of Sections 29.02 and 29.03 of this Ordinance are satisfactorily met.

2.	The lot on which the satellite dish antenna is located shall be of sufficient size to assure that an obstruction-free receive window can be maintained

29-8
 
within the limits of the property ownership.

3.	Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the antenna height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all sides of the satellite dish antenna in a manner in which growth of the landscape elements will not interfere with the receive window.

4.	The satellite dish antenna is not greater than three and one-half (3.5) meters in diameter.

5.	The conditional use permit provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.

B.	Business District Standards: Satellite dish antennas within the business zoning districts of the City shall be limited to those listed as permitted accessory and secondary uses in the applicable zoning district subject to the provisions of Subd. 29.02 and Subd.
29.03 of this Ordinance.

C.	Industrial District Standards: Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in excess of three and one-half (3.5) meters may be allowed as a conditional use within industrial districts of the City and shall comply with the following standards:

1.	All accessory and secondary use provisions of Sections 29.02 and 29.03 of this Ordinance are satisfactorily met.

2.	The lot on which the satellite dish antenna is located shall be of sufficient size to assure that an obstruction free transmit-receive window or windows can be maintained within the limits of the property ownership.

3.	Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the antenna height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all sides of the satellite dish antenna in a manner in which growth of the landscape elements will not interfere with the transmit-receive window.

4.	The conditional use permit provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance are considered and determined to be satisfied.



29.09 COMMERCIAL AND PUBLIC RADIO AND TELEVISION TRANSMITTING ANTENNAS, AND PUBLIC UTILITY MICROWAVE ANTENNAS: Commercial and public
radio and television transmitting and public utility microwave antennas shall comply with the
following standards:

A.	Such antenna shall be considered an allowed conditional use within the I-1 and I-2
 
Districts of the City and shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of Section 4 of this Ordinance.

B.	The antennas, transmitting towers, or array of towers shall be located on a continuous parcel having a dimension equal to the height of the antenna, transmitting tower, or array of towers measured between the base of the antenna or tower located nearest a property line and said property line, unless a registered structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of any antenna or tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.

C.	Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, at the discretion of the City, a fence not greater than eight (8) feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be provided around the support structure and other equipment.
 
SECTION 30.	WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS)

Subdivision

30.1	Purpose
30.2	Application
30.3	Declaration of Conditions
30.4	Site Plan Drawing
30.5	Compliance with State Building Code
30.6	Compliance with National Electrical Code
30.7	Manufacturer Warranty
30.8	Design Standards
30.9	Ornamental Wind Devices
30.10	Building Permit Required
30.11	Inspection
30.12	Abandonment



30.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of this Section is to establish standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of WECS shall be governed within the City.



30.2	APPLICATION: Wind conversion systems may be allowed as an accessory or conditional use within any zoning district of the City, subject to the regulations and requirements of this Section, and provided the property upon which the system is to be located is agricultural, commercial or industrial or is constructed and maintained on any parcel of land of at least five (5) acres in size.



30.3	DECLARATION OF CONDITIONS: The City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of WECS conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section and to maintain compatibility.



30.4	SITE PLAN DRAWING: All applications for WECS conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned, displaying the following information:

A.	Lot lines and dimensions.

B.	Location and height of all buildings, structures, above ground utilities, and trees on the lot, including both existing and proposed structures and guy wires anchors.

C.	Locations and height of all adjacent buildings, structures, above ground utilities and
 
trees located within three hundred (350) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property in question.

D.	Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures located on the property in question.

E.	Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed WECS and its relationship to structures on adjacent lots.



30.5	COMPLIANCE WITH STATE BUILDING CODE: Standard drawings of the structural components of the wind energy conversion system and support structures, including base and footings shall be provided along with the engineering data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the State Building Code especially with regards to wind and icing loads. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be certified by a registered engineer.



30.6	COMPLIANCE WITH NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE: WECS electrical equipment
and connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City.



30.7	MANUFACTURER WARRANTY: The applicant shall provide documentation or other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the WECS has been successfully operated in atmospheric conditions similar to the conditions within the City. The WECS shall be warranted against any system failures reasonably expected in severe weather operation conditions.



30.8	DESIGN STANDARDS:

A.	Height: The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be determined in one of two ways. In determining the height of the WECS, the total height of the system shall be included. System height shall be measured from the base of the tower to the highest possible extension of the rotor.

1.	A ratio of one (1) foot to one (1) foot between the distance of the closest property line to the base of WECS to the height of the system.






2.	A maximum system height of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
 
The shortest height of the two above mentioned methods shall be used in determining the maximum allowable height of a WECS system. The height of a WECS must also comply with FAA Regulation Part 77 “Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space” and/or MnDOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015 “Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation.”

B.	Setbacks: No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be located within or above any required front, side or rear yard setback and no part of the system shall be within ten (10) feet of any property line, whichever is greater. WECS towers shall be setback from the closest property line one foot for every one foot of system height. WECS shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of an above ground utility line.

C.	Rotor Size: All WECS rotors shall not have rotor dimensions greater than twenty-six
(26) feet.

D.	Rotor Clearance: Blade-arcs created by the WECS shall have a minimum of thirty
(30) feet of clearance over any structure or tree within a two hundred (200) foot radius.

E.	Rotor Design: The blade design and materials are to be designed and constructed to ensure safe operation in an urban/rural area.

F.	Rotor Safety: Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic braking device capable of stopping WECS operation in high wind (40 MPH or greater) or in conditions of imbalance.

G.	Lightning Protection: Each WECS shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City.

H.	Component Compatibility: The Wind turbine and wind turbine tower are to be designed and constructed to be compatible.

I.	Tower Access: To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must comply with one of the following provision:

1.	Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within twelve (12) feet of the ground.

2.	A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower.
3.	Tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least eight (8) feet high.

J.	Signs: WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet at the base of
 
the tower and said sign shall contain the following information:

1.	Warning high voltage.
2.	Manufacturer’s name.
3.	Emergency phone number.
4.	Emergency shutdown procedures.

K.	Lighting: WECS shall not have affixed or attached any lights, reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for illumination devices required by FAA Regulations Part 77 “Objectives Affecting Navigable Air Space” and Lighting.”

L.	Electromagnetic Interference: WECS shall be designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.

M.	Noise Emissions: Noises emanating from the operation of WECS shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended.

N.	Utility Company Interconnection: No WECS shall be interconnected with the local electrical utility company until the utility company and the City Engineer have commented upon such proposal. The interconnection of the WECS with the utility company shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City.



30.9	ORNAMENTAL WIND DEVICES: Ornamental wind devices that are not a WECS shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section and shall conform to other applicable provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable City regulations.



30.10	BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED: A building permit shall be required for the installation of a WECS in the City.



30.11	INSPECTION: The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any WECS conditional use permit to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located. If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety hazard, the owner shall upon written notice from the City, take expeditious action to correct the situation.



30.12	ABANDONMENT: Any WECS or tower which is not used for twelve (12) successive months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the property at the expense of the property owner or upon approval of an extension by the Zoning Administrator.
 

 

SECTION 31. SIGN REGULATIONS

Subdivision

31.1	Purpose
31.2	General Provisions
31.3	Exempt and Prohibited Signs
31.4	Non-Conforming Signs
31.5	General District Regulations
31.6	Special Use Regulations
31.7	Inspection and Removal
31.8	Permits and Variances



31.1	PURPOSE:The purpose of this Section is to achieve the following objectives:

A.	To establish standards which permit reasonable and equitable opportunity for business identification.

B.	To preserve and promote civic beauty and prohibit signs which would detract from this objective because of size, shape, height, location, condition, cluttering or illumination.

C.	To insure that signs do not create safety hazards.

D.	To preserve and protect property values.



31.2	GENERAL PROVISIONS:

A.	No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building until all necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the City Building Official.

B.	No signs, guys, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or maintained on rocks, fences, or trees, nor interfere with any electric light, power, or communication wires or the supports thereof, with the exception of signs necessary for security, or to preserve public safety, as determined by the City Council.

C.	No signs, other than those of governmental jurisdictions, shall be permitted within public right-of-way or street easements.

D.	No sign shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress of any building or structure.
 
E.	No sign or sign structure, unless otherwise noted in this Section, shall be closer to any lot line than a distance equal to one-half (1/2) the minimum required yard setback. No sign shall be placed within any drainage or utility easement.

F.	The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the State's Electrical Code.
Electrical service to such sign shall be underground.

G.	Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being directed onto residential property, or at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of the driver. Nor shall such signs interfere with or obscure an official traffic sign or signal. This includes indoor signs which are visible from public streets and highways.

H.	The use of banners, pennants, and similar devices shall require a permit to be issued by the Zoning Administrator. The permit shall be valid for no more than ten
(10) consecutive days. No more than three (3) permits per property shall be granted during any twelve (12) month period. A multiple occupancy building or buildings on the same parcel of land shall be considered one property.

I.	Landscaping which accompanies signage, such as area identification signs, shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator with regards to installation, design and maintenance.

J.	Signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a safe condition.
Sign or sign structures which are rotted, unsafe, deteriorated or defaced, as determined by the City Building Official or Zoning Administrator, shall be removed, repainted, repaired, or replaced by the permit holder, owner or agent of the property upon which the sign stands.

K.	The owner, lessee or manager of any ground sign and the owner of the land on which the same is located shall keep grass or weeds and other growth cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on which a sign is located.



31.3	EXEMPT AND PROHIBITED SIGNS:

A.	Exempt Signs: The following signs are allowed without a permit:

1.	Public Signs: Signs of non-commercial nature and in the public interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his or her public duty, such as directional signs, regulatory signs, warning signs, and informational signs and all warning signs posted by public utilities whether or not such signs are in the public rights-of-way.

2.	Informational Signs: Informational signs not exceeding four (4) square feet.
 

3.	Temporary Signs: Temporary signs announcing any public, charitable, educational or religious event or function, located entirely within the premises of that institution and setback no less than ten (10) feet from the property line with a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. Such signs shall be allowed no more than twenty-one (21) days prior to the event or function and must be removed within three (3) days after the event or function. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with the restrictions set forth in Section 31.02 of this Ordinance. If building mounted, these signs shall be flat wall signs and shall not project above the roof line. If ground mounted, the top shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.

4.	Integral Signs: Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure.

5.	Real Estate Signs: Temporary real estate signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area in residential zoning districts, and sixteen (16) square feet in agricultural, business and industrial districts, may be located on the subject property and limited to one (1) such sign for each property frontage. Two (2) signs shall be permitted in situations where the lot frontage exceeds five hundred (500) feet in length. These signs shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet. Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the sale. Temporary real estate directional signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area and four (4) in number showing a directional arrow and placed back of the property line shall be permitted on approach routes to an open house. The maximum height of such signs shall not exceed three (3) feet. These directional signs shall be erected and removed on the same day as the open house.



6.	Campaign Signs:

a.	State General Election Years: In a state general election year, the size and duration of campaign sign display shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statute 211.B.045, as amended. These signs shall be confined within private property and shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest edge of the pavement and one hundred (100) feet from the nearest curb intersection of any street.

b.	Other Election Years: In years when no state general election is to take place, signs announcing candidates seeking public political office and other data pertinent thereto shall be permitted up to a total area of nine (9) square feet for each premise in a residential zone and
 
thirty-two (32) square feet in an agricultural, commercial or industrial zone. These signs shall be confined within private property and shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest edge of the pavement and one hundred (100) feet from the nearest curb intersection of any street. These signs may be displayed sixty (60) days prior and seven (7) days after the election for which intended. In cases where a final election follows within seventy-five (75) days of a primary election, those candidates who won in the primary election may continue to display their signs during the interim period and up to seven (7) days after the final election.

7.	Single Family Residential Name and Street Address Signs: Two single family residential name/address signs not exceeding two (2) square feet each in area shall be permitted per single family dwelling. Such signs shall be allowed on mailboxes, but shall otherwise be setback at least six (6) feet from the nearest property line and a maximum height of six (6) feet when ground mounted.

8.	Farm Identification Signs: One (1) sign identifying the farm name and/or the type of farming activities practices upon the subject property. Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall be solely for the purpose of displaying the name and/or type of farming activity on the property. No advertising is allowed. These signs when ground mounted shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.

9.	Historical Signs: One (1) sign commemorating original family farmsteads or other places of local, state or national historical significance shall be permitted on the subject property and shall not exceed eight (8) square feet.

10.	Crop Demonstration Signs: Signs identifying agricultural products utilized upon the subject property not exceeding four (4) square feet in size.

11.	Holiday Signs: Signs or displays which contain or depict a message pertaining to a religious, national, state or local holiday and no other matter, and which are displayed for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days in any calendar year. Such signs may be illuminated but may not be flashing.

12.	Rummage (Garage) Sale Signs: Rummage sale signs shall not be posted more than one (1) day prior to the date(s) of sale and shall be removed within one (1) day after the end of the sale and the total of all such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Rummage sale signs shall not be located in any public rights-of-way. The City Building Official, Zoning Administrator or other designated City staff shall have the right to remove and destroy signs not conforming to this provision and assess costs related to such enforcement against the property owner conducting the sale.
 

13.	Window Signs:  Where allowed, window signs shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) percent of the total area of the window in which they are displayed.

14.	Construction Signs: A non-illuminated construction sign confined to the site of the construction, alteration or repair. Such sign must be removed within two (2) years of the date of issuance of the first building permit on the site or upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or when the particular project is completed, whichever first occurs. One sign shall be permitted for each street the project abuts. No sign may exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height, except signs abutting principal arterial streets which may not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area and fifteen (15) feet in height.

15.	Contractor’s Storage Yard Identification Signs: One (1) sign identifying the name of the operation and/or the type of activities practices upon the subject property. Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall be solely for the purpose of displaying the name and/or type of activity on the property. No advertising is allowed. These signs, when ground mounted, shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.

B.	Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited:

1.	Motion Signs and Flashing Signs: Except time and temperature signs depicting a constant message as contrasted to a moving message.

2.	No private sign shall be erected that resembles any official marker or sign erected of a governmental agency or shall display such words as "stop" or "danger" unless so specified by this Ordinance or other City regulations.

3.	Projecting Signs.

4.	Roof Signs.

5.	Expired Business Signs: Those signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located shall be removed immediately upon termination of use. Where the owner or lessor of the premises is seeking a new tenant, such signs may remain in place for not more than thirty (30) days from the date of vacancy.

6.	Advertising or Business Signs: Such signs on or attached to equipment such as semi-truck trailers where signing is a principal use of the equipment on either a temporary or permanent basis.
 

31.4	NON-CONFORMING SIGNS:

A.	General Provisions Governing Non-Conforming Signs:

1.	Any legal non-conforming on-premise sign lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued at the size and in the manner existing upon such date.

2.	A non-conforming sign may not be:

a.	Structurally  altered  except  to  bring  it  into  compliance  with  the provisions of this Section.

b.	Enlarged.

c.	Re-established after its removal or discontinuance.

d.	Repaired or otherwise restored, unless the damage is to less than fifty
(50) percent of sign structure value.

e.	Replaced.  (Applies to structure only and not message.)

3.	Non-Conforming Sign Maintenance and Repair: Nothing in this Section shall be construed as relieving the owner or user of a legal non-conforming sign or owner of the property on which the legal non-conforming sign is located from the provisions of this Section regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs, provided, however, that any repainting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign structure or copy in any way which makes it more non-conforming or the sign shall lose its legal non-conforming status. Illegal, non-conforming signs shall be removed by the property owner within ten (10) days of notice from the City.

B.	Non-Conforming Uses: When the principal use of land is legally non-conforming under the Zoning Ordinance of St. Augusta, all existing or proposed signs in conjunction with that land, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance or other City regulations, shall be considered conforming if they are in compliance with the sign provisions for the most restrictive zoning district in which the principal use is allowed.



31.5	GENERAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS:

A.	Agricultural Zoning District  as defined by Section 50 of this Ordinance:
 

1.	Permitted Signs: All signs, as outlined in Subd. 31.03.A of this Ordinance.

2.	No other signs shall be permitted in these districts unless deemed essential by a governmental agency.

B.	Residential Zoning Districts as defined by Section 50 of this Ordinance:

1.	All signs permitted in the Agricultural Zoning Districts.

2.	Residential Area Identification Sign: Two (2) signs for each entrance to an identifiable area or subdivision from major collector or arterial streets and consistent with the following provisions:

a.	Each sign face shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area with a maximum height of eight (8) feet for freestanding signs.

b.	Signs shall be located on outlots of sufficient size and area to accommodate said structure. A homeowners or neighborhood association or other form of deed restriction and ownership deemed acceptable by the City Council and involving all the properties within the designated area shall be required which shall own and be responsible for the upkeep, perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities, and other costs associated with the sign(s) and the outlot upon which it is located. The association rules or by-laws or similar legal document shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities will be delegated and paid for. Such legal document shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney.

c.	Outlots for signs shall be considered and planned for at the time of preliminary plat application and be included in the final plat. The subdivision development contract between the City and the developer shall specify the designated use of the outlot, its ownership and the respective responsibilities regarding the outlot.

d.	Signs shall be located no less than ten (10) feet from a property line.

e.	Lighting of signs shall be permitted, provided that glare or light from such lighting does not illuminate any adjacent properties, buildings, structures, or public rights-of-way. The electric costs and maintenance of such lighting shall be the responsibility of the homeowners or neighborhood association or other legal entity of the area identified by the sign(s) and said responsibility shall be clearly defined in the applicable legal contract.
 
f.	The outlot area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject to City Council review and comment.

g.	The design and construction of residential area identification signs shall be done with the highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. Residential area identification signs are to be aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be compatible with nearby or potential homes and other structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject to City Council review and approval.

h.	The City reserves the right to require the removal, at the owner's expense of any sign when the requirements of this Section are not completely followed and adhered to or if the sign is not properly maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The City shall not have any obligation or liability to replace any sign when removed by the City.

3.	Real Estate Development Project Signs: Signs involving temporary identification of a new subdivision or development located upon the project site.

a.	Each subdivision or development shall be allowed the following signs by permit:

(1)	One (1) sign not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area and a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, except signs abutting principal arterial streets which may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in surface area and fifteen (15) feet in height.

(2)	Directional signs as authorized by Section 31.05.B.4 of this Ordinance.

b.	The permit shall be renewable annually and conditioned upon documentation allowing such sign or structure by the property owner upon which it is to be located, and a vacancy rate of the subdivision greater than ten (10) percent.

4.	Directional Signs:  Off-site directional signs for institutions, or subdivisions may be allowed one (1) double sided sign per major arterial street approach
 
to the property with an area not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet on each side of the sign and shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit as regulated by Section 4 of this Ordinance or at the time of subdivision approval.

5.	Construction Sign: One (1) temporary, unilluminated sign identifying an engineer, architect, contractor, or product engaged in or used in the construction of a building, provided such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in surface area and shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.

6.	Identification Sign: One (1) double sided identification sign shall be allowed for conditional uses unless otherwise restricted. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, and such signs shall be solely for the purpose of displaying the name of the use and its activities and services. It may be illuminated, but not flashing. These signs shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.

7.	Home Occupations: No more than one sign may be displayed per property.
The sign may not exceed two (2) square feet in area nor a height of five (5) feet above the street grade. Such a sign shall not be illuminated and may be displayed only upon the property licensed for the home occupation. Lettering upon the signs hall be limited to the name and/or function of the home occupation.

C.	Commercial/Business and Industrial Zoning Districts as defined by Section 50 of this Ordinance:

1.	Signs as permitted in Agricultural Zoning Districts.

2.	Real Estate Signs: Temporary signs pertaining to the lease or sale of a property or building with the following restrictions:

a.	No more than one (1) double sided sign allowed per lot or per building for sale.

b.	The sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of space on each side.

c.	The sign shall not be illuminated.

d.	The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

3.	Real Estate Development Project Signs: Signs involving temporary identification of a new subdivision of development located upon the project site.
 
a.	Each subdivision or development shall be allowed the following signs by permit:

(1)	One (1) sign not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area and a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, except signs abutting principal arterial streets which may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in surface area and twenty (20) feet in height.

(2)	Directional signs as authorized by Section 31.05.B.4 of this Ordinance.

b.	The permit shall be renewable annually and conditioned upon documentation allowing such sign or structure by the property owner upon which it is to be located, and a vacancy rate of the subdivision greater than ten (10) percent.

4.	Business Identification Signs: Total sign area shall not exceed two and one- half (2.5) square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage. Signs chosen to comprise the total gross sign area shall be consistent with the following provisions:

a.	Freestanding: Not more than one (1) double sided freestanding sign.
Sign height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

b.	Wall, Canopy or Marquee: Not more than one (1) wall, canopy or marquee sign per building. However, on corner lots, two (2) such signs shall be allowed, one (1) per street frontage.

c.	Advertising messages shall not comprise more than twenty-five (25) percent of any freestanding or wall sign.

5.	Business Area Identification Signs: One (1) sign for each primary entrance to the qualifying area from major collector or arterial streets and consistent with the following provisions:

a.	Total sign area, including the sign structure, shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet with a maximum height of twelve (12) feet for freestanding signs.

b.	Each property owner and/or tenant of the area identified shall be permitted space upon the identification sign for the name of the business only.

c.	Signs shall be located on outlots of sufficient size and area to
 
accommodate them. A landowners or tenants association or other legal mechanism binding the properties or businesses involved shall own and be responsible for the upkeep, perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities, and other costs associated with the sign(s) and the outlot property. The association rules or by-laws or other legally recorded document shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities will be delegated and paid for. Such legal document shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney.

d.	Outlots for signs shall be considered and planned for at the time of preliminary plat application and be included in the final plat. The subdivision development contract between the City and the developer shall specify the designated use of the outlot, its ownership and the respective land owners association responsibilities regarding the outlot.

e.	Signs shall be located not less than five (5) feet from a property line.

f.	Lighting of signs shall be permitted, provided that glare or light from such lighting does not illuminate any adjacent properties, buildings, structures or public rights-of-way. The electric costs and maintenance of such lighting shall be the responsibility of the land owners or tenants association of the area identified by the sign(s) and shall be clearly noted in the association by-laws or rules or other such legal document.

g.	The outlot area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign permit application and be subject to City Council review and approval.

h.	The design and construction of business area identification signs shall be done with the highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism.  Business area identification signs are to be aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be compatible with nearby or potential homes and other structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject to City Council review and approval.

i.	The City reserves the right to require the removal, at the owner's expense, any sign when the requirements of this Section are not completely followed and adhered to or if the sign is not properly
 
maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The City shall not have any obligation or liability to replace any sign when removed by the City.

6.	Billboards: Billboards and advertising signs subject to the following provisions:

a.	Billboards shall be limited to no more than one (1) sign per facing or a total of no more than two (2) signs per structure.

b.	Billboards shall be limited to not more than twenty-five (25) feet in total length and a height of thirty (30) feet above the average grade, or such other height as may be approved by the City Council.

c.	Billboards shall be limited to an overall surface area on one (1) side of seven hundred seventy (770) square feet.

d.	No advertising signs shall be located within a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from any other billboard located along the same side of the street nor within five hundred (500) feet of any billboard located on the opposite side of that street or any other street.

e.	No billboard shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential zoning district or within three hundred (300) feet of an at- grade intersection of any street and railroad. No billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet from any parks, public lands, or public structures where said land or structures are located in commercial/business or industrial zoning districts.

f.	No billboard shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of a street or highway right-of-way.

g.	Billboards shall be permanently secured to the ground in a manner sufficient to meet the standards set forth in the State Building Code. Any billboard not secured shall be deemed a temporary billboard for purposes of this Ordinance. No temporary billboard shall be placed at a location for a period of more than five (5) days. All temporary billboards shall require a permit as provided in Section 31.08 of this section and all temporary billboards in existence at the time this Ordinance becomes effective shall be allowed to remain for a period of five (5) days after which they shall be removed.

7.	Message Signs: Temporary message signs, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet on each side may be allowed by temporary permit under the following provisions:
 
a.	Message signs may be illuminated, but flashing signs are prohibited.

b.	Electronic changing message/reader boards are prohibited.

c.	A temporary permit shall be valid for a period of ten (10) days and no more than three (3) permits per property shall be granted during any twelve (12) month period.

d.	In the case of a business center where two (2) or more uses are located within the same structure or upon the same parcel of land, that center shall be considered one property.

D.	In a Planned Unit Development District, signing restrictions shall be based upon the individual uses and structures contained in the complex. Signs shall be in compliance with the restrictions applied in the most restrictive zoning district in which the use is allowed.



31.6	SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS:

A.	Motor Fuel Station: Signs for motor fuel stations shall be regulated by the sign provisions for the zoning district in which the station is located. In addition, motor fuel stations may also display signs which identify current fuel prices and automobile wash facilities. No more than two (2) such signs shall be allowed and said signs shall be limited to a total maximum gross area of thirty-two (32) square feet and shall be limited to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet.

B.	Multiple Occupancy Business and Industrial Buildings: When a single principal building is devoted to four (4) or more businesses, or industrial uses, a comprehensive sign plan for the entire structure shall be submitted and shall be of sufficient scope and detail to permit a determination as to whether or not the plan is consistent with the following regulations. The plan shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. No permit shall be issued for an individual use except upon a determination that it is consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan.

1.	The maximum individual sign sizes for multiple occupancy structures and individual uses which may display signs shall not exceed the maximum provisions for single occupancy structures in the same zoning district.

2.	Multiple occupancy structures may display an area identification sign consistent with the applicable district provisions in Subd. 31.05.C of this Ordinance. Individual freestanding signs identifying the tenants' business shall not be displayed.

3.	Except as provided in Subd. 31.06.B.4 below, individual tenants of multiple
 
occupancy structures  shall not display separate wall signs unless the tenants' business has an exclusive exterior entrance. The number of signs shall be limited to one (1) per entrance, and each sign shall be limited to the maximum wall size sign permitted in the district, the total of which shall not exceed the square footage allowed. The signs shall be located only on exterior walls which are directly related to the use being identified.

4.	In any multiple occupancy structure qualifying as a mall type shopping center, directory signs shall be permitted for each common public entrance. Each directory sign area shall not exceed a total of fifty (50) square feet and shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the common public entrance being served. The size of individual business identification signing within the directory shall be established during the site plan review process. Attention shall be given to the possible number of tenant or occupant bays which may be served by the common public entrance for which the directory sign is intended.

C.	Institutional, Non-Commercial Public and Semi-Public Uses:

1.	The maximum signing allowed for such uses shall be determined on the basis of the following criteria (whichever provision allows for the largest amount of signing shall be the provision which applies):

a.	Based upon site area:

Up to 5 acres	


32 square feet
	5.1 acres to 10 acres	64 square feet
	10.1 acres to 15 acres	96 square feet
	15.1 acres to 25 acres	128 square feet
	25.1 acres and above	160 square feet

b.	The maximum size of signing allowed per single use in the respective zoning district in which the site is located.

2.	For sites not exceeding twenty-five (25) acres, one (1) sign shall be permitted for each principal use. The total signing not to exceed the maximum allowed per site.

3.	For sites of greater than twenty-five (25) acres containing one or more principal uses, two (2) signs not exceeding the maximum amount of signing allowed per site shall be permitted.

4.	Non-electronic reader (message) board space shall not exceed a total of twenty (20) square feet of the signing permitted or constructed.
 

31.7	PECTION AND REMOVAL:

A.	Inspection: All signs shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator and/or City Building Official.

B.	Removal of Signs:

1.	The Zoning Administrator and/or City Building Official shall order the removal of any illegal non-conforming sign erected or maintained in violation of this Ordinance. Notice in writing shall be given by the City to the owner of such sign, or of the building, structure or property on which such sign is located, to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Section within fifteen (15) days from the date of said notice.

2.	Upon failure to remove the sign or to comply with this notice, the City may remove the sign. Any costs of removal incurred by the City shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is located and may be collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes and all costs shall be assessed against the property.

3.	The Zoning Administrator and/or City Building Official may order the immediate removal of any sign without notice, which is in violation of the following:

a.	Signs located within the public right-of-way.

b.	Temporary signs that have exceeded the time limits allowed in this Ordinance.

c.	The condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public.



31.8	PERMITS AND VARIANCES:

A.	Except as provided in Section 31.03.A, no sign or structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt or relocated until a permit has first been issued by the City Building Official.

B.	Sign Application: The following information for a sign permit shall be supplied by an applicant upon submission of a sign permit application:

1.	Name, address and telephone number of person making application.
 
2.	Name, address and telephone number of person owning sign.

3.	The name, address and telephone number of the person owning the property upon which the sign is to be located.

4.	A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical features.

5.	Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the buildings or placement method in the ground.

6.	Landscape plans for area around signs.

7.	Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be erected.

8.	Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.

9.	Future maintenance plans.

10.	Sign value.

11.	Such other information as the City Building Official or Zoning Administrator shall require to show full compliance with this Ordinance and all other applicable City regulations.

C.	Application Processing and Action:

1.	Within five (5) working days of receiving an application for a sign permit, the City Building Official shall review it for completeness. If the application is complete, it shall then be processed. If the City Building Official finds that it is incomplete, the City Building Official shall, within such five (5) working day period, send to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this Ordinance and/or other City regulations.

2.	Upon receipt of a complete application, the Building Official shall review and comment upon application and shall either:

a.	Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application conforms in every respect with the requirements of this Ordinance and other City regulations.

b.	Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this
 
Ordinance and other City regulations.

3.	In case of a rejection, the City Building Official shall specify in the rejection the Section or Sections of this Ordinance and/or other City regulations with which the sign(s) is inconsistent.

4.	If the work authorized under a permit has not been initiated within sixty (60) days after the date of issuance, the permit shall be null and void.

D.	Variances and Appeals: Variances and appeals involving sign issues shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 7 and 8 of this Ordinance.

E.	Fees: Fees for the review and processing of sign permit applications and variance requests shall be imposed in accordance with the fee schedule established by City Council resolution.
 
SECTION 44. GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS

Subdivision

44.1	Establishment of Districts
44.2	Zoning District Boundaries
44.3	Zoning Map



44.1	ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS: In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trade and industry and the location of buildings designated for specific uses, to protect residential uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, recreation and open space within and surrounding such buildings, St. Augusta is hereby divided into the following zoning districts.

A.	Agricultural Districts:

1.	A-1, General Agricultural District
2.	A-2, Limited Agricultural District

B.	Residential Districts:

1.	R-1, Suburban Residential District
2.	R-2, Urban Single Family District
3.	R-3, Urban Single and Two Family District
4.	R-4, Medium Density Residential District
5.	R-5, High Density Residential District

C.	Business Districts:

1.	B-1, Neighborhood Business District
2.	B-2, Highway Business District
3.	B-3, General Business District
4.	B-W, Business/Warehousing District

D.	Industrial Districts:

1.	I-1, Limited Industrial District
2.	I-2, General Industrial District




E.	Special Districts:
 
1.	INS, Institutional District
2.	PUD, Planned Unit Development District
3.	S, Shoreland Overlay District
4.	W, Wetland System District
5.	FP, Floodplain District



44.2	ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES: Zoning district boundary lines established by this Ordinance generally follow lot lines, the centerlines of railroad right-of-way lines, street rights-of-way, water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date of this Ordinance.

A.	Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning district boundary line shall be heard by the City Council serving as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals pursuant to Section 8 of this Ordinance.

B.	Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.

C.	All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property in the most restrictive classification immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways or railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street, alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line.

D.	All areas within the corporate limits of the City which are under water and which are not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins such water area. If such water area adjoins two or more zones the boundaries of each zone shall be construed to be extended into the water area in a straight line until they meet the other district at the half-way point and/or to the corporation limits.



44.3	ZONING MAP: The location and boundaries of the districts established by this text are hereby set forth on the Zoning Map entitled "Zoning Map of St. Augusta." Said map shall be on file with the Zoning Administrator, and hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map." Said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and thereby made a part of this Ordinance by reference.
 
SECTION 45.  A-1, GENERAL AGRICULTURE DISTRICT

Subdivision

45.1	Purpose
45.2	Permitted Uses
45.3	Interim Uses
45.4	Uses Allowed by Administrative Permit
45.5	Accessory Uses
45.6	Conditional Uses
45.7	Lot Area, Density, and Setback Requirements
45.8	Building Height
45.9	Residential Divisions



45.1	PURPOSE: The A-1, General Agriculture District is established for the purpose of preserving, promoting, maintaining and enhancing the use of land for commercial agricultural purposes, to prevent scattered and leap-frog · urbanization and non-farm growth, to protect and preserve natural resource areas, and to stabilize increases in public expenditures for such public services as streets and street maintenance, police and fire protection, and schools. The A-1 District is further intended to govern and implement the Agricultural Preservation District as established by the Comprehensive Plan.



45.2	PERMITTED  USES:	Subject to applicable  provisions  of this  Ordinance,  the following are permitted uses in the A-1 District:

A		Day care facilities,  as  defined  in Section  2 of this  Ordinance,  licensed by the State and serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.

8.	Essential services as regulated by Section 28 of this Ordinance.

C.	Farms, farmsteads, farming and agricultural related buildings and structures subject to Minnesota Pollution Control Standards , but not including animal feedlots which require a conditional use permit as outlined in Section 23.07  of this Ordinance.

D.	Forestry,  nurseries,  greenhouses  for  growing  only,  landscape  gardening ,  and tree farms, including sale of products only grown on premises.

E.	Hobby farms.

F.	Personal  wireless  service  antennas  located  on  a  public  structure  or  existing structure as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
 
G.	Public parks,  playgrounds,  recreational  uses, wildlife  areas,  game farms,  and game refuges.

H.	Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.

I.		Single family detached dwellings at a density of not more than four (4) dwelling units per forty (40) acres of land.

J .		Temporary  seasonal  stands  for  the  sale  of  agricultural  products  restricted  to farms as regulated by Section 23 of this Ordinance.



45.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable prov1s1ons of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the A-1 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.

A	Contractor's storage yard provided that:

1.	The minimum lot size shall be four and one-haff (4.5) acres.

2.	An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site and which,	if the use is approved, shall be subject to applicable City regulations.

3.	The amount of land devoted to the office and storage yard is minimized to the extent possible.

4.	The contractor's storage yard and any associated building is located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines or right-of-way lines, whichever provides for the greater setback, for all uses other than commercial or industrial uses; or located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all property lines or right-of-way lines which abut any commercial or industrial use.

5.	The contractor's storage yard (that portion of the lot actively used for the contractor operation, parking, building, and storage area) is screened in accordance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

6.	The use shall have access to a major collector street or  higher classification street as designated by the Comprehensive Plan.

7.	No hazardous waste, garbage, refuse, items associated with junk yards or nuisance items defined by the Zoning Ordinance or applicable State Statutes shall be stored on site.
 
8.	No construction waste as defined by the Zoning Ordinance shall be stored on site unless specifically identified on the site plan for  the interim use permit and approved by the City Council.

9.	No flammable liquids shall be stored on site with the exception of fuel stored within approved Minnesota Pollution Control Agency storage tanks .

10.	No storage of materials (defined by the Zoning Ordinance as construction waste) shall be visible above the height of the fence or in locations that can be viewed from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties.

11.	All driveway and  employee  parking  areas  shall  be  surfaced  to  control drainage and dust as approved by the City Engineer.

12.	No retail sales shall be conducted from the site.

13.	The property owner shall enter into a performance agreement with the City identifying the terms and conditions under which the contractor's storage yard may operate.

14.	Other conditions as deemed necessary by the City Council to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the general public.

B.	Mining, sand and gravel extraction,  land reclamation and alteration as regulated by Section 22 of this Ordinance.

C.	Mobile homes (temporary) as regulated by Section 23 of this Ordinance.

D.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance .



45.4	USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this section, performance standards established by this Ordinance and processing requirements of Section 6, the following uses may be allowed in the A-1 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.

A       None.



45.5	ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this  Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the A-1 District:

 
A	Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance .
 

..- -
 
B.	Home  occupations   and  home  offices   as  regulated  by  Section  25  of  this	·
Ordinance.
 

C.	Operation and storage  of such vehicles,  equipment  and machinery which  are incidental and customary to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this district.

D.	Private  garages   and  off-street	parking  spaces  for	licensed   and  operable passenger cars and trucks.

E.	Private recreational vehicles and equipment.

F.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs two
(2) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

G.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance .

H.	Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their guests.

I.	Temporary seasonal sales of products produced on site (farms only) as regulated by Section 23.06 of this Ordinance.

J.	Tool  houses,  sheds  and  similar  buildings  for  storage  of  domestic  and  farm supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment.



45.6	CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses allowed in the A-1 District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)

A	Animal feedlots as regulated by Section 23.07 of this Ordinance.

B.	Cemeteries, provided that the site accesses on a major collector.

C.	Commercial outdoor recreation provided that:

1.	The land upon which  such use is to be located is marginal in terms of agricultural production.

2.	The  amount  of  land  devoted  to  buildings  is  minimized  to  the  extent possible but in no case shall exceed five (5) percent of the lot area up to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) square feet.
 
3.	An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site and which,	if the use is approved, shall be subject to applicable City regulations.

D.	Commercial riding stables, dog kennels, animal hospitals with overnight care and similar uses provided that the provisions of Section 24 of this Ordinance related to the keeping of animals are considered and determined to be satisfied .

E.	Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City.

F.	Personal wireless service antennas not located on a public structure or existing tower as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

G.	Single satellite dish TVROs greater than two (2) meters in diameter as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

4 H. As an exception to the standard density, the City will  accommodate an urban subdivision provided that utilities would be extended from the urban service area at one hundred (100) percent of the cost being borne by the developer. Utility costs would include trunk and lateral sanitary sewer, water, and any street improvements that are necessary. This type of development would be evaluated against the following criteria:

1.	A Comprehensive Plan amendment would be required for development outside of the urban service area. This  will  allow  the  Planning Commission and City Council to review each proposed residential, commercial, or industrial plat against the long term goals of the City.

2.	The City  shall make a determination if they have adequate sewer and water capacity to accommodate the proposed development.

3.	The proposed development shall be responsible for one hundred (100) percent of the cost of extending utilities to and through the proposed subdivision  area.

4.	The development shall be served by adequate streets and highways.

5.	The proposed density shall be determined to be acceptable as a long range land use for the City as evaluated against the land use policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

6.	The proposed development shall not adversely impact environmentally sensitive areas or result in the disruption of wetlands, drainageways, or other environmental features.
 
7.	It will be the responsibility of any landowner or development within the rural service area to demonstrate that their subdivision is not premature on the basis of the aforementioned criteria and that the proposed land use and density is appropriate for the location being proposed based on the policies of the Comprehensive Plan. Without this demonstration, the City would make a determination that the plat is premature and the four (4) per forty (40) would apply.

8.	Generally, rural residential subdivisions include a rural section street. To make accommodation for pedestrian movements, the rural street section shall include a four (4) foot paved shoulder for walking and bicycles, exclusive of the drive lanes of the street.

I.	Reductions in minimum residential lot frontages, provided that:

1.	In no case shall the frontage be less than fifty (50) feet.

2.	The reduction is based upon topography, natural features or some other physical reason which justifies to the satisfaction of the City Council a deviation from the established minimum.

3.	All other applicable provisions of Section 45.07, 45.08, and 45.09 of this Ordinance are met.



45.7	LOT AREA,  DENSITY, AND SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS:	The  following
requirements shall be observed in an A-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A	Lot Area Requirements:

1.	Lot area:  Not less than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet.

2.	Lot width:  Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.

3.	Lot depth:  Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.

4 B.	Maximum Density:  Not greater than four (4) dwellings per forty (40) acres.

C.	Principal Structure Setbacks:

1.	Front Yard:
 
Setbacks From Right
of-Way Lines	Street Class

 
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
 
State/Federal  Highway County Road
Local Street
From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
 

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard setback line.

2.	Side Yard:  Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yard :  Fifty (50) feet.

D.	Accessory Structure Setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.



45.8	BUILDING HEIGHT: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the A-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications  set forth in this Ordinance.

A		The maximum height of all principal buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

8.	Accessory structures shall be governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance .



45.9	RESIDENTIAL DIVISIONS:  As may be allowed by this subdivision,  "divisions" to be used as residential dwelling sites shall comply with the following:

A		The divisions shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of City street frontage unless a reduction is approved by a conditional use permit as provided in this section.

8.	The minimum lot size is forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet.

C.	A deed restriction shall be placed upon parcels that have exercised development rights to prohibit additional subdivision, unless it is rezoned.

D.	The initial parcel(s) is under common ownership.

E.	The division is processed according to the City's Subdivision Ordinance .
 
F.	The site is capable of accommodating a private well and septic system.

G.	All  applicable  feedlot  setbacks  of  Section  23.07  of   this   Ordinance   are satisfactorily met.

4 H. Maximum Density: Not greater than four (4) units per forty  (40)  acres.  In anticipation of future urban development , the City shall allow interim densities of four (4) units per forty (40) acres with a minimum lot size of one (1)  acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be mandatory to ensure that future City services can be accommodated. Transfer of development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of forty (40) acres shall be required to split off ten (10) developable acres. A minimum of thirty (30) acres shall be necessary to split off seven and one-half (7.5) developable  acres . A minimum of twenty (20) acres shall be required to split off five (5) developable acres. One (1) lot, not to exceed two and one-half (2.5) acres in size, may be split from an existing parcel of less than twenty (20) acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable area satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance and that there is.sufficient area identified for  the establishment of existing or future City services.  Below is a table that represents the requirements per acre:

plit
 
SECTION 46
A-2, LIMITED AGRICULTURE  DISTRICT

Subdivision

46.1	Purpose
46.2	Permitted Uses
46.3	Interim Uses
46.4	Uses Allowed by Administrative  Permit
46.5	Accessory  Uses
46.6	Conditional Uses
46.7	Lot Area, Density, and Setback Requirements
46.8	Building Height
46.9	Residential Divisions



46.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the A-2, Limited Agriculture District is to provide suitable areas of the City to be retained and utilized for low density residential, open space, and/or agricultural activities and to prevent the premature  conversion  of  rural lands to urban use. The A-2 District is further intended to govern and implement the Urban Service Reserve Area as defined by the Comprehensive Plan.



46.2	PERMITTED  USES:	Subject  to  applicable  provisions  of  this  Ordinance , the following are permitted uses in the A-2 District:

A		Day care facilities, as defined in Section 2 of this Ordinance, licensed by the State and serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.

8.	Essential services.

C.	Farms, farmsteads, farming and agricultural related buildings and structures subject to Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, but not including animal feedlots or other commercial operations.

D.	Forestry,  nurseries,  greenhouses  for  growing only,	landscape  gardening,  and tree farms including sale of products only grown on premises.

E.	Hobby farms.

F.	Personal wireless  service  antennas  located upon a  public structure  or existing tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

G.	Public  parks,  playgrounds,  recreational  uses,  wildlife  areas,  game farms,  and game refuges.
 

H.	Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.

I.	Single family detached dwellings at a density of not more than four   (4) dwelling units per forty (40) acres of land.



46.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable prov1s1ons of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the A-2 District and are governed by Section 5 of  this Ordinance.

A	Mining, sand and gravel extraction,  land reclamation and alteration as regulated by Section 22 of this Ordinance.

B.	Mobile homes (temporary) as regulated by Section 23 of this Ordinance.

C.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



46.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this section, performance standards established by this Ordinance and processing requirements of Section 6, the following uses may be allowed in the A-2 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.

A	None.



46.5	ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the A-2 District:

A	Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance.

B.	Home  occupations  and  home  offices  as  regulated  by  Section  25  of  this Ordinance.

C.	Operation and storage of such vehicles, equipment and machinery which are incidental and customary to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this district.

D.	Private  garages  and  off-street  parking  spaces	for  licensed  and  operable passenger cars and trucks.

E.	Private recreational vehicles and equipment.

F.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs two
(2) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
 

necessary for the operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

G.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance .

H.	Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational  facilities  which  are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their guests.

I.	Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic and farm supplies and non-commercial  recreational equipment.



46.6	CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses allowed in the A-2 District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)

A	Cemeteries, provided that the site accesses on a major collector.

B.	Commercial outdoor recreational areas including golf courses and country clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities provided that:

1.	The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in character.

2.	Not more than five (5) percent of the land area up to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) square feet of the site shall be covered by buildings or structures.

C.	Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City.

D.	Personal wireless service antennas not located on a public structure or existing tower as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.		Single satellite dish TVROs greater than two (2) meters in diameter as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance .
-
F.	Temporary seasonal sales of products produced on site (farms only) as regulated
by Section 23.06 of this Ordinance .

4 G. Maximum Density: Not greater than four (4) units per forty (40)  acres.  In anticipation of future urban development, the City sh.all allow interim densities of four  (4)  units  per  forty  (40)  acres  with  a  minimum  lot  size  of  one  (1)  acre.
 

Clustering of developable lots shall be mandatory to ensure that future City services can be accommodated. Transfer of development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of forty (40) acres shall be required to split off ten (10) developable acres. A minimum of thirty (30) acres shall be necessary to split off seven and one-half (7.5) developable acres. A minimum of twenty (20) acres shall be required to split off five (5) developable acres. One (1) lot, not to exceed two and one-half (2.5) acres in size, may be split from an existing parcel of less than twenty (20) acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable area satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance and that there is sufficient area identified for the establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that represents the requirements per acre:

Total Acres	Maximum Allowed for a Lot Split
40 acres	1O developable acres
30 acres	7.5 developable acres
20 acres	5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres	2.5 developable acres


46.07	LOT AREA,  DENSITY,  AND  SETBACK  REQUl°REMENTS:	The  following
minimum  requirements  shall  be  observed  in  the  A-2  District,  subject  to  additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A	Lot Requirements:

1.	Within the primary urban service reserve area (defined by the Comprehensive  .
Plan):
 
2.
a.	Minimum lot area:
b.	Maximum lot area:
 

45,000 square feet
2.5 acres
 

3.	Within  the  secondary	urban  service	reserve  area  (defined  by  the Comprehensive Plan):

 
a.	Minimum lot area:
b.	Maximum lot area:
 
45,000 square feet No limit
 

4 B. Maximum Density: Not greater than four (4) units per  forty  (40)  acres .  In anticipation of future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of four (4) units per forty (40) acres with a minimum lot size of one (1) acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be mandatory to ensure that future City services can be accommodated. Transfer of development  rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of forty (40) acres shall be required to split off ten (10) developable acres.  A minimum of thirty (30) acres shall be necessary to
 

split off seven and one-half (7.5) developable acres. A minimum of twenty (20) acres shall be required to split off five (5) developable acres. One (1) lot, not to exceed two and one-half (2.5) acres in size, may be split from an existing parcel of less than twenty (20) acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable area satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance and that there is sufficient area identified for the establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that represents the requirements per acre:

Total Acres	Maximum Allowed for a Lot Split
40 acres	1O developable acres
30 acres	7.5 developable acres
20 acres	5 developable acres
Les	s than 20 acres	2.5 developable acres   	

C.	Principal Structure Setbacks :

1.	Front Yard:

Setbacks From Right
of-Way Lines	Street Class

 
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
 
State/Federal  Highway County Road
Local Street
From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
 

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yard:  Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yard:  Fifty (50) feet.

D.     Accessory structure setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance .

46.8	BUILDING HEIGHT: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the A-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance :

A       The maximum height of principal buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

8.      Accessory structures shall be governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 

46.9	RESIDENTIAL DIVISIONS:  As may be allowed by this subdivision,  "divisions"
to be used as residential dwelling sites shall comply with the following:

A.	The divisions shall have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of City street frontage.

8.	The minimum lot size is forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet.

C.	A deed restriction shall be placed upon parcels that have exercised development rights to prohibit additional subdivision, unless it is rezoned.

D.	The initial parcel(s) is under common ownership.

E.	The division is processed according to the City's Subdivision Ordinance.

F.	The site is capable of accommodating a private well and septic system.
 

SECTION 48
R-1, SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Subdivision

48.1	Purpose
48.2	Permitted Uses
48.3	Interim Uses
48.4	Uses Allowed by Administrative Permit
48.5	Accessory Uses
48.6	Conditional Uses
48.7	Lot Area and Setback Requirements
48.8	Lot Coverage and Height


4 48.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the  R-1,  Suburban  Residential  District  is to provide for low to medium density single family detached dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses in areas designated as the rural service area by the Comprehensive  Plan.



48.2	PERMITTED  USES:	Subject  to  applicable  provisions of this  Ordinance,  the following are permitted uses in the R-1 District:

A.        Day care facilities serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.

8.        Essential services .

C.	Personal wireless  service  antennas  located upon a public structure  or existing tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

D.	Public parks, playgrounds, and residential uses.

E.         Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons .

F.        Single family detached dwellings .



48.3	INTERIM USE:  Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-1 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance:

A.        Farms, farmsteads , and farming.

B.       Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 ·of this Ordinance.
 
48.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this section,	performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the R-1 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:

A.	Model homes, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.

B.	Real estate offices, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.



48.5	ACCESSORY  USES:	Subject to applicable  provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-1 District:

A.	Accessory  uses  incidental  and  customary  to  the  uses  permitted  in  Sections 48.02, 48.03, and 48.06 of this Ordinance.

B.	Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance.

C.	Home  occupations   and  home  offices   as  regulated   by  Section  25  of  this Ordinance.

D.	Non-commercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.

E.	Private garages and off-street parking.

F.	Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.

G.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs two
(2) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

H.	Recreational vehicles and equipment.

I.	.  Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this  Ordinance.

J.	Tool  houses,  sheds  and  other  such  structures  for  the  storage  of  domestic supplies and equipment.
 
48.6	CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in the R-1 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)

A.		Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City.

8. Personal wireless service antennas not located on a public structure or existing tower as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance .

C.	Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues provided that side yards shall be double that required for the district.

D.	Single satellite dish TVROs greater than two (2) meters in diameter as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



48.7	LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the R-1 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

 
A.	Lot Area Requirements:
 


On-Site Sewer and Water Systems
 

 
1.	Lot Area
2.	Lot Width
3.	Lot Depth
 
45 ,000 square feet*
150 feet
100 feet
 

*	Additional   lot  area  may  be  required  if  soils  demonstrate   inability  to satisfactorily accommodate on-site sewer and water systems.

4 8. Density. Not greater than one (1) dwelling unit per forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet. In anticipation of future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of four (4) units per forty (40) acres with a minimum lot size of one (1) acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be mandatory to ensure that future City services can be accommodated. Transfer of development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership . A minimum of forty (40) acres shall be required to split off ten (10) developable acres. A minimum of thirty (30) acres shall be necessary to split off seven and one-half  (7.5) developable  acres.   A
 
minimum of twenty (20) acres shall be required to split off five (5) developable acres. One (1) lot, not to exceed two and one-half (2.5) acres in size, may be split from an existing parcel of less than twenty (20) acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable area satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance and that there is sufficient area identified for the establishment  of existing or future City services.  Below is a table that represents the requirements per acre:

Total Acres	Maximum Allowed for a Lot Split
40 acres	10 developable acres
30 acres	7.5 developable acres
20 acres	5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres	2.5 developable acres

C.	Principal Structure Setbacks:

 
1.	Front Yard:
 


Setbacks From Right
of-Way Lines	Street Class	·
 

 
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
 
State/Federal Highway County Road
Local Street
From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
 

Where a lot is located at the intersection of . two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yard:  Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yard:	Twenty (20) feet.

D.	Accessory Structures Setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance .



48.08	LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT: The following requirements shall be observed in the R-1 District:

A.	The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty (30) percent.

B.	All single family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one­ half (2.5) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.

C.	Accessory structures as governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 

4 D.	The combined total floor area of a detached accessory  building or buildings or detached garages shall not exceed the following maximum area requirements:

1.	Within the urban service area designated by the Comprehensive Plan:

Lot Area	Maximum Total Floor Area of All Detached Accessory Structures
1.00 acres or smaller	1,250 square feet
1.01 to 2.00 acres	1,500 square feet
2.01 to 4.99 acres	2,000 square feet
5.00 to 6.99 acres	2,500 square feet
7.00 acres or larger	4,000 square feet

2.	Within the rural service area designated by the Comprehensive Plan:

Lot Area	Maximum Total Floor Area of
All Detached Accessory Structures
1.00 acres or smaller	1,250 square feet
1.01 to 2.00 acres	1,500 square feet
2.01 to 4.99 acres	2,000 square feet
5.00 to 6.99 acres	2,500 square feet
7.00 to 9.99 acres	4,000 square feet
10.00 acres or larger	No Limit

4 E. Density. In anticipation of future urban development, the City shall allow interim densities of four (4) units per forty (40) acres with a minimum lot size of one (1) acre. Clustering of developable lots shall be mandatory to ensure that future City services can be accommodated. Transfer of development rights shall be allowed provided the properties upon which the transfer area occurs is contiguous and of common ownership. A minimum of forty (40) acres shall be required to split off ten (10) developable acres. A minimum of thirty (30) acres shall be necessary to split off seven and one-half (7.5) developable acres. A minimum of twenty (20) acres shall be required to split off five (5) developable acres. One (1) lot, not to exceed two and one-half (2.5) acres in size, may be split from an existing parcel of less than twenty (20) acres if it is demonstrated that the minimum developable area satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance and that there is sufficient area identified for the establishment of existing or future City services. Below is a table that represents the requirements per acre:
 

Total Acres	Maximum Allowed for a Lot Split
40 acres	10 developable acres
30 acres	7.5 developable acres
20 acres	5 developable acres
Less than 20 acres	2.5 developable acres
 
SECTION 49.	R-2, URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Subdivision

49.1	Purpose
49.2	Permitted Uses
49.3	Interim Uses
49.4	Uses Allowed by Administrative Permit
49.5	Accessory Uses
49.6	Conditional Uses
49.7	Lot Area and Setback Requirements
49.8	Lot Coverage and Height
49.9	Water and Sewer Service



49.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the R-2, Urban Residential District is to provide for single family dwelling units at a relatively dense urban scale upon the availability of public sanitary sewer service.



49.2	PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the R-2 District:

A.	Day care facilities serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.

B.	Essential services.

C.	Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure or existing tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

D.	Public parks, playgrounds, and residential uses.

E.	Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.

F.	Single family detached dwellings.



49.3	INTERIM USE: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-2 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance:

A.	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.

B.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
49.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:  Subject to applicable provisions of this section,  performance  standards  established  by  this  Ordinance,  and  processing

49-1
 
requirements  of  Section  6,  the  following  are  uses  allowed  in  an  R-2  District  by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:

A.	Model homes, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.

B.	Real estate offices, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.



49.5	ACCESSORY USES:  Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District:

A.	Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in Sections 49.02, 49.03, and 49.06 of this Ordinance.

B.	Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance.

C.	Home occupations and home offices as regulated by Section 25 of this Ordinance.

D.	Non-commercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.

E.	Private garages and off-street parking.

F.	Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which is operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.

G.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs two
(2) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

H.	Recreational vehicles and equipment.

I.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.

J.	Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment.



49.6	CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in the R-2 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)
 

A.	Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City.

B.	Personal wireless antennas not located on a public structure or existing tower as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

C.	Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues provided that side yards shall be double that required for the district.

D.	Single satellite dish TVROs greater than two (2) meters in diameter as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



49.7	LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the R-2 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Lot Area Requirements:

1.	Lot Area:	Not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.

2.	Lot Width:	Not less than seventy-five (75) feet.

3.	Lot Depth:	Not less than one hundred (100) feet.

B.	Principal Structure Setbacks:

1.	Front Yard:

Setbacks From Right
of-Way Lines	Street Class

35 feet	State/Federal Highway
35 feet	County Road
35 feet	Local Street
35 feet	From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.
 

2.	Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yard:  Twenty (20) feet.

4.	Buffer Yard: The side or rear yard setback shall be:

a.	Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.

b.	Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.



C.	Accessory Structures Setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.



49.8	LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT: The following requirements shall be observed in the R-2 District:

A.	The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty (30) percent.

B.	All single family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (2.5) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.

C.	Accessory structures as governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.



49.9	WATER AND SEWER SERVICE:  Each parcel shall be provided connection to public water and sanitary sewer systems.
 
SECTION 50. R-3, URBAN SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



Subdivision

50.1	Purpose
50.2	Permitted Uses
50.3	Interim Uses
50.4	Uses Allowed by Administrative Permit
50.5	Accessory Uses
50.6	Conditional Uses
50.7	Lot Area and Setback Requirements
50.8	Lot Coverage and Height



50.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the R-3, Urban Single and Two Family Residential District is to provide for higher density single family dwelling units and to introduce on a restricted basis, two family dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses in areas of the City which have publicly controlled sanitary sewer service. This district is only intended for those portions of the community designated as urban service areas by the Comprehensive Plan.



50.2	PERMITTED USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the R-3 District:

A.	Day care facilities serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.

B.	Essential services.

C.	Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

D.	Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.

E.	Public parks and playgrounds.

F.	Single family detached dwellings.



50.3	INTERIM USES:  Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-3 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance

A.	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.
 
B.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



50.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the R-3 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:

A.	Model homes, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.

B.	Real estate offices, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.



50.5	ACCESSORY USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 District:

A.	Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in Sections 50.02, 50.03, and 50.06 of this Ordinance.

B.	Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance.

C.	Home occupations and home offices as regulated by Section 25 of this Ordinance.

D.	Non-commercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.

E.	Private garages and off-street parking.

F.	Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests.

G.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short- wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

H.	Recreational vehicles and equipment.

I.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.

J	Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment.
 

50.6	CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an R-3 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)

A.	Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City.

B.	Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

C.	Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues provided that side yards shall be double that required for the district.

D.	Manufactured home parks, provided that:

1.	The minimum area required for a manufactured home park designation shall be twenty (20) acres.

2.	The following minimum lot requirements are satisfactorily met:

a.	Lot Area: Fifteen Thousand (15,000) Square Feet.
b.	Lot Width: Seventy-Five (75) Feet.
c.	Lot Depth: One Hundred (100) Feet.

3.	The following principal structure setbacks are satisfactorily met:

a.	Front Yard:

 
Setbacks
 


From Right-
of-Way Lines		Road Class
 

35 feet                     Principal Arterial
35 feet                     Minor Arterial
35 feet                     Local Street
35 feet                     From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more roads or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either road.
 
b.	Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.

c.	Rear Yard:  Twenty (20) feet.

d.	Buffer Yard:	The side yard or rear yard setback shall be:

(1)	Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.

(2)	Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.

4.	Accessory buildings, uses and equipment comply with the applicable provisions of Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.

5.	The total ground area of all residential buildings not exceed a lot coverage of thirty (30) percent.

6.	All residences be limited to a maximum height of one (1) story or twenty-five
(25) feet.

7.	The manufactured home park is developed in accordance with the City’s Subdivision Ordinance and all public improvement requirements incorporated therein.

8.	A storm shelter is provided in compliance with Minnesota Statutes. The City may require additional measures as determined necessary to safeguard the health and safety of persons occupying the manufactured home park. Such measures may include but shall not be limited to screening and/or landscape berms. All emergency storm protection measures shall be subject to City Council approval.

9.	The manufactured home park shall comply with Minnesota Statutes 327.20 et seq or all applicable City ordinances whichever is the more restrictive.

E.	Single satellite dish TVROs greater than two (2) meters in diameter as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

F.	Two family detached dwellings, provided that:

1.	They are located and designed so as to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

2.	The dwellings conform to all R-3 District setback requirements.



50.7	LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements
 
shall be observed in an R-3 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Single Family:

1.	Minimum Lot Area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.

2.	Minimum Lot Width: Seventy-five (75) feet.

3.	Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet.

B.	Two Family:

1.	Minimum Lot Area: Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.

2.	Minimum Lot Area Per Unit: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.

3.	Minimum Lot Width: One hundred twenty (120) feet.

4.	Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet.

C.	Principal Structure Setbacks:
1.	Front Yard: Setbacks
From Right
of-Way Lines	Road Class

35 feet                    Principal/Minor Arterial Street
35 feet                    Collector Street
35 feet                    Local Street
35 feet                    From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets that bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yard:	Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yard:	Twenty (20) feet.

4.	Buffer Yard:	The side yard or rear yard setback shall be:

a.	Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.
 

b.	Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.

D.	Accessory Structure Setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance



50.8	LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT: The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an R-3 District:

A.	The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty (30) percent.

B.	All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.

C.	Accessory structures shall be governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 
-


SECTION 51
R-4, MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Subdivision

51.1	Purpose
51.2	Permitted Uses
51.3	Interim Uses
51.4	Uses by Administrative  Permit
51.5	Accessory  Uses
51.6	Conditional Uses
51.7	Lot Area and Setback Requirements
51.8	Lot Coverage Height



4 51.01           PURPOSE:   The purpose of the R-4, Medium Density Residential District is to provide for low to moderate density through the mixture of one and  two  unit medium density dwellings and directly related complementary uses. The allowance of such uses and establishment of the district is dependent upon the availability of publicly controlled sanitary sewer service and only within portions of the City which have been designated as urban service areas by the Comprehensive  Plan.



51.02  PERMITTED  USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the R-4 District:

A       Day care facilities serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.

8.        Essential services.

C.	Public parks, playgrounds , and recreational uses.

D.	Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.         Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.

F.	Three-plex, four-plex , and six-plex multiple family units.

G.	Townhouses,  quadraminiums, and manor (six unit) homes.

H.	Two family dwelling units.

I.          Single family detached dwellings.
 
-



51.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-4 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance :

A.	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.

8.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance .



51.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the R-4 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:

A.	Model homes, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance .

8.	Real estate offices, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.



51.5	ACCESSORY USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-4 District:

A.	Accessory uses incidental and customary to the uses permitted in Sections 51.02, 51.03, and 51.06 of this Ordinance.

8.	Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinan·ce.

C.	Home occupations and home offices as regulated by Section 25 of this Ordinance.

D.	Non-commercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.

E.	Private garages and off-street parking.

F.	Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities , only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests .

G.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
 
-



H.	Recreational vehicles and equipment.

I.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.

J	Tool  houses,  sheds  and  other  such  structures  for  the  storage  of  domestic supplies and equipment.



51.6	CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an R-4 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)

A	Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City

B.	Manufactured home parks provided that:

1.	The  minimum  area  required for  a  manufactured  home  park designation shall be twenty (20) acres.

2.	The following minimum lot requirements are satisfactorily met:

a.	Lot Area: Fifteen Thousand (15,000) Square Feet
b.	Lot Width: Seventy-Five (75) Feet
c.	Lot Depth: One Hundred (100) Feet

3.	The following principal structure setbacks are satisfactorily met:
a.	Front Yard: Setbacks
From Right­
of-Way Lines	Road Class

 
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
 
Principal/Minor Arterial Collector Street
Local Street
From Cul-De-Sac  Right-of-Way
 

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more roads or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either road.
 

b.	Side Yard: Ten (10) feet

c.	Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet

d.	Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be:

(1)	Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.

(2)	Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.

4.	Accessory buildings, uses and equipment  comply  with  the  applicable provisions of Chapter 15.04 of this Ordinance .

5.	The total ground area of all residential buildings not exceed a lot coverage of thirty (30) percent.

6.	All residences be limited to a maximum height of one (1) story or twenty­ five (25) feet.

7.	The manufactured home park is developed in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance and all public improvement requirements incorporated therein.

8.	A storm shelter is provided in compliance with Minnesota Statutes. The City may require additional measures as determined necessary to safeguard the health and safety of persons occupying the manufactured home park. Such measures may include but shall not be limited to screening and/or landscape berms. All emergency storm protection measure shall be subject to City Council approval.

9.	The  manufactured  home  park  shall  comply  with  Minnesota  Statutes
327.20  et seq or  all applicable  City ordinances  whichever  is the  more restrictive.

C.	More than one (1) principal structure per lot.

D.	Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.	·



51.7	LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-4 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance .
 
-

A	Lot Area:

1.	Single Family:

a.	Minimum Lot Area: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.

b.	Minimum Lot Width: Sixty (60) feet.

c.	Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet.

2.	Two Family:

a.	Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:  Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.

b.	Minimum Total Lot Area: Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.

3.	Townhouses, Quadraminiums, Manor Homes:

a.	Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:  Five thousand (5,000) square feet.

b.	Minimum Total Lot Area:  Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

4.	Multiple Family Dwellings:

a.	Minimum Lot Area  Per Dwelling Unit:   Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

b.	Minimum Total Lot Area:  Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

B.	Principal Structure Setbacks:
1.	Front Yard: Setbacks
From Right
of-Way Lines	Road Class

 
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
 
Principal/Minor Arterial Street Collector Street
Local Street
From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
 
--------








Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets that bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet.

4.	Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be:

a.	Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.

b.	Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.

C.	Accessory Structure Setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.



51.8	LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT:  The following requirements shall be observed in an R-4 District:

A	The total ground area of all residential buildings shall not exceed a lot coverage of thirty (30) percent.

B.	All principal buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.

C.	Accessory uses shall be governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 52
R-5, HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Subdivision

52.1	Purpose
52.2	Permitted Uses
52.3	Interim Uses
52.4	Uses by Administrative Permit
52.5	Accessory Uses
52.6	Conditional Uses
52.7	Lot Area and Setback Requirements
52.8	Schedule of Allowances
52.9	Lot Coverage, Height and Bulk


4 52.01 PURPOSE: The purpose of the R-5, High Density Residential District is to provide for high density housing and directly related complementary uses. The allowance of such uses are dependent upon the availability of publicly controlled sanitary sewer service and only within portions of the City which have been designated as urban service areas by the Comprehensive Plan.



52.2	PERMITTED  USES:	Subject  to applicable  provisions  of this  Ordinance,  the following are permitted uses in the R-5 District:

A.       Day care facilities serving twelve (12) or fewer persons.

B.	Essential services.

C.	Multiple family dwellings.

D.	Personal wireless service antennas located upon a public structure, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance .

E.	Public parks, playgrounds, and recreational uses.

F.	Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons.

G.	Townhouses, quadraminiums, and manor homes.



52.3	INTERIM USES:  Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-5 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance:
 
A.          Farms, farmsteads, and farming.

B.         Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



52.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the R-4 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:

A.         Model homes, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.

8.      Real estate offices, temporary, as regulated by Section 19 of this Ordinance.



52.5	ACCESSORY  USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in an R-5 District:

A.       Accessory  uses incidental and customary  to the  uses permitted  in Sections
52.02, 52.03, and 52.06 of this Ordinance.

8.       Fences as regulated by Section 15.06 of this Ordinance.

C.		Home   occupations   and   home   offices   as  regulated   by  Section   25   of  this Ordinance.

D.      Non-commercial greenhouses, provided they do not exceed two hundred (200)
square feet in area.

E.         Private garages and off-street parking.

F.		Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of  the principal use and their occasional guests.

G. Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of household electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

H.        Recreational vehicles and equipment.

I.          Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
 

J	Tool  houses,  sheds  and  other  such  structures  for  the  storage  of  domestic supplies and equipment.



52.6	CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an R-5 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by  Section 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)

A.	Elderly (senior citizen) housing, provided that:

1.	Not more than ten (10) percent of the occupants  may be persons sixty
(60) years of age or under.

2.	To continue to qualify for the elderly housing classification, the owner or agency shall annually file with the Zoning Administrator a certified copy of a monthly resume of occupants or such a multiple dwelling, listing the number of tenants by age and clearly identifying and setting forth the relationship of all occupants sixty (60) years of age or under to qualified tenants, or to the building.

3.	Elevator service is provided to each floor level above ground floor.

8.	Halfway houses provided that the use is licensed by the State.

C.	Nursing	homes	and	similar	group	housing,	but   not	including	hospitals, sanitariums, or similar institutions, provided that:

1.	Side yards are double the minimum requirements established for this district.

2.	Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas.

3.	The site  shall  be served  by  an arterial  or  collector  street  of  sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated.

4.	All State statutes and regulations governing such use are strictly adhered to and all required operating permits are secured.

D.	Manufactured home parks provided that:

1.	The  minimum  area  required for  a manufactured  home park designation shall be twenty (20) acres.
 
2.	The following minimum lot requirements are satisfactorily met:

a.	Lot Area:	Fifteen Thousand (15,000) Square Feet
b.	Lot Width:  Seventy-Five (75) Feet
c.	Lot Depth: One Hundred (100) Feet

3.	The following principal structure setbacks are satisfactorily met:
a.	Front Yard: Setbacks
From Right­
of-Way Lines	Road Class

 
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
 
Principal/Minor Arterial Street Collector Street
Local Street
From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
 

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more roads or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either road.

b.	Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.

c.	Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet.

d.	Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be:

(1)	Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.

(2)	Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.

4.	Accessory buildings, uses  and  equipment  comply  with  the  applicable provisions of Chapter 15.04 of this Chapter .

5.	The total ground area of all residential buildings not exceed a lot coverage of thirty (30) percent.

6.	All residences be limited to a maximum height of one (1) story or twenty­ five (25) feet.

7.	The manufactured home park is developed in accordance with the City's Subdivision	Ordinance and all public  improvement  requirements incorporated therein.
 


8.	A storm shelter is provided in compliance with Minnesota Statutes.   The City   may  require  additional   measures   as ·  determined   necessary   to safeguard  the health and safety of persons occupying  the  manufactured home  park.    Such measures may include but shall not be limited to screening  and/or   landscape   berms.   All   emergency   storm   protection measure shall be subject to City Council approval.

9.	The  manufactured   home  park  shall  comply  with  Minnesota  Statutes
327.20  et  seq  or  all  applicable  City  ordinances  whichever  is the  more
restrictive.

E.	More than one (1) principal building on a lot.

F.	Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

G.	Public or semi-public recreational buildings and n·eighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues provided that side yards shall be double that required for the district.

H.	Swimming pools as an accessory use provided that:

1.	The use is fenced in accordance with Section 16 of this Chapter.

2.	The use is not located within the front yard.

3.	The use shall meet setbacks for principal structures.

4.	All necessary City permits are obtained for the use.



52.7	LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-5 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Lot Area:

1.	Townhouses, Quadraminiums, Manor Homes:

a.	Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
 
b.	Minimum Total Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

2.	Multiple Family Dwellings:

a.	Minimum  Lot Area  Per Dwelling Unit: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

b.	Minimum Total Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

3.	Multiple Family Dwelling-Elderly Housing:

a.	Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:  One thousand (1,000) square feet per unit.

b.	Minimum Total Lot Area:  Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.

8.	Principal Structure Setbacks:
1.	Front Yard: Setbacks
From Right
of-Way Lines	Road Class

 
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
 
Principal/Minor Arterial Street Collector Street
Local Street
From Cul-De-Sac Right-of-Way
 

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets that bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet.

4.	Buffer Yard: The side or rear yard setback shall be:

a.	Thirty-five (35) feet if abutting an existing business district.

b.	Fifty (50) feet if abutting an existing industrial district.

C.	Accessory Structure Setbacks as regulated by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 
52.8	SCHEDULE OF ALLOWANCES: Except for elderly housing, the lot areas per multiple family dwelling unit prescribed above shall be further subject to the following schedule of allowances,  which shall be added to or subtracted from the minimum lot area per dwelling unit as prescribed, thereby relating density requirements to the location, use and access provided the property.

A.		For each parking space provided under the living area of a building or underground subtract three hundred (300) square feet.

B.	If an adjacent site is zoned A-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Residential use, add three hundred (300) square feet per unit for that portion of any building within two hundred (200) feet of said district.

C.	If an adjacent site is zoned for commercial, industrial or institutional use, subtract three hundred (300) square feet per unit for that portion of any building within two hundred (200) feet of said district.

D.	For each unit containing bedrooms in excess of two (2), add three hundred (300) square feet.

E.	The maximum allowance which may be subtracted u.nder Section 52.08.A and C of this Ordinance shall be five hundred (500) square feet per unit.



52.9	LOT COVERAGE, HEIGHT AND BULK: The following lot coverage, height and bulk requirements shall be observed in the R-5 District:

A.	The total lot coverage of all buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) percent.

B.	The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 0.7.

C.	All principal buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.

D.	Accessory buildings shall be governed by Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 55.	B-1, NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT

Subdivision

55.1	Purpose
55.2	Permitted Uses
55.3	Interim Uses
55.4	Uses by Administrative Permit
55.5	Accessory Uses
55.6	Conditional Uses
55.7	Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
55.8	Maximum Building Height



55.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the B-1, Neighborhood Business District is to provide for the establishment of integrated neighborhood centers for convenient, limited office, retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. The B-1 District is further intended to provide for a transition between residential and commercial development.



55.2	PERMITTED USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the B-1 District:

A.	Bakery good sales and baking (for sale on-premise).
B.	Barber shops.
C.	Beauty parlors.
D.	Bicycle sales and repair shops.
E.	Books, office supply or stationery stores.
F.	Camera and photographic supply stores.
G.	Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts, and soft drink sales.
H.	Copy services, but not including printing press or newspaper.
I.	Dairy stores.
J.	Dry cleaning pick up and laundry pick up stations including incidental repair and assembly but not including processing.
K.	Essential services.
L.	Funeral homes and mortuaries.
M.	Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
N.	Grocery  stores,  convenience  (not  supermarket  type  and  without  motor  fuel facilities).
O.	Hardware stores.
P.	Jewelry stores.
Q.	Laundromat, self-service washing and drying.
R.	Locksmiths.
S.	Offices, commercial and professional.
 
T.	Personal wireless service antennas located on an existing structure or tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
U.	Prepared food - delivery and/or take-out only.
V.	Sexually oriented use - accessory.
W.	Shoe repair.
X.	Shoe stores.
Y.	Tailoring services.
Z.	Tanning salons.
AA.	Therapeutic massage.
BB.	Other uses of the same general character as the permitted uses listed above as determined by the City.



55.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the B-1 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.

A.	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.

B.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



55.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the B-1 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.

A.	Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an allowed principal use provided that:

1.	The area so occupied shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the principal building.

2.	No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear, side or front yards and shall be limited to the area of the customer entrances.

3.	The outdoor sales, rental or display area shall be included in the calculations for parking spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space required for parking as stipulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, except as may be exempted for cause by the Zoning Administrator.

B.	Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales provided that:

1.	Promotional Events:

a.	Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes
 
grand openings, carnivals, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal rides and displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.

b.	The event shall not exceed the period specified in the administrative permit and in no case shall exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days per event.

c.	There shall be no more than two (2) promotional events per calendar per year per property.

2.	Outdoor Sales:

a.	Such activity is directed towards the general public and include warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales, distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales, and licensed transient merchant and transient product merchant sales.

b.	The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary outdoor sales activities allowed by this paragraph and any applicable business licensing provisions in addition to other applicable building and safety code requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

(1)	The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year per property.

(2)	There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall there be more than ten (10) sales activities per year per property.

(3)	Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic circulation or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped areas is prohibited.

c.	General Standards.

(1)	The event shall be clearly accessory to or promoting the permitted or conditional use approved for the site. Only merchandise which is normally manufactured, sold, or stocked by the occupant on the subject premises on a regular or
 
seasonal basis shall be sold and/or promoted.

(2)	Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan and provided that it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.

(3)	The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off-street parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the Zoning Administrator who shall consider the nature of the event and the applicable parking requirements of this Ordinance.

Consideration shall be given to the parking needs and requirements of other occupants in the case of multi- tenant buildings. Parking on public right-of-way and streets is prohibited; except that parking on local streets may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only, provided that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by authorized enforcement officers, as approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator, at the petitioner’s expense.

(4)	Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary sign standards of this Ordinance and shall be allowed for the duration of the event. Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator; the erection and removal of such signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

(5)	The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration of the event.

C.	Other uses of the same general character as those listed as permitted use in this district.

55.5	ACCESSORY USES:  Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the B-1 District:

A.	Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of the principal use.
 
B.	Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.

C.	Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, but not including semi-trailer trucks.

D.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.



55.6	CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the B-1 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).

A.	Convenience Grocery Markets with Prepared Food and/or Motor Fuel Sales.
Grocery, food operations, and/or convenience motor fuel (no vehicle service or repair) provided that:

1.	Convenience/deli food is of the take-out type only and that no provision for seating or consumption on the premises is provided. Furthermore, that the enclosed area devoted to such activity, use and merchandise shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area.

2.	The storage, preparation and serving of food items are subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator who shall provide specific written sanitary requirements based upon the applicable State and County regulations.






3.	That the proximate area and location of space devoted to non-automotive merchandise sales shall be specified in the application and in the conditional use permit. Exterior sales or storage shall be allowed by administrative permit.

4.	The off-street loading space(s) and building access for delivery of goods shall be separate from customer parking and entrances and shall not cause conflicts with customer vehicles and pedestrian movements.

5.	The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 AM to 11:00 PM, unless
 
extended by the City Council as part of the conditional use permit.

6.	Motor fuel facilities shall be installed in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas pumps and to allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.

7.	A protective canopy located over pump islands may be an accessory structure on the property and may be located twenty (20) feet or more from the front lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off site is maintained.

8.	The operation shall be responsible for litter control within three hundred (300) feet of the premises and litter control is to occur on a daily basis. Trash receptacles must be provided at a convenient location on site to facilitate litter control.

B.	Day care nursery facilities as a principal or accessory use provided that the use complies with the provisions of Section 26 of this Ordinance.

C.	Personal wireless antennas not located on an existing structure or tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

55.7	LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the B-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Lot Area: One (1) acre.

B.	Lot Width: One Hundred twenty-five (125) feet
C.	Setbacks:

1.	Front yards:

Setbacks	


Setbacks
	From
Centerline	From Right-
of-Way Lines	Street Class
	
130 feet
130 feet
65 feet	
65 feet	State/Federal Highway
65 feet	County Road
35 feet	Local Street
 
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yards: Fifteen (15) feet.

3.	Rear Yards: Twenty-five (25) feet.

4.	Buffer Yards: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet if abutting a residential district.



55.8	MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:

A.	Principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet

B.	Accessory building: Per Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 62.	INS, INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT

Subdivision

62.1	Purpose
62.2	Permitted Uses
62.3	Interim Uses
62.4	Uses by Administrative Permit
62.5	Accessory Uses
62.6	Conditional Uses
62.7	Lot Requirements and Setbacks
62.8	Height Requirements



62.1	PURPOSE: The INS District is intended to provide a specific zoning district for facilities devoted to serving the public. It is unique in that the primary objective of uses within this district is the provision of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than the sale of goods or services. It is intended that uses within such a district will be compatible with adjoining development, and they normally will be located on an arterial street or thoroughfare.



62.2	PERMITTED USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the INS District:

A.	Day care nurseries.

B.	Essential services.

C.	Nursing homes, residential care facilities, and similar group housing but not including hospitals, sanitariums, or similar institutions.

D.	Parks, and recreational fields and structures.

E.	Personal wireless service towers and antennas located on a public structure as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

F.	Pre-school, elementary, junior or senior high schools having a regular course of study accredited to the State of Minnesota.

G.	Publicly owned civic or cultural buildings, such as libraries, City offices, auditoriums, public administration buildings and historical developments.

H.	Religious  institutions,  such  as  churches,  chapels,  temples,  mosques,  and synagogues.
 


62.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the INS District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance:

A.       Farms, farmsteads, and farming.



62.4	USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance and processing requirements of Section 6, the following uses may be allowed in an INS District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator:

A.	Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.

B.	Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.



62.5	ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the INS District:

A.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 62.02, 62.03, and 62.05 of this Ordinance.

B.	Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.

C.	Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance.

D.	Parks, playgrounds or athletic fields.

E.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

F.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.



62.6	CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provision of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an INS District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance.)
 

A.	Automobile parking lots as a principal use provided that the use and design is in conformance with Section 20 of this Ordinance.

B.	Cemeteries or memorial gardens provided that:

1.	The site is landscaped in accordance with Section 15.07.

2.	The use is available to the “public”.

3.	The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district.

4.	The use meets the minimum setback requirements for principal structures.

5.	The site accesses on a collector or arterial street.

C.	Colleges, seminaries, and other institutions of higher education.

D.	Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility microwave antennas, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Community centers.

F.	Correctional facilities and shelters provided that:

1.	Facilities shall comply with all applicable codes and regulations and shall have, current and in effect, the appropriate state licenses.

2.	On-site services and treatment shall be for residents and inmates of the facility only, and shall not be for non-residents or persons outside the facility.

3.	All new buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be consistent with the scale and character of the buildings in the neighborhood. Exterior building materials shall also be harmonious with other buildings in the neighborhood.






4.	No correctional facility shall be closer than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet from another licensed correctional facility or from any property designated on the Land Use Plan as residential and/or designated on the official zoning map as residential.

5.	The conditional use permit is only valid as long as a valid state license is held
 
by the operator of the facility where such license is required.

6.	Appropriate  transition  to  neighboring  property  shall  be  provided  by landscaping and site design consistent with the City ordinances and policies.

G.	Day care, social services or other non-directly related worship type activities as an accessory use within a religious institutional building(s).

H.	Hospitals, sanitariums, or similar institutions provided that:

1.	Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas.  Said area shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with Section
15.06 of this Ordinance.

2.	All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly adhered to and all required operating permits are secured.

I.	Living quarters which are provided as an accessory use to a principal use in Section
62.02 or to a conditional use in this section provided that:

1.	The living quarters shall not be used as rental property.

2.	A maximum of one (1) such dwelling shall be allowed.

3.	There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility (i.e., caretaker, security, etc.).

J.	Medical, dental and chiropractic offices and clinics, commercial and professional offices, funeral homes and mortuaries.

K.	Other uses of the same general character as those listed in Sections 62.02, 62.04, and 62.06 of this Ordinance.

L.	Outdoor recreational areas including golf courses, country clubs, swimming pools, and similar facilities.

M.	Reduction in lot area requirements.
N.	Retail commercial activities and personal services, provided that:

1.	Merchandise is sold at retail.

2.	Personal services are limited to those uses and activities which are allowed as a permitted or permitted accessory use within a B-1 Zoning District.

3.	The retail activity and personal services are located within a structure whose
 
principal use is not commercial sales.

4.	The retail activity and personal services shall not occupy more than fifteen
(15) percent of the gross floor area of the building.

5.	The retail activity and personal services are not located within a structure whose principle use is residential.

6.	No directly or indirectly illuminated sign or sign in excess of ten (10) square feet identifying the name of the business shall be visible from the outside of the building.

7.	No signs or posters of any type advertising products for sale or services shall be visible from the outside of the building.

O.	Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



62.7	LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an INS District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, modifications set forth in this Ordinance:

A.	Lot Area - Minimum Site Area.

1.	Five (5) acres unless otherwise specified or reduced by conditional use permit.

2.	Religious institutions - three (3) acres.

3.	Elementary schools - fifteen (15) acres.

4.	Junior high schools - thirty (30) acres.

5.	Senior high schools - fifty (50) acres.

6.	Hospitals - ten (10) acres.

7.	Community centers - three (3) acres.

B.	Setbacks.

1.	Schools, Hospitals, and Public Works Facilities.

a.	Front Yard.
 

Setbacks From Right-
of-Way Lines	Street Class

65 feet	State/Federal Highway
65 feet	County Road
50 feet	Local Street

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

b.	Side yard: One hundred (100) feet

c.	Rear Yard: One hundred (100) feet

2.	All Other Institutional Uses:

a.	Front Yard: Same as for schools, hospitals, and public works facilities.

b.	Side Yard: Fifty (50) feet.

c.	Rear Yard: Fifty (50) feet.



62.8	HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: The following height requirements shall be observed in the INS District:

A.	All principal structures and their accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.	.



SECTION 63.	PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT

Subdivision

63.1	Purpose
63.2	Uses
63.3	Requirements, Conditions and Standards for Approving a PUD
63.4	Development Standards
63.5	Sketch Plan
63.6	General Plan
63.7	Final Plan
63.8	PUD Evaluation
 
63.9	Plan Modification/Amendment of a PUD
63.10	General Requirements



63.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the PUD, Planned Unit Development District is to provide comprehensive procedures and standards intended to allow greater flexibility in the development of neighborhoods and/or non-residential areas by incorporating design modifications and/or a mixture of uses.  The PUD process is intended to encourage:

A.	Innovations in development to the end that the growing demands for all styles of economic expansion may be met by greater variety in type, design, and placement of structures and by the conservation and more efficient use of land in such developments.

B.	Higher standards of site and building design through the use of trained and experienced land planners, architects, landscape architects and engineers.

C.	More convenience in location and design of development and service facilities.

D.	The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural topography, wetlands, woodlands, and geologic features and the prevention of soil erosion which are over and above minimum standards and expectations.

E.	A creative use of land and related physical development which allows a phased and orderly development and use pattern.

F.	An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby lowering development costs, long term maintenance expenses, and public investments.



G.	A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan. (PUD is not intended as a means to vary applicable planning and zoning principles.)

H.	A more desirable and creative environment than might be possible through the strict application of zoning and subdivision regulations of the City.



63.2	USES: All permitted, permitted accessory, conditional uses, interim uses, and uses by administrative permit contained in Sections 45 through 61 of this Ordinance which are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan shall be treated as potentially allowable uses within a PUD District.
 
63.3	REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS AND STANDARDS FOR APPROVING A PUD:

A.	General Standards:

1.	Comprehensive Plan Consistency: The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan.

2.	Common Open Space: Common private or public open space and facilities at least sufficient to meet the minimum requirements established in the Comprehensive Plan and such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents/occupants of the PUD may be provided within the area of the PUD development.

3.	Operating and Maintenance Requirements for PUD Common Open Space Facilities: Whenever common private or public open space or service facilities are provided within the PUD, the PUD shall contain provisions to assure the continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service facilities to a predetermined reasonable standard. Common private or public open space and service facilities within a PUD may be placed under the ownership of one or more of the following, as approved by the City Council:

a.	Dedicated to the public, where a community-wide use is anticipated and the City Council agrees to accept the dedication.

b.	Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated.



c.	Property owners association, provided all of the following conditions are met:

1)	Prior to the use, occupancy, sale or the execution of contracts for sale of individual buildings, units, lots, parcels, tracts or common areas, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent document or a document such as specified by Minnesota Statutes 515, Article 2 and a set of floor plans such as specified by Minnesota Statutes 515, Article 2-110 shall be filed with St. Augusta. Said filing with the City is to be made prior to the filings of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of Stearns County.

2)	The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or equivalent  document  shall  specify  that  deeds,  leases  or
 
documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, lots, parcels, or tracts shall subject said properties to the terms of said declaration.

3)	The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an owner’s association or corporation shall be formed and that all owners shall be members of said association or corporation which shall maintain all properties and common areas in good repair and which shall assess individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney. The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of the individual owner through establishing adequate private control.

4)	The declaration shall additionally, amongst other things, provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to maintain properties in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of St. Augusta or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due and in the event St. Augusta City incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and regulations, which said expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association or corporation, then the City shall have the right to assess each property its prorata share of said expenses. Such assessments, together with interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each property against which each such assessment is made.

5)	Membership must be mandatory for each owner, and any successive buyer.

6)	The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a limited period of years, unless specifically approved by the City.

4.	Staging of Public and Common Open Space: When a PUD provides for common private or public open space, and is planned for a staged development over a period of time, the total area of common or public open space or land escrow security in any stage of development shall, at a minimum, bear the same relationship to the total open space to be provided in the entire PUD as the stages or units completed or under development bear to the entire PUD.

5.	Density: The maximum allowable density in a PUD Zoning District shall be determined by standards negotiated and agreed upon between the applicant

63-4
 
and the City. In all cases, the negotiated standards shall be consistent with the development policies as contained in the St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan.

6.	Principal Buildings: No More than one (1) principal building may be constructed on each platted lot within a PUD.

7.	Land Use/Housing Type: A PUD which involves only one (1) land use or housing type may be allowed, provided that it is otherwise consistent with the stated purposes and objectives of this section and the Comprehensive Plan.

8.	Ordinance Modifications: The uniqueness of  each PUD requires that specifications and standards for streets, utilities, public facilities and the approval of land subdivisions may be subject to modifications from the City ordinances generally governing them. The City Council may therefore approve streets, utilities, public facilities and land subdivisions which are not in strict compliance with usual specifications or ordinance requirements where it is found that such are not required in the interests of the City.

9.	Utilities: In any PUD, all utility installations and connections including telephone, electricity, gas, telecable, public sewer and water, private septic systems and wells shall conform to the applicable provisions of the St. Augusta Subdivision Ordinance, unless otherwise approved by the City Council.

10.	Streets: All streets shall conform to the design standards contained in the St.
Augusta Subdivision Ordinance unless otherwise approved by the City Council.

11.	Fencing/Screening/Landscaping: In any PUD, fencing, screening, and landscaping shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

12.	Setbacks:

a.	The front, rear and side yard restrictions on the periphery of the property to which the PUD is applied shall at a minimum be the same as the setbacks which are common to the area and generally consistent with this Ordinance.

b.	No building shall be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb line along those roadways which are part of the internal street pattern.

c.	No building within the project shall be nearer to another building, than
 
one-half (1/2) the sum of the building heights of the two (2) buildings.

13.	Height: The maximum building height to be considered within a PUD Zoning District shall comply with the height standards specified within this Ordinance in general.

B.	Benefit: The proposed PUD shall accomplish one or more of the objectives stated in Section 63.01 and shall not simply be for the enhanced economic gain of the applicant. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to demonstrate compliance with this requirement.



63.4	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:

A.	Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish standards for residential, non- residential, and mixed use residential and non-residential PUD Zoning Districts, in addition to those standards contained elsewhere in this Ordinance for all PUD projects. All PUD projects shall be developed in accordance with the following residential area standards:

1.	There shall be no minimum lot or area requirement for a tract of land for which a PUD Zoning District is proposed.

2.	There shall be no minimum frontage on a public street required for a tract of land for which a PUD is proposed.

3.	The tract of land for which a PUD is proposed shall have municipal water and sewer available to it or shall provide approved well locations and comply with City and/or County septic system requirements.

4.	For PUD Zoning District projects, the performance standards, area requirements and construction limitations of generally comparable conventional zoning districts shall apply to the project, excepting those standards to be modified, as determined by the City Council and as provided above in Section 63.03, Subd. A.1 and A.3.

5.	Off-street parking and loading facilities for a residential PUD shall be provided in accordance with Sections 20 and 21 of this Ordinance.

6.	In addition to the above standards, the City Council may impose such other requirements for individual PUD Districts as are reasonable and as the Board deems necessary to protect and promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community and the surrounding area.
 
63.5	SKETCH PLAN:

A.	Application Procedures and Information Requirements: Prior to the filing of a formal application, the applicant shall be required to submit a sketch plan of the project to the Zoning Administrator. Such plan shall be processed according to the information requirements, standards and procedures for preliminary site plans as established by Section 10.03.B of this Ordinance.

B.	Exemptions: At the request of the applicant and upon the approval of the Zoning Administrator, minor PUD projects or projects of a non-controversial nature may be exempt from the sketch plan process and may proceed to the general plan, as regulated by Section 63.06 of this Section.



63.6	GENERAL PLAN:

A.	Application Procedure: PUD zoning applications shall be processed according to the evaluation criteria and procedures outlined in Section 10.03.C of this Ordinance.

B.	Information Requirement:

1.	The information required for all PUD general plan applications shall be as specified in Section 10.06 of this Ordinance.

2.	The Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, and/or City Council may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or document required by this section which it finds to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific PUD being considered.

C.	Zoning Enactment: The formal establishment of the PUD District shall take place in conjunction with City Council approval of the general plan.



63.7	FINAL PLAN: After approval of a sketch plan for the PUD and approval of a general plan for all or a portion of the proposed PUD, the applicant shall submit the following material for review by the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of a building permit(s).

A.	Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to sale of any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance of any public or common open space or service facility.

B.	All certificates, seals and signatures required for the  dedication of land and
 
recording of documents.

C.	Final architectural working drawings of all structures.

D.	Any other plans, agreements or specifications necessary for the Zoning Administrator to review the proposed construction. All work must be in conformance with the Minnesota State Building Code.



63.8	PUD EVALUATION: If periodic review of a PUD is included as a condition to the approval of a PUD, such a project shall be reviewed by the City Council. At such times, the City Council, at its discretion, may take additional testimony on the PUD.

63.9	PLAN MODIFICATION/AMENDMENT OF A PUD:

A.	Minor Modifications/Amendment: Plan modifications/amendments qualifying as minor as defined by Section 10.07.A of this Ordinance may be processed and approved pursuant to that section.
B.	Major Modification/Amendment: The same review procedure shall be followed for a major/modification/amendment of a PUD as was followed with respect to the applicant’s general plan, outlined in Section 63.06 and pursuant to Section 10.07.B of this Ordinance.



63.10	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:

A.	Records: The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all PUD zones approved by the City, including information on a project’s allowed uses, all pertinent project plans, any conditions imposed on a project by the City Council, and such other information as the Zoning Administrator may deem appropriate.

B.	Withdrawal of an Application: Any application under this section may be withdrawn by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior to final City Council action thereon.

C.	Platting of a PUD: In the event that a PUD is to be subdivided into lots or parcels for the purpose of separate ownership, such PUD shall be platted under the platting procedures and according to standards contained in the St. Augusta Subdivision Ordinance and the related requirements of Stearns County. The preliminary plat shall be processed in conjunction with the general plan as outlined in Section 63.06. A separate action on the final plat shall be processed before the City Council prior to the final stage of the PUD.

D.	Conveyance of Property Within a PUD: In the event that any real property within an
 
approved PUD is conveyed in total or in part, the buyer(s) thereof shall be bound by all provisions of the PUD and the general plan for that project. However, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as to make such conveyed property non- conforming with regard to normal zoning standards as long as the conveyed property conforms with the approved PUD and the general plan for a project.

E.	Development Agreement: Prior to the approval of the general plan, the applicant shall enter into a development agreement as may be required for site improvements by the Subdivision Ordinance or this Ordinance for the project in question. Once approved, the development agreement shall be recorded with Stearns County and documentation of such action shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.

F.	Issuance of Building Permits: Following approval by the City Council of a PUD general plan and recording of the PUD development contract with Stearns County, the Building Official may issue a building permit for such structures in compliance with this Ordinance.

SECTION 67.	SCENIC RIVERS DISTRICT

Subdivision

67.1	Adoption of Stearns County Regulations
67.2	Administration and Enforcement



67.1	ADOPTION  OF  STEARNS  COUNTY  REGULATIONS:  The  Stearns  County
Mississippi River Scenic River Ordinance, Number 37, regulating the use of bluff lands and shorelands of the Mississippi River in Stearns County, is hereby adopted by referenced and attached to this Ordinance as Appendix D.



67.2	ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT: The provisions of this subdivision shall be administered and enforced by the Stearns County Zoning Administrator.
 
SECTION 56.	B-2, HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT

Subdivision

56.1	Purpose
56.2	Permitted Uses
56.3	Interim Uses
56.4	Uses by Administrative Permit
56.5	Accessory Uses
56.6	Conditional Uses
56.7	Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
56.8	Maximum Building Height



56.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the B-2, Highway Business District is to provide for and limit the establishment of motor vehicle oriented or dependent high intensity commercial and service activities.



56.2	PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the B-2 District:

A.	Animal hospitals and kennels.
B.	Auto accessory stores (not including service).
C.	Bakery good sales and baking (for sale on-premise).
D.	Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and other financial institutions including drive-up tellers.
E.	Barber shops.
F.	Beauty parlors.
G.	Bicycle sales and repair shops.
H.	Books, office supply or stationery stores.
I.	Camera and photographic supply stores.
J.	Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts, and soft drink sales.
K.	Copy services, but not including printing press or newspaper.
L.	Dairy stores.
M.	Dry cleaning pick up and laundry pick up stations including incidental repair and assembly but not including processing.
N.	Essential services.
O.	Funeral homes and mortuaries.
P.	Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
Q.	Grocery  stores,  convenience  (not  supermarket  type  and  without  motor  fuel facilities).
R.	Hardware stores.
S.	Jewelry stores.
T.	Laundromat, self-service washing and drying.
 
U.	Liquor, on and off-sale.
V.	Locksmiths.
W.	Motels, motor hotels and hotels.
X.	Offices, commercial and professional.
Y.	Personal wireless antennas located on an existing structure or tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
Z.	Prepared food - delivery and/or take-out only.
AA.	Private clubs or lodges serving food and beverages. BB.	Reception halls.
CC.	Recreation, indoor commercial (i.e., sport and health clubs, bowling alleys, roller rinks, etc.)
DD.	Restaurants (not of the drive-in, convenience or drive-through type), cafes, on and off-sale liquor.
EE.	Sexually oriented use - principal and accessory. FF.	Shoe repair.
GG.	Shoe stores.
HH.	Tailoring services.
II.	Tanning salons.
JJ.	Therapeutic massage.
KK.	Other uses of the same general character as the permitted uses listed above as determined by the City.



56.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the B-2 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.

A.	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.

B.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



56.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the B-2 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.

A.	Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an allowed principal use subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.A of this Ordinance.

B.	Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.

C.	Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.
 


56.5	ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the B-2 District:

A.	Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of the principal use.

B.	Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.

C.	Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, but not including semi-trailer trucks.

D.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.



56.6	CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the B-2 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).

A.	Accessory, enclosed retail, rental or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that:

1.	Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Business District.

2.	Such use does not constitute more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area and not more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.

B.	Automobile washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-service), provided that:

1.	Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate an appropriate number of vehicles and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.

2.	Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot landscaped or covered.

3.	The entire area other than occupied by the building or planting shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which will control dust and drainage which
 
is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

4.	Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

C.	Convenience Store with Gasoline. Grocery and/or food operations, with convenience gas (no vehicle service or repair), provided that:

1.	Convenience/deli food is of the take-out type only and that no provision for seating or consumption on the premises is provided. Furthermore, that the enclosed area devoted to such activity, use and merchandise shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area.

2.	That any sale of food items is subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator who shall provide specific written sanitary requirements for each proposed sale location based upon applicable State and County regulations.

3.	That the approximate area and location devoted to non-automotive merchandise sales shall be specified in general terms in the application and in the conditional use permit. No exterior sales or storage shall be permitted.

4.	The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 AM to 12:00 PM, unless extended by the City Council.

5.	Motor fuel activities shall be installed in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks shall be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and unloading operations do not conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.

6.	A protective canopy located over pump island may be an accessory structure on the property and may be located twenty (20) feet or more from the front lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off site is maintained.
7.	The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

8.	Each light standard base shall be landscaped.

9.	Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, and shall be subject to the approval of the City.
 

10.	An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by parked cars or moving vehicles.

D.	Drive-in and convenience food establishments, provided that:

1.	At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five (5) feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 16 of this Ordinance.

2.	Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered.

3.	Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous curbs not less than six (6) inches high above the parking lot or driveway grade.

4.	Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements, shall comply with Section 20 of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

5.	The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or plantings shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

E.	Motor vehicle fuel sales, truck stop, auto repair - minor and tire and battery stores and services, provided that:

1.	Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the standards and requirements imposed by this Ordinance for motor fuel stations shall apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to other requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property.



2.	The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

3.	Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed.

4.	Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered.

5.	Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic
 
movement, shall comply with Section 20 of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

6.	No outside storage, sales, service, or rental shall be permitted.

7.	Sale of products other than those specifically mentioned in this sub-section shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

8.	All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by modifying the conditions.

F.	Open and outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use provided that:

1.	The area is fenced and screened from view of the neighboring residential uses or if abutting a residential district in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

2.	Storage is screened from view from the public right-of-way in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

3.	Storage area is grassed or surfaced to control dust.

4.	Does not take up parking spaces as required to conform to this Ordinance.

G.	Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that:

1.	Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.

2.	Outside sales areas are fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting residential district in compliance with Section
15.07 of this Ordinance.

3.	Sales area is grassed or surfaced to control dust.

4.	The use does not take up parking space as required to conform to this Ordinance.

H.	Personal wireless antennas not located on an existing structure or tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
 
56.7	LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the B-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Lot Area: One (1) acre.

B.	Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet

C.	Setbacks:

1.	Front yards:

Setbacks                 Setbacks
From                       From Right-
Centerline	of-Way Lines	Street Class

130 feet                      65 feet                  State/Federal Highway
130 feet                      65 feet                  County Road
65 feet                       35 feet                  Local Street

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yards: Twenty (20) feet.

3.	Rear Yards: Twenty (20) feet.

4.	Buffer Yards: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet if abutting a residential district.

56.8	MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:

A.	Principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet

B.	Accessory building: Per Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 57.	B-3, GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

Subdivision

57.1	Purpose
57.2	Permitted Uses
57.3	Interim Uses
57.4	Uses by Administrative Permit
57.5	Accessory Uses
57.6	Conditional Uses
57.7	Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
57.8	Maximum Building Height



57.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the B-3 District is to provide specifically for the regulation of high intensity commercial uses located within the Central Business District of the community and other intense commercial areas of the City.



57.2	PERMITTED USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the B-3 District:

A.	Amusement centers.
B.	Animal clinics (with no overnight care).
C.	Animal hospitals and kennels
D.	Antique or gift shop.
E.	Appliance and electronic stores including incidental repair and assembly but not fabricating or manufacturing.
F.	Auto accessory stores (not including service).
G.	Bakery good sales and baking (for sale on premise).
H.	Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and other financial institutions including drive-up tellers.
I.	Barber shops.
J.	Beauty parlors.
K.	Bicycle sales and repair shops.
L.	Books, office supply or stationary stores.
M.	Building supply sales within the principal structure.
N.	Cabinet and carpentry shops.
O.	Camera and photographic supply stores.
P.	Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts, and soft drink sales.
Q.	Carpet, rug and tile stores.
R.	Coin and philatelic stores.
S.	Copy services, but not including printing press or newspaper.
T.	Costume, clothes rental.
U.	Dairy stores.
 
V.	Department and discount and warehouse stores.
W.	Dry cleaning including plant accessory heretofore, pressing and repairing.
X.	Dry good stores.
Y.	Employment agencies.
Z.	Essential services.
AA.	Fabric and notion sales stores. BB.	Finance companies.
CC.	Funeral homes and mortuaries. DD.	Furniture stores.
EE.	Furriers when conducted only for retail trade on premises. FF.	Garden supply stores.
GG.	Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
HH.	Grocery  stores,  convenience  (not  supermarket  type  and  without  motor  fuel facilities).
II.	Grocery stores, supermarket. JJ.	Hardware stores.
KK.	Jewelry stores and luggage stores.
LL.	Laundromat, self-service washing and drying. MM.	Leather goods and luggage stores.
NN.	Liquor, on and off-sale. OO.	Locksmiths.
PP.	Motels, motor hotels and hotels.
QQ.	Music shops and sales (instruments, equipment, tapes, compact discs, etc.). RR.	Newspaper, printing or publishing shops.
SS.	Offices, commercial and professional.
TT.	Personal wireless antennas located on an existing structure or tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
UU.	Pet shops.
VV.	Prepared food - delivery and/or take-out only.
WW.  Private clubs or lodges serving food and beverages.
XX.	Reception halls.
YY.	Recreation, indoor commercial (i.e., sport and health clubs, bowling alleys, roller rinks, etc.)
ZZ.	Restaurants (not of the drive-in, convenience or drive-through type), cafes, on and off-sale liquor.
AAA.  Sewing machine sales and service.
BBB.  Sexually oriented use - principal and accessory. CCC.  Shoe repair.
DDD	Shoe stores. EEE.  Tailoring services. FFF.	Tanning salons.
GGG. Theaters, not of the outdoor drive-in type. HHH.  Therapeutic massage.
III.	Toy stores.
JJJ.	Travel bureaus, transportation ticket offices.
 
KKK.  Upholstery shops.
LLL.	Variety stores and stores of similar nature.
MMM. Other uses of the same general character as the permitted uses listed above as determined by the City.

57.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the B-3 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.

A.	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.

B.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



57.4	USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the B-3 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.

A.	Open or outdoor sales, rental or display as an accessory use in association with an allowed principal use subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.A of this Ordinance.

B.	Temporary, outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.

C.	Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.



57.5	ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in a B-3 District:

A.	Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of the principal use.

B.	Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.

C.	Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, but not including semi-trailer trucks.

D.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as
 
regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.



57.6	CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the B-3 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).

A.	Accessory, enclosed retail, rental or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that:

1.	Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Business District.

2.	Such use does not constitute more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area and not more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.

B.	Automobile car washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-service), provided that:

1.	Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate an appropriate number of vehicles and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.

2.	Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered.

3.	The entire area other than occupied by the building or planting shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which will control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

4.	Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

C.	Convenience Store with Gasoline. Grocery and/or food operations, with convenience gas (no vehicle service or repair), provided that:

1.	Convenience/deli food is of the take-out type only and that no provision for seating or consumption on the premises is provided. Furthermore, that the enclosed area devoted to such activity, use and merchandise shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area.

2.	That any sale of food items is subject to applicable State and/or County regulations. Written documentation of compliance with such County and/or State regulations shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.
 
3.	That the approximate area and location devoted to non-automotive merchandise sales shall be specified in general terms in the application and in the conditional use permit. No exterior sales or storage shall be permitted.

4.	The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 AM to 12:00 PM, unless extended by the City Council.

5.	Motor fuel activities shall be installed in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks shall be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and unloading operations do not conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.

6.	A protective canopy located over pump island may be an accessory structure on the property and may be located twenty (20) feet or more from the front lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off site is maintained.

7.	The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

8.	Each light standard base shall be landscaped.

9.	Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, and shall be subject to the approval of the City.

10.	An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by parked cars or moving vehicles.






D.	Drive-in and convenience food establishments, provided that:

1.	At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five (5) feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 16 of this Ordinance.

2.	Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered.

3.	Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous curbs not less
 
than six (6) inches high above the parking lot or driveway grade.

4.	Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements, shall comply with Section 20 of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

5.	The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or plantings shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

E.	Motor vehicle fuel sales, truck stop, auto repair - minor and tire and battery stores and services, provided that:

1.	Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the standards and requirements imposed by this Ordinance for motor fuel stations shall apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to other requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property.

2.	The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings shall be surfaced with blacktop or concrete to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

3.	Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed.

4.	Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered.

5.	Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, shall comply with Section 22 of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

6.	No outside storage, sales, service, or rental shall be permitted.

7.	Sale of products other than those specifically mentioned in this sub-section shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

8.	All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the City Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by modifying the conditions.

F.	Personal wireless antennas not located on an existing structure or tower, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
 

57.7	LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the B-3 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Lot Area: One (1) acre.

B.	Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet

C.	Setbacks:

 
1.	Front yards:
 


Setbacks From Right-
of-Way Lines	Street Class

35 feet	State/Federal Highway
35 feet	County Road
35 feet	Local Street
 

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yards: Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yards: Twenty (20) feet.

4.	Buffer Yards: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet if abutting a residential district.
57.8	MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:

A.	Principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet

B.	Accessory building:  Per Section  15.04 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 58.	B-W, BUSINESS/WAREHOUSE DISTRICT


Subdivision

58.1	Purpose
58.2	Permitted Uses
58.3	Interim Uses
58.4	Uses by Administrative Permit
58.5	Accessory Uses
58.6	Conditional Uses
58.7	Lot Requirements and Setbacks
58.8	Maximum Building Height



58.1	PURPOSE: The purpose of the B-W, Business/Warehouse District is to provide for the establishment of wholesale and retail trade of large volume or bulk commercial items, storage and warehousing. The overall character of the B-W District is intended to be transitional in nature, thus industrial uses allowed within this District shall be limited to those which can compatibly exist adjacent to commercial and lower intensity activities. The B-W District is intended to be implemented for those areas designated for business- warehouse land uses by the Comprehensive Plan.



58.2	PERMITTED USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in a B-W District:

A.	Automobile repair - major
B.	Commercial printing establishments.
C.	Commercial/professional offices.
D.	Conference centers.
E.	Contractor operations.
F.	Essential services.
G.	Governmental and public utility buildings and structures.
H.	Indoor commercial recreation.
I.	Laboratories.
J.	Lumber  yards,  building  material  sales,  and  similar  bulk  type  retail  sales establishments.
K.	Motor vehicle, farm implement, and recreation equipment sales, services and repair and structures accessory thereto.
L.	Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure, as regulated by Section 29 of this Chapter.

M.	Restaurants (not of the drive-in, convenience food or drive-through type), on and off-sale liquor.
 
N.	Sexually oriented business - principal and accessory.
O.	Truck terminals.
P.	Wholesale showrooms/warehousing.
Q.	Other uses of the same general character as the permitted uses listed above as determined by the City.

58.3	INTERIM USES:  Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the B-W District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.

A.	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.

B.	Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



58.4	USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in a B-W District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.

A.	Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.

B.	Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.



58.5	ACCESSORY USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in a B-W District:

A.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses allowed in Sections 58.02 and
58.06 of this Ordinance, but not including outside storage/sales, etc.

B.	Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance, including semi- trailer trucks.

C.	Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.

D.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
 

58.6	CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in a B-W District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).

A.	Open and outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use provided:

1.	The  storage  area  is  landscaped,  fenced,  and  screened  from  view  of neighboring uses and abutting Residential Districts.

2.	Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way.

3.	Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced.

4.	All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences.

5.	The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance.

B.	Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use provided that:

1.	Outside sales areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting residential district.

2.	All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences.

3.	Areas are asphalt or concrete surfaced.

4.	The use does not take up parking space or loading areas as required for conformity to this Ordinance.

5.	Additional parking, pursuant to Section 20 of this Ordinance is provided for said space.

C.	Manufacturing,  compounding,  assembly,  packaging,  treatment  or  storage  of products and materials provided that:
1.	The proposed use complies with the performance standards outlined in Section 15 and all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.

D.	Personal wireless service towers and antennas not located on a public structure, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.
 

58.7	LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-W District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Lot Area: One (1) acre.

B.	Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet

C.	Setbacks:
1.	Front yards: Setbacks
From Right-
of-Way Lines	Road Class

35 feet                     State/Federal Highway
35 feet                     County Road
35 feet                     Local Street

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets that bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yards: Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yards: Twenty (20) feet.

4.	Buffer Yards: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet if abutting a residential district.

58.8	MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:

A.	Principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet

B.	Accessory building: Per Section 15.04 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 59 -  RESERVED
 
SECTION 60.	I-1, LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Subdivision

60.1	Purpose
60.2	Permitted Uses
60.3	Interim Uses
60.4	Uses by Administrative Permit
60.5	Accessory Uses
60.6	Conditional Uses
60.7	Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
60.8	Maximum Site Coverage
60.9	Maximum Building Height



60.1	PURPOSE: It is the intent of the I-1 Limited Industrial District to provide for the establishment of industrial development which can compatibly exist adjacent to both lower intensity businesses and high intensity manufacturing uses. The location of such industrial uses shall be consistent with the general locations shown in the Comprehensive Plan.



60.2	PERMITTED USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the I-1 District:

A.	Automobile repair - major.

B.	Contractor operations.

C.	Dog kennels.

D.	Essential services.

E.	Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.

F.	Laboratories.

G.	Machine shops.

H.	Manufacturing or assembly of a wide variety of products that produces no exterior noise, glare, fumes, obnoxious products, by-products or wastes, or creates other objectionable impact on the environment, including the generation of large volumes of traffic. Examples of such uses are:

1.	Fabrication or assembly of  small products such as optical, electronic, pharmaceutical, medical supplies and equipment.
 

2.	Printing and publishing.

I.	Mini-storage.

J.	Offices related to other allowed uses (limited to fifty (50) percent of the principal structure).

K.	Personal wireless service towers and antennas as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

L.	Radio and television stations.

M.	Sexually oriented businesses, principal and accessory.

N.	Trade schools.

O.	Warehousing and indoor storage excluding explosives and hazardous waste.

P.	Wholesale showrooms.



60.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the I-1 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.

A.	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.



60.4	USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this Section, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the I-1 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.

A.	Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.

B.	Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.




60.5	ACCESSORY USES:  Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the I-1 District:

A.	Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the
 
principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of the principal use and shall be of the same material and design as the principal use.

B.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

C.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.



60.6	CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the I-1 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.02 of this Ordinance).

A.	Accessory, enclosed retail, rental, or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that:

1.	Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Business District.

2.	Such use does not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the principal building.

B.	Commercial and professional offices within the principal structure in excess of that which is allowed in this district or as a freestanding principal use.

C.	Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility microwave antennas, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

D.	Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in excess of three and one-half (3.5) meters in diameter, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that:



1.	Outside service areas are fenced and screened from view of the public right- of-way, neighboring residential uses, or an abutting Residential District in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

2.	The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this Ordinance.
 

3.	Sales area is hard surfaced to control dust.

F.	Open and outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use provided that:

1.	The  storage  area  is  landscaped,  fenced,  and  screened  from  view  of neighboring uses and abutting residential zoning and public rights-of-way.

2.	The storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced unless specifically approved by the City Council.

3.	The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance.



60.7	LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a I-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Lot Area: One (1) acre.

B.	Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet

C.	Setbacks:

1.	Front yards:

Setbacks From Right-
of-Way Lines	Street Class

35 feet	State/Federal Highway
35 feet	County Road
35 feet	Local Street




Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side Yard: Ten (10) feet.

3.	Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet
 
4.	Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet in abutting a residential district.



60.8	MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE:

A.	Building and Structure: Thirty (30) percent

B.	Hard surface including buildings and parking/driveway areas: Eighty-five (85) percent.



60.9	MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:  Thirty-five (35) feet.
 
SECTION 61. I-2, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Subdivision

61.1	Purpose
61.2	Application of Performance Requirements
61.3	Permitted Uses
61.4	Interim Uses
61.5	Uses by Administrative Permit
61.6	Accessory Uses
61.7	Conditional Uses
61.8	Lot Area Requirements and Setbacks
61.9	Maximum Site Coverage by Building
61.10	Maximum Building Height



61.1	PURPOSE: It is the intent of the I-2 General Industrial District to provide areas suitable for the location of general industrial activities which have adequate and convenient access to major streets and provide effective controls for “nuisance” and pollution characteristics. It is further the intent of this District to encourage industrial development in a compact and orderly manner consistent with the general locations shown in the Comprehensive Plan providing a compatible relationship with other land uses where a full complement of urban services are provided.



61.2	APPLICATION OF PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS: All uses provided for
under  the  I-2  District  shall  show  proof  of  ability  to  comply  with  the  performance requirements of this Ordinance prior to issuance of any construction permit.



61.3	PERMITTED USES:	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the I-2 District:

A.	Appliance assembly and warehousing, machine shops, freight terminals and classification yards, concrete products plants, building materials production and clothing or apparel manufacturing and similar uses.

B.	Automobile repair - major.

C.	Bakeries, wholesale.

D.	Contractor operations.

E.	Distribution centers.
 

F.	Essential services.

G.	Food processing facilities.

H.	Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.

I.	Laboratories.

J.	Machine shops.

K.	Manufacturing or assembly of a wide variety of products that produces no exterior noise, glare, fumes, obnoxious products, by-products or wastes, or creates other objectionable impact on the environment, including the generation of large volumes of traffic. Examples of such uses are:

1.	Fabrication or assembly of  small products such as optical, electronic, pharmaceutical, medical supplies and equipment.

2.	Printing and publishing.

L.	Mini-storage.

M.	Offices related to other allowed uses (limited to fifty (50) percent of the principal structure).

N.	Personal wireless service towers and antennas, including necessary equipment buildings, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

O.	Radio and television stations.

P.	Trade schools.

Q.	Truck terminals.

R.	Warehousing and indoor storage excluding explosives and hazardous waste.

S.	Wholesale showrooms.






61.4	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the I-2 District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance.
 
A.       Farms, farmsteads, and farming.



61.5	USES ALLOWED BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, performance standards established by this Ordinance, and processing requirements of Section 6, the following are uses allowed in the I-2 District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.

A.	Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.

B.	Temporary outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in section 55.04.B of this Ordinance.



61.6	ACCESSORY USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the I-2 District:

A.	Commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of the principal use.

B.	Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.

C.	Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance including semi-trailer trucks.

D.	Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite dish TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.



61.7	CONDITIONAL USES: The following are conditional uses in the I-2 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures and performance standards set forth in and regulated by Sections 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance).

A.	Accessory, enclosed retail, rental, service, or processing, manufacturing activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that:
 
1.	Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Business District.

2.	Such use does not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the principal building.

B.	Commercial and professional offices within the principal structure in excess of that which is allowed in this district or as a freestanding principal use.

C.	Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public utility microwave antennas, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

D.	Commercial, private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas in excess of three and one-half (3.5) meters in diameter, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that:

1.	Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.

2.	Outside sales areas are fenced and screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting residential zoning district in compliance with Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

3.	The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this Ordinance.

4.	Sales area is hard surfaced to control dust.

F.	Open and outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use provided that:

1.	The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting residential zoning districts and public rights-of- way.

2.	Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced.



3.	The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance.

G.	Storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which could decompose by demolition; refuse and garbage disposal; crude oil; bulk fuel, gasoline or other liquid storage provided that:
 

1.	At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than twenty-five
(25) feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 16 of this Ordinance.

2.	Each light standard base shall be landscaped.

3.	Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, shall comply with Section 20 of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

4.	No outside storage except as allowed in compliance with Section 61.07.E of this Ordinance.

5.	All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the City Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by modifying the conditions.

H.	Waste facilities provided that:

1.	All applicable federal, state and/or county permits are obtained including, but not limited to:

a.	The Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

b.	The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).

c.	The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR).

2.	Any applicable environmental review requirements outlined in Section 9 of this Ordinance are satisfactorily met.

3.	A financial guarantee in a form deemed appropriate by the City Attorney is provided to ensure the following minimum activities:

a.	Completion of site improvements.
b.	Emergency clean up and correction.

c.	Closure and post closure activities.

4.	The facility is subject to periodic monitoring as determined by the City.

5.	The facility is provided a minimum of two (2) independent emergency access escape routes, neither of which may traverse residentially zoned areas.
 

6.	The facility is set back a minimum one thousand (1,000) feet from all storm water holding areas, natural drainage facilities and wetlands.

7.	All storm water runoff is held on site prior to release into natural drainage ways and the City’s storm drainage system.

8.	The outside storage of materials, containers or disposal facilities involving hazardous waste is prohibited.

9.	The outside storage of materials, containers or disposal facilities involving non-hazardous materials is enclosed and screened as outlined in Section
15.07 of this Ordinance.

10.	The loading and/or unloading of waste materials is conducted within buildings and upon an impermeable floor surface.

11.	All development, operation, maintenance and closure/conversion plans are subject to City approval.

12.	A sign indicating the facility’s inventory of waste materials by type and location is posted at the main entrance of the site.

13.	All hazardous waste materials stored on the site are clearly designated.

14.	All facility employees are subject to emergency training programs, the procedures and techniques of which are subject to City approval.

15.	Emergency preparedness plans which:

a.	Establish procedures for handling ruptures, spills and the like.

b.	Alert applicable agencies and area property owners.



c.	Establish provisions for emergency evacuation that are provided to and approved by the City.

16.	All containers used for the outside storage of waste materials are properly cleaned prior to storage and maintained in a clean manner so as not to attract vectors or cause objectionable odors.



61.8	LOT  AREA  REQUIREMENTS  AND  SETBACKS:	The  following  minimum requirements shall be observed in the I-2 District, subject to additional requirements,
 
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance.

A.	Lot Area: Two (2) acres.

B.	Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet

C.	Setbacks:

1.	Front yards:

Setbacks                 Setbacks
From                       From Right-
Centerline	of-Way Lines	Street Class

130 feet                      65 feet                  State/Federal Highway
130 feet                      65 feet                  County Road
65 feet                       35 feet                  Local Street

Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

2.	Side yard: Twenty (20) feet.

3.	Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.

4.	Buffer Yard: The side yard or rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet in abutting a residential district.

61.9	MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE BY BUILDINGS:  Fifty (50) percent of the total lot area.

61.10	MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:  Thirty-five (35) feet.
 
-



SECTION 62
INS, INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT

Subdivision

62.1	Purpose
62.2	Permitted Uses
62.3	Interim Uses
62.4	Uses by Administrative Permit 62.05  Accessory Uses
62.6	Conditional Uses
62.7	Lot Requirements and Setbacks
62.8	Height Requirements



62.1	PURPOSE: The INS District is intended to provide a specific zoning district for facilities devoted to serving the public. It is unique in that the primary objective of uses within this district is the provision of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than the sale of goods or services. It is intended that uses within such a district will be compatible with adjoining development, and they normally will be located on an arterial street or thoroughfare .



62.2	PERMITTED   USES:	Subject  to  applicable  provisions  of  this  Ordinance,  the following are permitted uses in the INS District:

A.	Day care nurseries.

B.	Essential services.

C.	Nursing  homes,  residential  care  facilities,  and  similar  group  housing  but  not including hospitals, sanitariums, or similar institutions.

D.	Parks, and recreational fields and structures .

E.		Personal wireless  service towers and antennas  located on a public structure as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

F.	Pre-school, elementary, junior  or senior high schools having a regular course of study accredited to the State of Minnesota.

G.	Publicly   owned   civic   or   cultural   buildings,   such   as   libraries,	City  offices, auditoriums,  public administration buildings and historical developments.
 
-

H.		Religious   institutions,   such   as   churches ,   chapels ,   temples ,   mosques ,   and synagogues.



62.3	INTERIM USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the INS District and are governed by Section 5 of this Ordinance:

A	Farms, farmsteads, and farming.



62.4	USES  ALLOWED	BY  ADMINISTRATIVE	PERMIT:	Subject  to  applicable  . provisions  of this  Section,  performance  standards  established  by this  Ordinance  and processing  requirements  of  Section  6,  the  following  uses  may  be allowed  in an  INS District by administrative permit as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator :

A	Temporary  outdoor promotional events and sales subject to the same provisions as required in Section 55.04.8 of this Ordinance .

8.		Other uses of the same general character as those listed as a permitted use in this district.



62.5	ACCESSORY  USES: Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the INS District:

A	Accessory  uses customarily  incidental to the uses  permitted  in Sections 62.02, 62.03, and 62.05 of this Ordinance .

8.	Off-street loading as regulated by Section 21 of this Ordinance.

C.	Off-street parking as regulated by Section 20 of this Ordinance.

D.	Parks, playgrounds or athletic fields.

E.		Radio and television receiving antennas including single satellite  dish  TVROs three and one-half (3.5) meters or less in diameter , short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio stations  and television  receivers, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance .

F.	Signs as regulated by Section 31 of this Ordinance.
 
-

62.06 CONDITIONAL USES: Subject to applicable provision of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an INS District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 4.02 and 4.04 of this Ordinance .)

A	Automobile parking lots as a principal use provided that the use and design is in conformance with Section 20 of this Ordinance .

B.	Cemeteries or memorial gardens provided that:

1.	The site is landscaped in accordance with Section 15.07.

2.	The use is available to the "public".

3.	The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district.

4.	The use meets the minimum setback requirements for principal structures.

5.	The site accesses on a collector or arterial street.

C.	Colleges, seminaries, and other institutions of higher education .

D.	Commercial  and  public  radio  and  television  transmitting  antennas,  and  public utility  microwave antennas, as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.

E.	Community centers.

F.	Correctional facilities and shelters provided that:

1.	Facilities shall comply with all applicable codes and regulations and shall have, current and in effect, the appropriate state licenses.

2.	On-site services and treatment shall be for residents and inmates of the facility only, and shall not be for non-residents or persons outside the facility.

3.	All new buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be consistent with the scale and character of the buildings in the neighborhood . Exterior building materials shall also be harmonious with other buildings in the neighborhood.

4.	No correctional facility shall be closer than one thousand three hundred twenty  (1,320) feet from another licensed correctional facility or from any
 

property	designated	on   the	Land   Use   Plan   as	residential	and/or designated on the official zoning map as residential.

5.	The conditional use permit is only valid as long as a valid state license is held by the operator of the facility where such license is required.

6.	Appropriate transition to neighboring property shall be provided by landscaping and  site design consistent  with  the  City  ordinances  and policies.

G.	Day care, social services or other non-directly related worship type activities as an accessory use within a religious institutional building(s).

H.	Hospitals, sanitariums , or similar institutions provided that:

1.	Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas. Said area shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with Section
15.06 of this Ordinance.

2.	All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly adhered to and all required operating permits are secured.

I.	Living quarters which are provided as an accessory use to a principal use in Section 62.02 or to a conditional use in this section provided that:

1.	The living quarters shall not be used as rental property.

2.	A maximum of one (1) such dwelling shall be allowed.

3.	There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility (i.e., caretaker, security, etc.).

J.	Medical, dental and chiropractic offices and clinics, commercial and professional offices, funeral homes and mortuaries .

K.		Other  uses  of  the  same  general  character  as  those  listed  in  Sections  62.02, 62.04, and 62.06 of this Ordinance.

L.		Outdoor  recreational  areas  including  golf  courses,   country  clubs,  swimming pools, and similar facilities.

M.	Reduction in lot area requirements .

N.	Retail commercial activities and personal services, provided that:
 
-

1.	Merchandise is sold at retail.

2.	Personal services are limited to those uses and activities which are allowed as a permitted or permitted accessory use within a B-1 Zoning District.

3.	The retail activity and personal services are located within a  structure whose principal use is not commercial sales.

4.	The retail activity and personal services shall not occupy more than fifteen
(15) percent of the gross floor area of the building.

5.	The retail activity and personal services are not located within a structure whose principle use is residential.

6.	No directly or indirectly illuminated sign or sign in excess of ten  (10) square feet identifying the name of the business shall be visible from the outside of the building.

7.	No signs or posters of any type advertising products for sale or services shall be visible from the outside of the building.

0.		Personal wireless service towers and antennas  not located on a public structure as regulated by Section 29 of this Ordinance.



62.7	LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an INS District subject to additional requirements , exceptions, modifications set forth in this Ordinance:

A      Lot Area - Minimum Site Area.

1.	Five (5) acres unless otherwise specified or reduced by conditional use permit.

2.	Religious institutions - three (3) acres.

3.	Elementary schools - fifteen (15) acres.

4.	Junior high schools - thirty (30) acres.

5.	Senior high schools - fifty (50) acres.

6.	Hospitals - ten (10) acres.
 
-


7.	Community centers - three (3) acres .

B.	Setbacks.

1.	Schools, Hospitals, and Public Works Facilities.

a.	Front Yard.

Setbacks From Right­
of-Way Lines	Street Class

 
65 feet
65 feet
50 feet
 
State/Federal Highway County Road
Local Street
 

Where a lot is located at the intersection of . two (2) or more streets or highways which bound two (2) or more sides of the lot, no building shall project beyond the front yard line of either street.

b.	Side yard: One hundred (100) feet

c.	Rear Yard: One hundred (100) feet

2.	All Other Institutional Uses:

a.	Front  Yard:   Same  as  for  schools,   hospitals,  and  public  works facilities .

b.	Side Yard: Fifty (50) feet.

c.	Rear Yard: Fifty (50) feet.



62.8	HEIGHT  REQUIREMENTS:	The  following  height  requirements  shall  be observed in the INS District:

A.	All  principal  structures  and  their  accessory  buildings  shall  be  limited  to  a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
 
-



SECTION 63
PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT

Subdivision

63.1	Purpose
63.2	Uses
63.3	Requirements, Conditions and Standards for Approving a PUD
63.4	Development Standards
·	63.05  Sketch Plan
63.6	General Plan
63.7	Final Plan
63.8	PUD Evaluation
63.9	Plan Modification/Amendment of a PUD
63.10	General Requirements



63.01 PURPOSE: The purpose  of the PUD,  Planned Unit Development District is to provide comprehensive procedures and standards intended to allow greater flexibility in the development of neighborhoods and/or non-residential areas by incorporating design modifications and/or a mixture of uses.  The PUD process is intended to encourage:

A		Innovations in development to the end that the growing demands for all styles of economic expansion may be met by greater variety in type, design, and placement of structures and by the conservation and more efficient use of land in such developments.

B.	Higher  standards  of  site  and  building  design  through  the  use  of  trained  and experienced land planners, architects, landscape architects and engineers.

C.	More convenience in location and design of development and service facilities.

D.	The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural topography, wetlands, woodlands, and geologic features and  the prevention of soil erosion which are over and above minimum standards and expectations.

E.	A creative use of land and related physical development which allows a phased and orderly development and use pattern.

F.	An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby lowering development costs, long term maintenance expenses,  and public investments.
 
-

G.	A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan. (PUD is not intended as a means to vary  applicable planning and zoning principles.)

H.	A more desirable and creative environment than might be possible through the strict application of zoning and subdivision regulations of the City.



63.2	USES: All permitted, permitted accessory, conditional uses, interim uses, and uses by administrative permit contained in Sections 45 through 61 of this Ordinance which are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan shall be treated as potentially allowable uses within a PUD District.



63.3	REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS AND STANDARDS FOR APPROVING A PUD:

A    General Standards :

1.	Comprehensive Plan Consistency : The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan.

2.	Common Open Space: Common private or public open space  and facilities at least sufficient to meet the minimum requirements  established in the Comprehensive Plan and such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents/occupants of the PUD may be provided within the area of the PUD development.

3.	Operating and Maintenance Requirements for PUD Common Open Space Facilities: Whenever common private or public open space or service facilities are provided within the PUD, the PUD shall contain provisions to assure the continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service facilities to a predetermined reasonable standard. Common private or public open space and service facilities within a PUD may be placed under the ownership of one or more of the following, as approved by the City Council:

a.	Dedicated to the public, where a community-wide use is anticipated and the City Council agrees to accept the dedication.

b.	Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated.

c.	Property owners association , provided all of the following conditions are met:
 
-



1)	Prior to the use, occupancy, sale or the execution of contracts for sale of individual buildings, units, lots, parcels, tracts	or common areas, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent document or a document such as specified by Minnesota Statutes 515, Article 2 and a set of floor plans such as specified by Minnesota Statutes 515, Article 2-110 shall be filed with St. Augusta. Said filing with the City is to be made prior to the filings of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of Stearns County.

2)	The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or equivalent document shall specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, lots, parcels, or tracts shall subject said properties to the terms of said declaration.

3)	The  declaration  of  covenants ,  conditions  and   restrictions shall provide that  an owner's  association  or corporation  shall be formed and that all owners · shall be members of said association or corporation which  shall  maintain  all  properties and common areas in good repair and which shall .assess individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or common  costs.  This  declaration  shall  be  subject  to   the review and approval of the City Attorney. The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of the individual owner  through  establishing  adequate  private  control.

4)	The declaration shall additionally,  amongst  other  things, provide that  in the  event  the  association  or  corporation  fails to  maintain  properties  in  accordance  with  the   applicable rules and regulations of St.  Augusta or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due and  in the event St. Augusta City incurs any  expenses  in enforcing  its rules	and regulations, which · said expenses are not immediately  reimbursed  by  the  association  or   corporation, then the City  shall have the right to assess each property its prorata	share  of  said  expenses.   Such   assessments, together with  interest  thereon  and  costs  of  collection,  shall be a lien on each property against which each such assessment   is made.

5)	Membership must be mandatory for each owner, and any successive buyer.
 
-



6)	The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a limited period of years , unless specifically approved by the City.

4.	Staging of Public and Common Open Space: When a PUD provides for common private  or public open space, and is planned for a staged development over a period of time, the total area of common or public open space or land escrow security in any stage of development shall, at a minimum, bear the same relationship to the total open space to be provided in the entire PUD as the stages or units completed or under development bear to the entire PUD.

5.	Density: The maximum allowable density in a PUD Zoning District shall be determined by standards negotiated and agreed upon between the applicant and the City. In all cases, the negotiated standards shall be consistent with the development policies as contained in the St. Augusta Comprehensive Plan.

6.	Principal Buildings: No More than one (1) principal building may be constructed on each platted lot within a PUD.

7.	Land Use/Housing Type: A PUD which involves only one (1) land use or housing type may be allowed, provided that it is otherwise consistent with the stated purposes and objectives of this section and the Comprehensive Plan.

8.	Ordinance Modifications: The uniqueness of each PUD requires that specifications and standards for streets, utilities, public facilities and the approval of land subdivisions may be subject to modifications from the City ordinances generally governing them. The City Council may therefore approve streets, utilities, public facilities and land subdivisions which are not in strict compliance with usual specifications or ordinance requirements where it is found that such are not required in the interests of the City.

9.	Utilities: In any PUD, all utility installations and connections including telephone, electricity, gas, telecable, public sewer and water, private septic systems and wells shall conform to the applicable provisions of the St. Augusta Subdivision Ordinance, unless otherwise approved by the City Council.

10.	Streets: All streets shall conform to the design standards contained in the St. Augusta Subdivision Ordinance unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
 
-



11.	Fencing/Screening/Landscaping: In any PUD, fencing, screening , and landscaping shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section 15.07 of this Ordinance.

12.	Setbacks:

a.	The front, rear and side yard restrictions on the periphery of the property to which the PUD is applied shall at a minimum be the same as the setbacks which are common to the area and generally consistent with this Ordinance.

b.	No building shall be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb line along those roadways which are part of the internal street ·pattern.                            -

c.	No building within the project shall be nearer to another building, than one-half (1/2) the sum of the building heights of the two (2) buildings.

13.	Height: The maximum  building height to be considered within a PUD Zoning District shall comply with the height standards specified within this Ordinance in general.

8.		Benefit: The proposed PUD shall accomplish one or more of the objectives stated in Section 63.01 and shall not simply be for the enhanced economic gain of the applicant. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to demonstrate compliance with this requirement.



63.04  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:

A		Purpose: The  purpose of this section is to establish standards for residential, non-residential, and mixed use residential and non-residential PUD Zoning Districts, in addition to those standards contained elsewhere in this Ordinance for all PUD projects. All PUD projects shall be developed in accordance with the following residential area standards:

1.	There shall be no minimum lot or area requirement for a tract of land for which a PUD Zoning District is proposed.

2.	There shall be no minimum frontage on a public street required for a tract of land for which a PUD is proposed.
 
-


3.	The tract of land for which a PUD is proposed shall have municipal water and  sewer  available  to  it or  shall  provide approved  well  locations  and comply with City and/or County septic system requirements.

4.	For PUD Zoning District projects, the performance standards, area requirements	and construction limitations of generally comparable conventional zoning districts shall apply to the project,  excepting those standards to be modified, as determined by the City Council and as provided above in Section 63.03, Subd. A.1 and A.3.

5.	Off-street parking and loading facilities for a residential PUD shall be provided in accordance with Sections 20 and 21 of this Ordinance.

6.	In addition to the above standards, the City Council may impose such other requirements for individual PUD Districts as are reasonable and as the Board deems necessary to protect and promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community and the surrounding area.



63.5	SKETCH PLAN:

A		Application Procedures and Information Requirements: Prior to the filing of a formal application, the applicant shall be required to submit a sketch plan of the project to the Zoning Administrator. Such plan shall. be processed according to the information requirements, standards and procedures for preliminary  site plans as established by Section 10.03.B of this Ordinance.

B.		Exemptions: At the request of the applicant and upon the approval of the Zoning Administrator, minor PUD projects or projects of a non-controversial nature may be exempt from the sketch plan process and may proceed to the general plan, as regulated by Section 63.06 of this Section.



63.6	GENERAL PLAN:

A	Application Procedure: PUD zoning applications shall be processed according to the evaluation criteria  and procedures outlined in Section 10.03.C of this Ordinance.

B.	Information Requirement:

1.	The information required for all PUD general plan applications shall be as specified in Section 10.06 of this Ordinance.
 
-


2.	The Zoning Administrator , Planning Commission , and/or City Council may excuse an applicant from submitting  any specific  item of  information or document required by this section which it finds to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific PUD being considered.

C.	Zoning Enactment: The formal establishment of the PUD District shall take place in conjunction with City Council approval of the general plan.



63.7	FINAL PLAN: After approval of a sketch plan for the PUD and approval of a general plan for all or a portion of the proposed PUD, the applicant shall submit the following material for review by the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of a building permit(s).

A.		Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants  prior to sale of any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance of any public or common open space or service facility.

8.	All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land and recording of documents.

C.	Final architectural working drawings of all structures .

D.	Any other plans, agreements or specifications necessary for the Zoning Administrator	to review the proposed construction. All work must be in conformance with the Minnesota State Building Code.



63.8	PUD EVALUATION: If periodic review of a PUD is included as a condition to the approval of a PUD, such a project shall be reviewed by the City Council. At such times , the City Council, at its discretion, may take additional testimony on the PUD.



63.9	PLAN MODIFICATION/AMENDMENT OF A PUD:

A.		Minor Modifications/Amendment: Plan modifications/amendments qualifying as minor as defined by Section 10.07.A of this Ordinance may be processed and approved pursuant to that section.

8.		Major Modification/Amendment:  The same  review procedure  shall  be followed for a major/modification/amendment of a PUD as was followed with  respect to the  applicant's  general  plan, outlined  in Section 63.06  and pursuant to Section
10.07.B of this Ordinance.
 
-



63.10  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:

A		Records: The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all PUD  zones approved by the City, including information on a project's allowed uses, all pertinent project plans, any conditions imposed on a project by the City Council, and such other information as the Zoning Administrator  may deem appropriate.

B.	Withdrawal of an Application: Any application under this section may be withdrawn by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior to final City Council action thereon.

C.	Platting of a PUD: In the event that a PUD is to be subdivided into lots or parcels for the purpose of separate ownership, such PUD shall be platted under the platting procedures and according to standards contained in the St. Augusta Subdivision Ordinance and the related requirements of Stearns County. The preliminary plat shall be processed in conjunction with the general plan as outlined in Section 63.06. A separate action on the final plat shall be processed before the City Council prior to the final stage of the PUD.

D.	Conveyance of Property Within a PUD: In the event that any real property within an approved PUD is conveyed in total or in part, the buyer(s) thereof shall be bound by all provisions of the PUD and  the general plan for that project. However, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as to make such conveyed property non-conforming with regard to normal zoning standards as long as the conveyed property conforms with the approved PUD and the general plan for a project.

E.		Development Agreement: Prior to the approval of the general plan, the applicant shall enter into a development agreement as may be required for site improvements by the Subdivision Ordinance or this Ordinance for the project in question. Once approved, the development agreement shall be recorded with Stearns County and documentation of such action shall be provided to the Zoning  Administrator.

F.		Issuance of Building Permits: Following approval by the City Council of a PUD general plan and recording  of the PUD development contract with Stearns County, the Building Official may issue a building permit for such structures in compliance with this Ordinance.
 

SECTION 64
S, SHORELAND MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT

Subdivision

64.1	:  Purpose
64.2	: Statutory Authorization
64.3	: Shoreland Districts
64.4	District Application
64.5	:  Boundaries
64.6	: Shoreland Classification System
64.7	: Land Use Districts Descriptions
64.8	: Agriculture/Residential Standards - Lakes
64.9	: Commercial/Industrial Standards - Lakes
64.10	:  Agriculture , Residential, Commercial and Industrial Standards - Rivers/Streams 64.11:  Additional Special Provisions
64.12	Non-Conformities
64.13	:  Administration
64.14	Variances
64.15	Conditional Uses
64.16	:  Subdivision/Platting Provisions 64.17:  Planned Unit Development (PUDs)
64.18:  Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources



64.1	: PURPOSE: The intent of this Section is to reduce the effects of overcrowding, to prevent pollution of waters of the Community, to provide ample space on lots for sanitary facilities, to minimize flood damages, to maintain property values, and to maintain natural characteristics of shorelands and adjacent water areas by controlling lot sizes, placement of structures on lots, and alteration of shoreland areas.



64.2	: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION: This Section is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103A, 8, E, F, G, and I, Minnesota Regulations, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462.



64.3	: SHORELAND DISTRICTS: The shorelands within the City of St. Augusta  are hereby designated as shoreland districts and the requirements set forth in this Section shall govern development and other activities within these districts. The classification of the shoreland areas shall govern the use, alteration and development of these areas according to said classification as per M.S. 103F.201, .205, .211, .215, and .221, and Minnesota Regulations NR 82-84.
 
64.4	: DISTRICT APPLICATION: The Shoreland District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon all zoning districts as contained herein as existing or amended by this Ordinance and official Zoning Map. The regulations and requirements imposed by the Shoreland District shall be in addition to those established for districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of districts, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.



64.5	: BOUNDARIES: The boundaries of the Shoreland Overlay District are established within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of the surface water depending on the size of the surface water as indicated on the official Zoning Map.

SURFACE WATER	DISTANCE  (FEET)*

 
Greater than ten (10) acres (Table 1)
 
1,000
 

Rivers and Streams (draining an area greater
than two (2) square miles)***	300**

*		The practical distance may be less whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographical divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and prevent flowage toward the surface water.
 
**

***
 
The distance requirement shall be increased to the limit of the floodplain when the floodplain is greater than three hundred (300) feet.
Does not include Wild, Scenic, and Recreational River
 


64.6	: SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM: The surface waters affected by this Ordinance and which require controlled development of their shoreland (Shoreland District) shall be shown on the official Zoning Map established by Subd. 44.03 of this Ordinance. Surface waters generally greater than ten (10) acres and given an identification number by the State of Minnesota are defined and listed below.

A.	Lakes Classification System:

1.	Natural Environmental Lakes: Natural environmental lakes are generally small, often shallow lakes with limited capacities for assimilating the impacts of development and recreational use. They often have adjacent lands with substantial constraints for development such as high water tables, exposed bedrocks, and unsuitable soils.

These lakes, particularly in rural areas, usually do not have much existing development or recreational use.
 

Natural Environment Lakes
 

Protected Waters Inventory ID #
 




2.	Recreational Development Lakes: Recreational development lakes are generally medium sized lakes of varying depths and shapes with a variety of land form, soil, and ground water situations on the lands around them. They often are characterized by moderate levels of recreational use and existing development. Development consists mainly of seasonal and year-round residences and recreationally-oriented commercial uses. Many of these have capacities for accommodating additional development and use.

 
Recreational Development Lakes
 
Protected Waters Inventory ID#
 




B.	Rivers and Streams Classification System:

1.	Agricultural Rivers: Agricultural river segments are located in well-roaded, intensively cultivated areas of the western and southern regions of the state. Cultivated crops are the predominant land use, with some pasture and occasional	feedlots, small municipalities, and small forested areas. Residential development is not common, but some year-round residential use is occurring within commuting distances of major cities. Some intensive recreational use occurs on these river segments in particular areas,  but overall recreational use of these waters and adjacent lands is low. Although potential exists for additional development and recreation, water quality constraints and competing land uses, particularly agriculture, will inhibit expansions .

Agricultural River	Legal Description




2.	Tributary Rivers: Tributary river segments consists of water courses mapped in the Protected Waters Inventory that have not been assigned one of the river classes. These segments have a wide variety of existing land and recreational use characteristics.  The segments  have considerable  potential for additional development and recreational use, particularly  those  located near roads and within cities.

Tributary Rivers	Legal Descriptions
 
64.7	:  LAND USE DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS:

A		Criteria for Designation: The land use districts in Subd. 64.07.B and the delineation of a land use district's boundaries on the official Zoning Map, shall be consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan and the following criteria, considerations, and objectives:

1.	General Considerations and Criteria for all Land Uses:

a.	Preservation of natural areas.
b.	Present ownership and development of shoreland areas.
c.	Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities.
d.	Topographic  characteristics.
e.	Vegetative  cover.
f.	In-water physical characteristics, values, and constraints.
g.	Recreational use of the surface water.
h.	Road and service center accessibility.
i.	Socio-economic development needs and plans as they involve water and related land resources.
J.	The   land  requirements   of  industry  which,   by  its  nature,   requires location in shoreland areas.
k.	The necessity to preserve and restore _certain areas having significant historical or ecological value.

2.	Factors and Criteria for Planned Unit Developments:

a.	Existing recreational use of the surface waters and likely increases in use associated with planned unit developments.

b.	Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density.

c.	Suitability of lands for the planned unit development  approach.

d.	Level of current development in the area.

e.	Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped lands.

B.		Allowable Land Uses: The land uses allowable for · the Shoreland Overlay District shall follow the permitted, interim, accessory, and conditional use designations as defined and outlined in the base zoning districts established by Subd. 44.01 of this Ordinance and shall be properly delineated on the official Zoning Map for the shorelands  of St. Augusta.  The land uses shall be further subject to the provisions of Subd. 64.08 of this Section. These land use districts are in conformance with the criteria specified in Minnesota Regulations,  Part 6120.3200,  Subp. 3.
 

64.8	: AGRICULTURE/RESIDENTIAL  STANDARDS - LAKES:

A		Lot and Setback Standards -Lakes: Subject to the other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this Ordinance, the following minimum requirements for lakes shall be observed in the agricultural and residential zoning districts established by Subd. 44. 01 of this Ordinance, which are overlaid by the Shoreland District.

 




1.	Lot Area and Width
a.	Unsewered: Riparian Lots
 
Natural			Recreational Environment		Development Area	Width	Area	Width
 
Single	80,000	200	40,000	150
Duplex	120,000	300	80,000	225
Triplex	160,000	400	120,000	300
Quad	200,000	500	160,000	375

Non-Riparian Lots
Single	80,000	200	40,000	150
Duplex	160,000	400	80,000	265
Triplex	240,000	600	120,000	375
Quad	320,000	800	160,000	490

b.	Sewered: Riparian Lots






Non-Riparian Lots
Single	20,000	125	15,000	75
Duplex	35,000	220	26,000	135
Triplex	52,000	315	38,000	190
Quad	65,000	410	49,000	245

2.	Setbacks from Ordinary
	High Water Mark*
a.	Structures
	Unsewered	150	100
	Sewered	150	75
b.	Sewage Treatment System	.  150	75

..,   ,	3.	Side  Yard   Setbacks
 

	for Property Abutting a Lake	20	20

4.	
Building Height (Ft)**	
35	
35

5.	
Maximum Impervious Surface to Area Ratio	

25%	

25%

*	Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to piers and docks.
Where development exists on both sides of a proposed building site, building setbacks may be altered to more  closely conform to  adjacent building setbacks provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.

**	Agricultural use related buildings, silos , and towers shall be exempt from the building height requirements . Building heights of over 35 feet that are not an exempt agricultural use may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit as regulated under Section 4 of this Ordinance and Subd. 64.15 of this Section .



64.9	:	COMMERCIAUINDUSTRIAL  STANDARDS - LAKES:

A		Lot and Setback Standards - Lakes. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this Ordinance, the following minimum requirements for lakes shall be observed in the business and industrial zoning districts established by Subd. 44.01 of this Ordinance, which are overlaid by the Shoreland District

 



1.	Lot Width
a.	Unsewered
 
Natural	Recreational
Environment	Develol2ment
 
Riparian Lots	200	150
Non-Riparian Lots	200	150
b.	Sewered
Riparian Lots	125	100
Non-Riparian Lots	125	100

2.	Setback from Ordinary High Water Mark*

a.	Commercial/
Industrial	150	100
b.  Impervious Surface
Parking	75	50

3.	Side Yard Setback for
Property Abutt ing Lake	20	20
 


4.	Building Height - Feet**	35	35

5.	
Maximum Impervious		
	Surface to Lot
Area Ratio	
25%	
25%

*	Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to piers and docks.
Where development exists on both sides of a proposed building site, building setbacks may be altered to more closely conform to adjacent building setbacks provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.

**	Agricultural use related buildings, silos, and towers shall be exempt from the building height requirements. Building heights of over 35 feet that are not an exempt agricultural use may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit as regulated under Section 4 of this Ordinance and Subd. 64.15 of this Section.



64.10	:	AGRICULTURE,	RESIDENTIAL,	COMMERCIAL,	AND	INDUSTRIAL STANDARDS -  RIVERS/STREAMS:

A		Lot and Setback Standards - Rivers: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this Ordinance, the following minor requirements for rivers shall be observed in all Zoning  Districts established by Subd. 44.01 of this Ordinance which are overlaid by the Shoreland District.

 


Lot Width
1.	Unsewered
 
Agriculture	Tributarv
 





2.	Sewered
Single	150	75
Duplex	225	115
Triplex	300	150
Quad	375	190
 

Agriculture	Tributary

 
Setback from Ordinary High Water Mark*
1.	Structures
Unsewered 	100
Sewered 	50
 
100
50
 

2.	Sewage Treatment System

Side Yard Setbacks for Property	75	75
Abutting a River or Stream	20	20

Building Height-Feet**	
35	
35

Maximum Impervious		
Surface Area Ratio	25%	25%

*	Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to piers and docks.
Where development exists on both sides of a proposed building site, building setbacks may be altered to more closely conform to adjacent building setbacks provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.

**	Agricultural use related buildings, silos, and towers shall be exempt from the building height requirements. Building heights of over 35 feet that are not an exempt agricultural use may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit as regulated under Section 4 of this Ordinance and Subd. 64.15 of this Ordinance.



64.11	:  ADDITIONAL SPECIAL PROVISIONS:

A.	Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding those in the tables in Sections 64.08, 64.09 and 64.10 can only be allowed if designed and approved as residential planned unit developments under Subd. 64.17 of this Ordinance . Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters shall be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards shall be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building line. The sewer lot area dimensions shall only be used if publicly owned or controlled sewer system service is available to the property.

B.	Subdivisions of duplex, triplexes, and quadraminiums on Natural Environment Lakes shall also meet the following standards:

1.	Each building shall be set back at least two hundred (200) feet from the ordinary high water level;

2.	Each building must have common  sewage  treatment  and water  systems  in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building;
 


3.	Watercraft docking facilities for each lot shall be centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and

4.	No more than twenty-five (25) percent of a lake's shoreland shall  be  in duplex, triplex, or quad developments.

C.	Lots intended as controlled private access to public waters or as recreational areas for use by other than those residents residing on the lot in question is expressly prohibited.

D.	Placement, Design, and Height of Structures:

1.	Placement of Structures on Lots: When more than one setback applied to a site, structures and facilities shall be located to meet all setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone. Subject to other more restrictive limitations as may be imposed by this Ordinance, structures shall be located a follows:

a.	Additional   Structure   Setbacks:	The  following   additional   structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the water body.

Setback From:	Setback (in feet)
(1)	Top of bluff	30
(2)	Unplatted cemetery	50

(3)	Right-of-way line	30
of federal, state,
or county highway .

 

(4)	Right  -of-way   line of street , or other roads or streets not classified.
 
·	(Subject to individual
of town road, public district requirements)
 

b.	Bluff   Impact  Zones:	Structures	and  accessory   facilities,	except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.

c.	Uses Without Water-Oriented  Needs:	Uses without water-oriented needs  shall  be  located  on  lots  or  parcels  without  public  waters
 
frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer , leaf-on conditions.

2.	Design Criteria for Structures:

a.	High Water Elevations : Structures shall be placed in accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not exist, the elevation to which  the  lowest  floor,  including basement, is placed or flood-proofed shall be determined as follows :

(1)	For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher.

(2)	For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the flood of record, if data are available. If data is not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood lows and to establish a flood protection elevation.	Under all three approaches, technical evaluations shall be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200 governing the management of floodplain areas . If more than one approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined shall be used for placing structures and other facilities;

(3)	Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined if the structure is constructed	of flood-resistant materials to the elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and debris.

b.	Water-Oriented Accessory Structures : Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this Ordinance, each lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback in Subd. 64.08, 64.09 and 64.10 of this Ordinance if the water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions :
 

(1)	The structure or facility shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy  an  area  greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet. Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet above grade at any point;

(2)	The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level shall be at least ten (10) feet;

(3)	The structure or facility shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;

(4)	The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but shall not be enclosed or used as a storage area;

(5)	The structure or facility shall not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water supply  or  sewage treatment facilities; and

(6)	As an alternative for general development and recreational development water bodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating and water-oriented supporting equipment, may occupy an area up to four hundred (400) square feet, provided the maximum width of the structure is twenty (20) feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.

c.	Stairways, Lifts and Landings: Stairways and lifts are  the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for  achieving  access  up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this  Ordinance, stairways and lifts shall meet the following design requirements:

(1)	Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet in width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, and public open space recreational properties;

(2)	Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Landings larger than thirty-two	(32) square feet may be used for commercial properties, and public open space recreational properties;

(3)	Canopies or roofs shall  not  be allowed  on stairways,  lifts,  or landings;
 


(4)	Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.

(5)	Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface	of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.

(6)	Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of subitems (a) to (e) shall be complied with  in addition to the requirements of Minnesota Regulations, Chapter 1340.

d.	Significant Historic/Archeological Sites: No structure may be placed on a significant historic and/or archeological site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a public repository.

e.	Steep Slopes: The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems , roads, driveways, structures,  or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary,  conditions  shall be attached to  issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer , leaf-on vegetation .

E.	Shoreland Alterations: Alterations of vegetation and topography shall be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic value, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.

1.	Vegetation  Alterations:

a.	Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by Subd. 64.11.F of this Ordinance shall be exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.
 

b.	Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest management uses as regulated in Subd. 64.11. H of this  Ordinance may be allowed subject to the following standards:

(1)	Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes shall not be allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable as a conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan may be developed and approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District in which the property is located.

(2)	In shore and bluff  impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees may be allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering	areas, beach and  watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, provided that:

(a)	The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, shall not be substantially reduced;

(b)	Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces shall be preserved; and

(c)	The  above  provisions  shall  not  be  applicable  to  the removal of trees,  limbs,  or  branches  that  are  dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.

2.	Topographical Alterations/Grading and Filling:

a.	Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this Ordinance, grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validity issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading  and filling standards in this section shall be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways.

b.	Public roads and parking areas as regulated by Subd. 64.11.F of this Ordinance.
 


c.	Notwithstanding items a and b above, a grading and filling permit shall be required for:

(1)	The movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and

(2)	The  movement  of  more than fifty  (50) cubic yards  of  material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.

d.	The following considerations and conditions shall be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals:

(1)	Grading or filling in any Type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 wetland shall be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland:*

(a)	Sediment and pollution trapping and retention;

(b)	Storage  of  surface  runoff  to  prevent  or  reduce  flood damage;

(c)	Fish and wildlife habitat;

(d)	Recreational use;

(e)	Shoreline or bank stabilization; and

(f)	Noteworthiness, including special qualities such a historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others.

*This evaluation shall also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other local, state, or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the  Minnesota  Department  of  Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant shall be so advised.

(2)	Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;
 

(3)	Mulches or similar materials shall be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage,  and permanent vegetation cover shall be established as soon as possible.

(4)	Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature shall be used;

(5)	Altered areas shall be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service ;

(6)	Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;

(7)	Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes shall be reviewed by the City Engineer for continued slope stability and shall not create finished slopes of 30 percent or greater. This provision shall not apply to any retaining wall;

(8)	Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact zones;

(9)	Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources under Minnesota Statutes, Section  103G.245.

(10)	Alterations of topography shall only be allowed  if they  are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and

(11)	Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, may be permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet.

e.	Connections to Public Waters : Excavations  where  the  intended purpose is connection to a public water, such boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, shall be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources has approved the proposed connection to public waters.
 

F.	Placement and Design of Streets, Driveways, and Parking Areas: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this Ordinance, the following standards shall apply in regard to roadway, driveway, and parking area placement and design within the Shoreland Overlay District of St. Augusta.

1.	Public streets and private roads and parking areas shall be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters.  Documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that all streets and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water  conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.

2.	Streets, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist.  If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts.

3.	Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access­ related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this sub-part are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of Subd. 64.11. E of this Ordinance shall be met.

G.	Storm Water Management: Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this Ordinance or the City Code, the following general and specific standards shall apply in regard to storm water management  within the Shoreland Overlay District of St. Augusta:

1.	General Standards:

a.	When possible, existing  natural  drainageways,  wetlands,  and vegetated soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain storm water runoff before discharge to public waters.

b.	Development shall  be planned and conducted in a manner that shall minimize the extent of disturbed  areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.

c.	When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle  storm water  runoff  using natural features  and vegetation,  various  types  of
 
...._.,,,  '                                                                 constructed  facilities  such  as  diversions,  settling  basins,  skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made materials and facilities.

2.	Specific Standards:

a.	Impervious surface coverage of lots shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area.

b.	When constructed facilities are used for storm water management, documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.

c.	New constructed storm water outfalls to public waters shall provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.

H.	Special   Provisions  for   Commercial,	Industrial,   Public/  Semipublic,   Agricultural, Forestry and Extractive Uses and Mining of Metallic Minerals and Peat:

1.	Standards for Commercial, Industrial, Public and Semipublic Uses:

a.	Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage  on  public waters.	Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this Ordinance, those uses with water-oriented needs shall meet the following standards:

(1)	In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this ·Ordinance, the uses shall be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;

(2)	Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons shall centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need;and

(3)	Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards:
 

(a)	No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator;

(b)	Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information. They shall	only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available.	The signs shall not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, shall not be located higher than ten feet above the ground, and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights shall be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters; and

(c)	Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise	directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights.

b.	Uses without water-oriented needs shall be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or  parcels  with public waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened  from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions .

2.	Agriculture Use Standards:

a.	General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting may be permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the United States soil Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency.
 
b.	The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.

c.	Animal feed lots shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance , as well as the following standards:

(1)	New feedlots shall not be located in the shoreland of watercourses or in bluff impact zones and shall meet a minimum setback of 300 feet from the ordinary high water level of  all public waters basins; and

(2)	Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water level or within a bluff impact zone may be allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact zones .

3.	Forest Management Standards: The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation shall be conducted consistent with the  provisions  of  the Minnesota	Non-point Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management "Best  Management Practices in Minnesota".

4.	Extractive Use Standards:

a.	Site Development and Restoration Plan: An extractive use site development and restoration plan shall be developed, approved, and followed over the course of operation of the site. The  plan  shall address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation , and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and shall  clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.

b.	Setbacks for Processing Machinery: Processing machinery shall be located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from bluffs.

5.	Mining of Metallic Minerals and Peat: Mining of metallic minerals and peat, as defined in Minnesota Statutes , Sections 93.44 to 93.51, shall be a permitted use provided the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Sections 93.44 to 93.51 are satisfied.
 

I.	Water Supply and Sewage Treatment:

1.	Water Supply: Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes shall meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.

Private wells shall be located, constructed, maintained, and sealed in accordance with, or in a more thorough manner, than the water well construction code of the Minnesota Department of Health.

2.	Sewage Treatment: Any premises used for human occupancy shall be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows :

a.	Publicly-owned sewer systems shall be .used where available.

b.	All private sewage treatment systems shall meet or exceed the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's standards for individual sewage treatment	systems contained in the document titled, "Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards, Chapter 7080", a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.

c.	On-site sewage treatment systems shall be set back from the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in this Section.

d.	All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in subitems (1) - (4). If the determination of a  site's  suitability  cannot  be  made  with  publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient  soil borings and percolation tests from . on-site field investigations.
Evaluation criteria.

(1)	Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table or bedrock;

(2)	Soil conditions, properties, and permeability;

(3)	Slope;

(4)	The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock outcrops.
 
e.	Non-conforming  sewage  treatment  systems  shall  be  regulated  and upgraded in accordance with Subd. 64.12 .C of this Ordinance.



64.12	: NON-CONFORMITIES:  All legally established non-conformities as of the date of this Ordinance may continue, but they shall be managed according to applicable state statutes and Section 14 of this Ordinance for the subjects of alterations and  additions , repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and intensification of use; except that the following standards shall also applying shoreland areas ;

A       Construction and Non-conforming Lots of Records:

1.	Lots of record in the Office of the Stearns County Recorder on the date of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of this Section may be allowed as building sites without variances from lot size requirements provided the use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became substandard, was created compliant with official controls in effect at the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements of this Ordinance are met.

2.	A variance from setback requirements shall be obtained before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot. In evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.

3.	If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of this Section, the lot shall not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or development. The lot shall be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the requirements of this Ordinance to the extent possible.

B.	Additions/Expansions  to Non-conforming Structures:

1.	All additions or expansions to the outside  dimensions  of  an  existing  non­ conforming structure shall meet the setback, height, and other requirements of this  Section. Any deviation from these requirements  may be authorized only by a variance pursuant to Section 7 of this Ordinance.

2.	Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the following criteria and standards are met:
 
a.	The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were established;

b.	A  thorough  evaluation  of  the  property  and  structure  reveals   no reasonable  location  for  a  deck  meeting  or  exceeding  the  existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure ;

c.	The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary  high water  level or does  not encroach  closer than thirty
(30) feet , whichever is more restrictive; and

d.	The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened .

C.	Non-conforming  Sewage  Treatment  Systems:  A  sewage   treatment system	not meeting the  requirements  of  this  Section  shall  be upgraded,  at  a  minimum, at  any  time  a permit  or  variance  of  any  type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property. For the purposes of this provision a sewage treatment system shall not be considered non-conforming of the  only  deficiency  is  the  sewage treatment  system's  improper · setback  from  the  ordinary  high  water level.



64.13	:   ADMINISTRATION:

A	Permits Required:

1.	A shoreland permit shall be required for the construction of buildings or building additions (and including such related activities as construction decks and signs}, the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, and those grading and filling activities not exempted by Subd. 64.11.E.2 of this Ordinance . Application for a permit shall be made to the City Zoning Administrator on the forms provided. The application shall include the necessary information so that the site's suitability for the intended use can be determined and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be provided.

2.	A shoreland permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system, as defined by Subd. 64.12.C. shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

8.		Certificate of Zoning Compliance :  The Zoning Administrator  shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for each activity requiring a permit as specified in this Section.
 
This certificate shall specify that the use of land conforms to the requirements of this Ordintince. Any use, arrangement,  or construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and shall be punishable as provided in Section 12 of this Ordinance.



64.14	:  VARIANCES:

A		Provisions: Variances shall only be granted in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462, as applicable and with Section 7 of this Ordinance. A  variance may not circumvent the general purposes and intent of this Ordinance. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the  subject  property  is located.    Conditions  may  be  imposed  in the  granting  of  a variance  to  ensure  compliance  and to  protect  adjacent  properties  and  the  public interest.	In considering a variance request, the Board of  Adjustment  shall  also consider  whether  the  property  owner  has reasonable  use  of ·the land without the variance, whether the property is used seasonally or  year-round,   whether  the variance is being requested solely on the basis of economic considerations, and the characteristics of development on adjacent properties.

B.	Board of Adjustment: The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of business. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance required in Subd. 64.18 below shall also include the Board of Adjustment's summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance.

C.	Sewage Treatment Systems: For existing developments, the application for variance shall clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, shall require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment .system .



64.15	: CONDITIONAL USES: Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review of conditional uses as found in Section 4 of this Ordinance. The following  additional evaluation criteria and conditions shall apply within shoreland areas:

A		Evaluation Criteria: A thorough evaluation of the water body and the topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site shall be made to ensure:

1.	The  prevention  of  soil  erosion  or  other  possible  pollution  of  public waters, both during and after construction;
 
2.	The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters  is limited;

3.	The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment ; and

4.	The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will gererate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.

8.	Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits: The City of St. Augusta, upon consideration of the criteria  listed above and the purposes of this Ordinance, shall attach such conditions to the  issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance . Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.	Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;

2.	Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and

3.	Special provisions for the location, design, and use of structures, sewage treatment systems , watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking  areas.



64.16	:   SUBDIVISION/PLATTING  PROVISIONS:

A		Land Suitability: Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit developments authorized under Subd. 64.17 of this Ordinance, shall  be suitable  in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by the local unit of government shall consider items specified in the Subdivision Ordinance.

8. Consistency with Other Controls: Subdivisions must conform to the Subdivision Ordinance.		A subdivision shall not be approved where a later variance from one or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose.	In areas not served by publicly owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision shall not be approved unless domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with Subd. 64.11.1 can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks shall not be approved.
 

C.	Information Requirements: Sufficient information shall be submitted by the applicant for the community to make a determination of land suitability. The information shall include those items specified in Subd. 10.06 of this Ordinance and at minimum the following:

1.	The surface water features required in Minnesota Statutes,  Section 505.02, Subdivision  1, to be shown on plats, obtained from  United State Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;

2.	Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of anticipated	vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic conditions,	including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling storm water runoff and erosion, both during and after construction activities;

3.	Location of 100-year floodplain areas and floodway districts from existing adopted maps or data; and

4.	A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the "toe" and the "top" of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream .

D.	Dedications: When a land or easement dedication is a condition of subdivision approval, the approval shall provide easements over natural drainage  or  ponding areas for management of storm water and significant wetlands.

E.		Platting: All subdivisions that create five or more lots or parcels that are 2 % acres or less in size shall be processed as a plat in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 505 and the Subdivision Ordinance. No permit for construction of buildings or sewage treatment systems shall be issued for lots created after these official controls are enacted unless the lot is approved as part of a formal subdivision.

F.		Controlled Access or Recreational Lots: Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by non-riparian lots within a subdivision shall meet or exceed the sizing criteria in Subd. 64.08, 64.09 and 64.10 of this Ordinance.



64.17	:  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUDs):

A		Types of PUDs Permissible: Planned unit developments (PUDs) may be allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built sites, or conversations of existing buildings and land. Planned unit developments may be allowed as a district as specified in Section 63 of this Ordinance.   The land use
 
districts in which they are an allowable use are identified in the land use district descriptions in Subd. 64-7 of this Ordinance and the official zoning map.

B.	Processing of PUDs: Planned unit developments shall  be  processed  as  a conditional use and in conformance with Section 63 cif this Ordinance, except that an expansion to an existing commercial PUD involving six or less new dwelling units or sites since the date of this Ordinance was adopted are permissible as a permitted use provided the total project density does not exceed the allowable densities calculated in the project density evaluation procedures in Subd. 64.17. E. Approval shall not occur until the environmental review process (EAW/EIS) is complete.

C.	Application for a  PUD:  The  applicant for  a  PUD  shall  submit  the documents specified in Subd. 63.03 of this Ordinance prior to final action being taken on the application request.

D.	Site "Suitable Area" Evaluations: Proposed new or expansions to existing planned unit developments shall be evaluated using the following procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling uniUdwelling site density evaluation in Subd. 64.17.E.

1.	The  project  parcel  shall  be divided  into tiers  by  locating one  or  more  lines approximately  parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water  level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:	·

Shoreland Tier Dimensions	Unsewered   Sewered (Feet)	(Feet)

Recreational Development Lakes	267	267
Natural Environment Lakes	400	320
All River Classes	300	300

2.	The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project shall then be subject to either the residential or commercial planned unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or sites.

E.	Residential and Commercial PUD Density Evaluation: The procedures for determining the "base" density of a PUD and a density increase multipliers are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the water body, but shall not be transferred to any other tier closer.

1.	Residential PUD "Base" Density Evaluation:

a.	The suitable a.rea within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size standard for lakes or, for rivers, the single residential lot width
 

standard times the tier depth, unless the local unit of government has specified an alternative minimum lot size for rivers which shall then be used to yield a base density of dwelling units or sites for each tier . Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned unit developments shall then be compared with the tier, density, and suitability analysis herein and the design criteria in Subd. 64.17.D.

2.	Commercial PUD "Base" Density Evaluation: The density evaluation as follows pertains to those commercial planned unit developments that provide transient service oriented operations such as hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicles, and camping parks and other like service activities .

a.	Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling units or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and sites. Computation of inside living area sizes .shall not include decks, patios, stops, steps, garages or porches and basements, unless they are habitable space.
b.	Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table: Commercial Planned Unit Development
Floor area Ratios*
Public Waters Classes

 









*Average unit floor area (sq.ft.)
 
Sewered general development lakes; first
tier on unsewered
general develop­ ment lakes; urban, agricultural, tributary river segments
 
Second and additional tiers on unsewered general develop­ ment lakes; recreational
lake; transition and forested river segments
 






Natural environment lakes and remote river segments
 

200	.040	.020	.010
300	.048	.024	.012
400	.056	.028	.014
500	.065	.    .032	.016
 

600	.072	.038	.019
700	.082	.042	.021
800	.091	.046	.023
900	.099	.050	.025
1,000	.108	.054	.027
1,100	.116	.058	.029
1,200	.125	.064	.032
1,300	.133	.068	.034
1,400	.142	.072	.036
1,500	.150	.075	.038

*For average  unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios listed for 200 square feet. For areas greater than shown, use the ratios listed for 1,500 square feet. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at 400 square feet. Manufactured home sites  in recreational camping areas shall use a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if unknown, the ratio listed for 1,000 square feet.

c.	Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling units or sites.

d.	Divide the total floor area by tier computed in Item C above by the average inside living area size determined in Item A above. This yields a base number of dwelling units and sites for each tier.

e.	Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the commercial planned unit development are then compared with the tier, density, design criteria and suitability analysis.

3.	Density Increase Multipliers:

a.	Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in Subd. 64.17.E are met or exceeded and the design criteria in Subd.
64.17.F are satisfied. The allowable density   increases  in  Item  b below may only be allowed if  structure  setbacks  from  the  ordinary high water level are  increased  to  at  least  50  percent  greater  than the minimum setback, or  the  impact  on  the  water  body  is  reduced an  equivalent  amount   through   · vegetative   management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the local unit of government and the setback is at least 25 percent greater than the minimum   setback.

b. Allowable dwelling  unit  or  dwelling  site  density  increases  for residential or commercial  planned unit developments:
 

" '---/

 
Density Evaluation Tiers
 
Maximum density increase within each tier (percent)
 

 
First Second Third Fourth Fifth
 
50
100
200
200
200
 

F.	Maintenance and Design Criteria:

1.	Maintenance and Administration Requirements:

a.	Before final approval of a planned unit development, adequate provisions shall be developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development.

b.	Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means shall be provided to ensure long­ term	preservation and maintenance of open space.  The instruments must include all of the following protection:

(1)	Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUOs);

(2)	Vegetation  and  topographic  alterations  other  than  routine maintenance prohibited;

(3)	Construction  of  additional  buildings  or  storage  of  vehicles and other materials prohibited; and

(4)	Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited.

c.	Development organization and functioning: Unless an equally effective alternative community framework is · established, when applicable, all residential planned unit development shall use an owners association with the following features:

(1)	Membership shall be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site purchaser and any successive purchasers;
 

(2)	Each member shall pay a pro rata share of the association's expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites;

(3)	Assessments shall be adjustable to accommodate changing conditions; and

(4)	The association shall be responsible for insurance, taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.

2.	Open  Space  Requirements:	Planned  unit developments  shall  contain open space meeting all of the following criteria:

a.	At least 50 percent of the total project area shall be preserved as open space;

b.	Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, or land covered by road surfaces,	parking areas, or structures, except water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, are d veloped areas and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space;

c.	Open space shall include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;

d.	Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling units or sites, and by the general public;

e.	Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems if the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems;

f.	Open space shall not include commercial facilities or uses, but may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities;

g.	The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, shall be preserved by use of restrictive	deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication		and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means; and

h.	The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, must be included as open space.  For residential PUDs, at least fifty (50) percent of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or
 

at least seventy (70) percent of the shore impact zone area of new developments shall be preserved in its natural existing state. For commercial PUDs, at least fifty (50)  percent of the shore impact zone shall be preserved in its natural state.

3.	Erosion  Control  and  Storm  Water  Management:	Erosion  control  and storm water management plans shall be developed and the PUD shall:

a.	Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction. this shall be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques shaJI be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control  plans approved  by a Soil and Water Conservation District may be required if project size and site physical characteristic warrant; and

b.		Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities of storm water runoff. Impervious surface coverage within any tier  shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the tier area, except that for commercial PUDs thirty-five
(35) percent impervious surface coverage may be allowed  in the first tier of general development lakes with an approved  storm water management plan and consistency with this Ordinance.

4.	Centralization  and  Design  of  Facilities:	Centralization  and  design  of facilities and structures shall be done according to the following standards:

a.	Planned unit developments shall be connected to publicly owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems shall be centralized and designed and installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the Minnesota Department of Health and this Ordinance. On-site sewage treatment systems shall be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors shall be provided for  a replacement  soil treatment  system for each sewage system;

b.	Dwelling units or sites shall be clustered into one or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They shall be designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the  surface  water features,  and maximum  height.    Setbacks  from  the  ordinary  high
 

water level shall be increased in accordance with this Ordinance for developments with density increases;

c.	Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, shall be centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation of suitability  shall include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft shall not exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier (notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing commercially used harbor). Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers;

d.	Structures, parking areas, and other facilities shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the local unit of government, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening shall be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided;

e.	Accessory structures and facilities, except water oriented accessory structures, shall meet the required principal structure setback and shall be centralized; and

f.	Water oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in Subd. 64.11. D of this Ordinance are centralized.

G.	Conversions: The City may allow existing resorts or other land uses and facilities to be converted to residential planned unit developments if all of the following standards are met:

1.	Proposed conversions shall be initially evaluated using the same procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all new construction.	Inconsistencies between existing features of the development and these standards shall be identified.

2.	Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment, structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore recreation facilities shall be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the conditional use permits.
 

3.	Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies shall be evaluated and reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These improvements shall include, where applicable, the following:

a.	Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones;

b.	Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from the water; and

c.	If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff impact zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or  substantial  alterations . The conditions must also provide for future relocation of dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced.

4.	Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed standards in this Ordinance may be allowed to continue but shall not be allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the future. Efforts shall be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high densities by requiring seasonal	use, improving vegetative screening, centralizing  shore recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatment systems, or other means.



64.18	:  NOTIFICATIONS TO THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES:

A		Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances,  amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls  shall be sent to the	Commissioner    of   the    Department    of .  Natural    Resources    or    the Commissioner's  designated  representative  and  postmarked  at  least  ten  days before	the      hearings.          Notices     of     hearings    to    consider     proposed subdivisions/plans shall include copies of the subdivision/plat.

8.		A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or the Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action.
 
SECTION 65
W, WETLANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT

Subdivision

65.1	:  Purpose
65.2	Scope
65.3	District Application
65.4	:  Permitted Uses
65.5	:  Conditional Uses
65.6	:   Exemption Determinations
65.7	:  No-Loss Determinations
65.8	:  Replacement Plan Determinations
65.9	:  Technical Evaluation Panel and Procedures 65.1O:  Appeal of City of St. Augusta Decisions 65.11:  Compensation
65.12	:  Enforcement Procedures
65.13	:  Mining
65.14	Standards and Procedures for Evaluating Wetland Replacement Plans 65.15:  Standards and Criteria for State Wetland Banking
65.16: Calcareous Fens



65.01: PURPOSE: The purpose and intent of this Section is to insure that the wetland resources within the City of St. Augusta are protected and conserved. Wetland resources serve to provide food, shelter and habitat for fish and wildlife, store surface runoff and reduce flooding damages, replenish subsurface water supplies, provide outdoor recreation areas and enhance the natural beauty and biodiversity of landscapes within the City. This section incorporates by reference the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, Laws of Minnesota 1991, chapter 354, as amended by Laws 1993, chapter 175 and the accompanying rules of the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources (Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420, as amended) whose purpose is to:

A	Achieve no net loss in the quantity, quality, and biological diversity of Minnesota's existing wetlands;

B.	Increase the quantity, quality and biological diversity·of Minnesota's wetlands by restoring or enhancing diminished or drained wetlands;

C.	Avoid  direct  or  indirect  impacts  from  activities  that  destroy  or  diminish  the quantity, quality and biological diversity of wetlands;  and

D.	Replace wetland values where avoidance of activity is not feasible and prudent.
These. purposes  being  consistent  with  the  City's . desire  to  preserve  areas cont.aining low lands,  marshes, wetlands,  drainage areas,  water  bodies and
 
waterways which are essential to the health, safety and general welfare of the	'-
City's residents .



65.2	: SCOPE: Wetlands must not be drained or filled wholly or partially unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value . This Section, along with the above mentioned references , shall be utilized by the City to insure the protection of the City's wetland resources.

In addition to the provisions of this Section, City decisions on draining and filling of wetlands are subject to Minnesota Statutes,  chapters  1168 and  116D, which  provide that an action which is likely to have material adverse effects on natural resources must not be allowed if there is a feasible and prudent alternative consistent with the requirements of the public health, safety and welfare and the state's paramount concern for the protection of its natural resources. Economic considerations alone do not justify adversely effective actions.



65.3	: DISTRICT APPLICATION:

A	All wetlands within the City of St. Augusta are hereby designated as part of the W, Wetlands Overlay District, and the requirements set forth in this Section shall govern development and other activities within these districts.

8. The W, Wetlands Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon all zoning districts as contained herein as existing or amended by the text of this Section. The regulations and requirements imposed by the W, Wetlands Overlay District shall be in addition to those established for districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of districts, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.

C.	The boundaries of wetlands within the City may be changed by the City Council, Department of Natural Resources, or Army Corps of Engineers, whatever applicable, when it can be demonstrated by registered site survey and topographic work, and hydrologic analysis performed by registered engineer or land surveyor that the established boundaries are incorrect.



65.4	: PERMITTED USES: Permitted uses within a wetland, and as described in this Section, are subject to guidelines established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Uses within a wetland which are not prohibited by this Section are:
 
A	The use of the bed of the wetlands for pasture or cropland during dry period if dikes, ditches, tile lines, or buildings are not constructed and the agricultural use does not result in the drainage of the wetlands.

B.	The filling of a wetland to accommodate wheeled booms on irrigation devices if the fill does not impede normal drainage.

C.	The control of noxious weeds if the control does not drain or fill the wetland.

D.	Excavation in wetlands if done in a manner such that the wetlands are  not drained or filled.



65.5	: CONDITIONAL USES:  Permitting for conditional uses in the W District shall be based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 4 of this Ordinance. Conditional use permits shall be subject to the elevation criteria as set forth in Subd.
4.02 of this Ordinance. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which  may  be imposed by this Section, the uses listed in part B may be allowed in wetlands by conditional use permit subject to the following:

A	A wetland may not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless either the activity meets the exemption criteria stated in part B or unless it is replaced under an approved replacement plan meeting the criteria of Subd. 65.14. C. A wetland activity will be considered exempt if it qualifies for any one of the exemptions, even though it may be indicated as not exempt under another exemption.

These exemptions do not apply to calcareous fens as identified by the commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.

No exemptions apply to wetlands that have been previously restored or created as a result of an approved replacement  plan. All such wetlands are subject to replacement on subsequent drainage or filling.

Nonexempt wetlands cannot be partially drained or filled in order to claim  an exemption or no-loss determination on the remainder. Therefore, no exemptions or no-loss determinations can be applied to the remaining wetland that would not have been applicable before the impact.

Present  and future  owners  of  wetlands  drained  or  filled  without  replacement under an exemption in part 8, subparts 1, 2, 4, 7, 8 and 23, can make no use of the wetland area after it is drained or filled, other than as agricultural land, for ten years after the draining or filling, unless it is first replaced under the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.222, paragraph (g).  Also, for ten years the wetland  may not be restored for replacement  credit.   At the time of draining or filling, the landowner shall record a notice of these restrictions in the office of the
 

Stearns County Recorder. At a minimum, the recorded document must contain the name or names of the landowners, a legal description of the property to which the restrictions apply, a statement of the restrictions, the date on which the ten-year period expires, the City of St. Augusta as the local government which certified the exemption, if such occurred, the signatures of all owners, and an acknowledgment.

A person conducting an activity in a wetland under an exemption in part B shall ensure that:

1.	Appropriate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water;

2.	The activity does not block fish activity in a watercourse; and

3.	The activity is conducted in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, and local requirements, including best management practices and water resource protection requirements established under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 103H.

B.	A request for an exemption shall be required of a perspective applicant on a form provided by the City of St. Augusta. Exemptions which qualify for City of St. Augusta review are as follows:

1.	Activities in a wetland that was planted with annually seeded crops, was in a crop rotation seeding of pasture grasses or legumes, or was required to be set aside to receive price support or other payments under United States Code, title 7, sections 1421 to 1469, in six of the last ten years prior to January 1, 1991.

Documentation, such as Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service aerial photographs, Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service form 578 or equivalent, United States Department of Agriculture records, or affidavit of landowner is required to accompany the application for exemption and be furnished by the applicant.

Set aside land used for this exemption must be wetland Types 1 and 2.

2.	Activities in a wetland that  is or has  been  enrolled  in  the  federal conservation reserve program under United States code, title 16, section 3831, that:

a.	Was planted with annually seeded crops, was in a crop rotation seeding, or was required to be set aside to receive price support or payment under United States Code, title 7, sections 1421 to 1469,
 
in six of the last ten years prior to being enrolled in the program; and

b.		Has  not  been  restored  with  assistance  from  a  public  or  private wetland restoration program.

Federal documentation that the wetland is or has been enrolled in the federal conservation reserve program is required to accompany the application for exemption and be furnished by the applicant.  The landowner must also meet the  same requirements of subpart 2 for the exemption stated  in Minnesota  Statutes,  section  103G.2241, subdivision 1, clause (1), except that the years required are at least six of the ten years preceding the year of enrollment in the conservation reserve program. The landowner must also state in writing that the wetland was not restored with assistance from a public or private wetland restoration fund, or that the restoration was done under a contract or easement providing the landowner with the right to drain the restored wetland.

3.	Activities necessary to repair and maintain existing public or private drainage systems as long as wetlands that have been in existence for more than 20 years are not drained. This exemption allows maintenance which fills wetlands that have been in existence for more than 20 years when the wetlands are located within the right-of-way acreage of the ditch or within a one rod width on either side of the top of the ditch, whichever is greater, and the filling is limited to the side c sting of spoil materials resulting	from the maintenance and the spoil deposition area is permanently seeded into grass after maintenance activities are completed.

The owner must provide documentation that the wetlands which will be partially or completely drained by the maintenance have not existed for more than 20 years.

Aerial photographs from two years of normal or wetter than normal water level conditions showing no wetlands are one form of acceptable documentation.	If aerial photographs are unavailable, a sworn affidavit may be submitted. Otherwise, the landowner must  show that the maintenance will not reduce the wetland from what it was 20 years ago or more.

This exemption includes _ lowering the elevation of previously placed tile when made necessary by land subsidence provided the lowe'ring does not drain wetlands .

4.	Activities in a wetland that has received a  commenced  drainage determination provided for by the federal Food Security Act of 1985, that
 
was made to the county agricultural stabilization and conservation service office prior to September 19, 1988, and a ruling and any subsequent appeals or reviews have determined that drainage of the wetland had been commenced prior to December 23, 1985.

The wetland landowner must provide Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service documents confirming that the county agricultural stabilization and conservation service office determined before September 19, 1988, that drainage had begun before December 23, 1985 and that the determination has not been overturned by subsequent appeal or review and is not currently under administrative review.

5.	Activities exempted from federal regulation under United States Code, title 33, section 1344(f).

The City of St. Augusta  shall certify the exemption only if the landowner ·· furnishes  proof of qualification for one of the exemptions from the  United States Army Corps of Engineers.

This exemption does not apply to a project with the purpose of converting a wetland to a nonwetland, either immediately or gradually, or converting the wetland to another use, or when the fill will result in significant discernible change to the flow or circulation of water in the wetland, or partly draining it, or reducing the wetland area.

6.	Activities  authorized  under,  and   conducted   in  accordance   with,   an applicable general permit  issued  by  the  United  States  Army  Corps  of Engineers under section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act, United States Code,  title 33, section 1344, except the nationwide permit in  Code  of Federal  Regulations,  title  33,  section  330.5,  paragraph  (a),  clause  (14), limited to when a new street crosses a wetland, and all of clause (26).

This exemption is for nationwide permits 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 25 issued under Code of Federal Regulations, title 33, section 330.5.  The City of St. Augusta shall certify such an exemption only if the applicant furnishes proof of qualification for one of these nationwide permits from the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Nationwide permit 14 for a new street does not qualify for this exemption, nor do nationwide permits under numbers not listed in this exemption.

To qualify for a nationwide permit, the applicant for a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit must meet any regional conditions imposed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and must obtain from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency an individual section 401 certification when required.
 

7.	Activities in a type 1 wetland on agricultural land, as defined  in United States	Fish and Wildlife Circular No.  39  (1971  edition)  except  for bottomland hardwood type 1 wetlands.

The wetland landowner must provide the same proofs required by the first paragraph of exemption 1, for lands abutting at least 50 percent of the wetland's boundary. The City of St. Augusta may seek the advice of the technical panel as to whether the wetland is a type 1 wetland not of the bottomland hardwood type.

The type of the wetland will be determined according to United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition) . Alternatively, the type of the wetland can be determined from the Cowardin (et al. 1979) classification system: PEM1A, PEMA, PEMJ, and PEM1J may be considered to be a type 1 wetland .

This exemption applies if the wetland is all type 1 wetland , or is a combination of types 1 and 2 wetlands , on agricultural land, and the type 2 wetland area is less than two acres.

8.	Activities in a type 2 wetland that is two acres in size or less located on agricultural land.

The wetland landowner must provide the same material as required from  , the landowner by exemption 7.	The City of St. Augusta may seek the advice  of the technical  panel  as to whether  the wetland  is a type 2 wetland, two acres or less in size.

The wetland size is the area within its boundary. The boundary must be determined according to the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands" (January 1989). The type of the wetland must be determined according to United State Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39  (1971 edition). Alternatively, type can be determined from the Cowardin (et al. 1979) classification system : PEM1B and PEMB may be considered to be a type 2 wetland.

This exemption applies if the wetland is a type 2 wetland, or is a combination of types 1 and 2 wetlands, on agricultural land, and the type 2 wetland area is less than two acres.

9.	Activities in a wetland restored for conservation purposes under a contract or easement providing the landowner with the right to drain the restored wetland.
 
The wetland landowner must provide a contract or easement conveyance or affidavit demonstrating that the landowner or a predecessor restored the wetland for conservation purposes but retained the right to subsequently drain the restored wetland.

10.	Activities in a wetland created solely as a result of:

a.	Beaver dam construction;
b.	Blockage of culverts through roadways maintained by a public or
private entity;
c.	Actions by public entities that were taken for a purpose other than
creating the wetland; or
d.	Any combination of a. to c.

Wetland areas created by beaver activities may be drained by removing those materials placed by beaver. Drainage is permitted by removing or moving materials blocking installed roadway culverts and drainage structures. Additional excavation or removal of other materials  is not permitted unless it can be shown by aerial photographs that the proposed activity will not drain or fill wetland that was there before the beaver dam was built or the culvert became plugged.

Wetlands may be drained or filled if the landowner can show that the wetland was created solely by actions the purpose of which was not to create the wetland and were approved, permitted, funded, or overseen by a public entity.

Impoundments or excavations constructed in. nonwetlands solely for the purpose of effluent treatment, storm water retention, soil and water conservation practices, and water quality improvements, and not as part of a compensatory wetland mitigation process that may, over time, take on wetland characteristics, are also exempted.

11.	Placement, maintenance, repair, enhancement, or replacement of utility or utility-type service, including the transmission, distribution, or furnishing, at wholesale or retail, or natural or manufactured gas, electricity,  telephone, or radio service or communications  if:

a.	The impacts of the proposed  project  on  the  hydrologic  and biological characteristics of the wetland have been avoided and minimized to the extent possible; and

b.	The proposed project significantly modifies or alters less than one­ half acre of wetlands.
 
For new placement and enhancement of existing facilities, the utility must demonstrate that the character and extent of the impacts of the proposed project on the wetlands have been minimized and that the entire project will, cumulatively , drain or fill less than one-half acre of wetland.

for maintenance, repair, and replacement, the City of  St. Augusta  may issue a seasonal or annual exemption certification or the utility may proceed without City of St.  Augusta certification if it is carrying out the work according to best management practices . Work of an emergency nature may proceed as necessary and any drain or fill activities shall be addressed with the City of St. Augusta after the emergency work has been completed.

12.	Activities associated with routine maintenance of utility and pipeline rights­ of-way, provided the activities do not result in additional intrusion into the wetland .

This exemption is for maintenance, but not expansion, of the rights-of-way in which utilities are located.  Spill remediation is not routine maintenance.

The City of St. Augusta may issue a seasonal or annual exemption certification or the utility may proceed if it is carrying out the work according to best management practices. Work of an emergency nature may proceed as necessary and any drain or fill activities shall be addressed with the City of St. Augusta after the emergency work has been completed.

13.	Alteration of a wetland associated with the operation, maintenance, or repair  of an interstate pipeline within all existing or acquired interstate pipeline rights-of-way. This exemption includes construction activities.

14.	Temporarily crossing or entering a wetland  to  perform  silvicultural activities, including timber harvest as part of a forest management activity , so long as the activity limits the impact on the hydrologic and biologic characteristics	of the wetland; the activities do not result in  the construction of dikes, drainage ditches, tile lines, or buildings; and  the timber harvesting and other silvicultural practices do not result in the drainage of the wetland or public waters . This exemption is for temporary­ use roads constructed for 'the primary purpose of providing access for the conduct of silvicultural activities.

15.	Permanent access for forest roads across wetlands so long as the activity limits the impact on the hydrologic and biologic characteristics of the wetland; the construction activities do not result in the access becoming a
 
dike, drainage ditch or tile line; with filling avoided wherever possible; and there is no drainage of the wetland or public waters.

This exemption  is the same as exemption 14 except that it is for permanent forest  roads which are roads constructed for the primary purpose of providing access for the conduct of silvicultural activities .

16.	Activities associated with routine maintenance or repair of existing public highways, roads, streets, and bridges, provided the activities do not result in additional intrusion into the wetland outside of the existing right-of-way.

This exemption does not prevent repairing washouts or adding material to the driving surface provided the road's occupancy of the wetland outside of the existing right-of-way does not increase.

17.	Emergency repair and normal maintenance and repair of existing public works, provided the activity does not result in additional intrusion of the public works into the wetland and do not result in the draining or filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland.

This exemption applies to public works other than roads, such as buildings and bridges.

18.	Normal maintenance and minor repair of structures causing no additional intrusion of an existing structure into the wetland, and maintenance and repair of private crossings that do not result in .the draining or filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland.

This exemption applies to private structures, such as buildings and road crossings.

19.	Duck blinds: This exemption allows floating duck blinds  and  blinds  on poles or pilings. This exemption does not allow fill other than poles or pilings.	·

20.	Aquiculture activities including pond excavation and associated access roads and dikes authorized under, and conducted in accordance with, a permit issued by the United States Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act, United States Code, title 33, section 1344, but not including buildings.

21.	Wild rice production activities, including necessary diking and other activities authorized under a permit issued by the United State Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act, United States Code, title 33, section 1344. Documentation demonstrating
 
-

that the exemption applies may include showing possession of a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit for the project.

22.	Normal agricultural practices to control pests or weeds , defined by rule as either noxious or secondary weeds , in accordance with applicable requirements under state and federal law, including established best management practices .

This exemption does not allow diking, ditching, tiling or filling, or other control practices that would result in the conversion of wetlands .

23.	Activities in a wetland that is on agricultural land annually enrolled in the federal Food, Agricultural , Conservation , and Trade Act of 1990, United States Code, title 16, section 3821, subsection (a), clauses (1) to (3), as amended, and  is subject to sections 1421 to 1424 of the federal act in effect on January 1, 1991, except that land enrolled in a federal farm program is eligible for easement participation for those acres not already compensated under a federal program.

Documentation such as a written statement from the local Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service office that the proposed  activity would not result in loss of eligibility for benefits under the farm program may be used as evidence for this exemption. If the activity would result in loss of eligibility, the landowner cannot qualify for the exemption by withdrawing from the program.

24.	Development projects and ditch improvement projects in the state that have received preliminary or final plat approval, or infrastructure that has been installed, or having local site plan approval, conditional use permits, or similar official approval by a governing body or government agency, within five years before August 2004. Plat approval must be preliminary as approved by the City of St. Augusta.

Subdividers who obtained preliminary plat approval in the specified time period, and other project developers with one of the listed approvals timely obtained, provided approval has not expired and the project remains active, may drain and fill wetlands, to the extent documented by the approval , without replacement. Those elements of the project that can be carried out without changing the approved plan and without draining or filling must be done in that manner. If wetlands can be avoided within the terms of the approved plan, they must be avoided. For county, joint county, and watershed district ditch projects, this exemption applies to projects that received final approval in the specified time period.
 
-

25.	Activities that result in the draining or filling of less than 400 square feet of wetlands . This exemption applies if the total wetland loss by draining and filling will be less than 400 square feet per year per landowner, and the cumulative	impact by all persons on a wetland over time without replacement after January 1, 1992, does not exceed five percent of the wetland's area.



65.6	: EXEMPTION DETERMINATIONS: A landowner intending  to  drain  or fill  a wetland without replacement, claiming exemption , must apply for a  conditional  use permit from the City of St. Augusta before beginning drainage or filling activities for determination whether or not the activity is exempt.  A landowner who does not request a determination may be subject to the enforcement provisions contained herein and Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.2372. The City of St. Augusta will keep on file  all documentation and findings of fact concerning exemption determinations for a period of ten years .

The City of St. Augusta will offer exemption certificates as part of the wetland program within their jurisdiction.

The landowner applying for exemption is responsible for submitting the proof necessary to show qualification for the particular exemption claimed.

The City of St. Augusta will place the decision authority for exemption applications with the City's Engineer .

The City Engineer's decision shall be based on the exemptions standards in Subd. 65.05. If the decision requires a finding of wetland size or type, the City's Engineer may seek the advice of the technical panel.

A landowner draining or filling a wetland under an exemption shall ensure that appropriate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water, the drain or fill does not block fish passage, and the drain or fill is conducted in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, and local requirements , including best management practices and water resource protection requirements established under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 103H.



65.7	:	NO-  LOSS  DETERMINATIONS:	A  landowner  unsure  if proposed work  will result in a loss of wetland may apply by conditional use permit application to the City of St. Augusta  for a determination .   A  landowner  who  does  not request  a determination may be subject to the enforcement  provisions contained herein and Minnesota Statutes, section  103G.2372.	The  City  of  St.  Augusta  will  keep on file  all documentation  and findings  of  fact  concerning  no-loss  determinations  for  a  period  of  ten  years .	The landowner  applying for  a no-loss  determination  is responsible  for  submitting the  proof
 
-

necessary to show qualification for the claim. The City of St. Augusta will place the decision authority for no-loss applications with the City's Engineer . The City's Engineer shall issue a no-loss certificate if the landowner requests and if either:

A         The work will not drain or fill a wetland;

B.	Water level management activities will not result in the conversion of a wetland to another land use;

C.	The activities are in a surface  impoundment  for  containment  of  fossil  fuel combustion waste or water retention, and are not part of a compensatory wetland mitigation program; or

D.	The activity is being conducted as part of an approved replacement plan or is conducted  or  authorized  by  public  agencies   for   the   purpose   of   wetland restoration and the activity is restricted to placing fill in a previously excavated drainage system to restore a wetland to its original c6ndition.



65.8	:  REPLACEMENT  PLAN DETERMINATIONS:   A landowner intending to drain or fill a wetland who does not qualify for an exemption or no-loss determination shall obtain approval of a replacement plan from the City of St. Augusta before beginning draining or filling the wetland. A person who does not do so is subject to the enforcement provisions in Subd. 65.12 and Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.2372. An application for approval of a replacement plan may  be obtained from the City of St. Augusta .  The City of St. Augusta will, within ten days of receipt of the application, mail a copy of the application and an invitation to submit comments to:

A	The Board of Water and Resources, who will subsequently  publish  the application in the Environmental Quality Board Monitor.
B.	Members of the public who have requested a copy.
C.	The Soil and Water Conservation District.
D.	The watershed district or water management organization, if there is one.
E.	The Stearns County board of water and soil resources.
F.	Mayors of the cities within the watershed.
G.	The commissioners of agriculture and natural resources.

At the same time, the City of St. Augusta will publish notice of the application with an invitation to comment in a general circulation newspaper in- the area affected.   The City of St. Augusta  will  not make its decision  before 30 days and not more than 60 days have elapsed from the mailing of notice, publication in the Environmental Quality Board Monitor, when required, or publication in the newspaper, whichever is later.  The City of St. Augusta  decision will not be effective until 30 days after a copy of the decision has been mailed to the Environmental Quality Board Monitor for publication, when required, and mailed to  the  same  list specified  above for  notice of the  application  and to  the
 
-

applicant. The mailing to the applicant will be by registered mail and will advise that the decision is not effective for 30 days, and is stayed if it is appealed.

Publication in the Environmental Quality Board Monitor of replacement plan applications and decisions will be performed, except for the fill activities described in the next paragraph, when the City of St. Augusta will publish a general notice in the Environmental Quality Board Monitor that it will not be publishing notice of such individual activities,  but will instead provide mailed notice of each project to anyone asking to be put on the City of St. Augusta's mailing list for such projects. This notice will be published not less often than once every year. The notice will advise how persons may submit their names and addresses to be put on the mailing list.

Projects eligible for this form of Environmental Quality Board Monitor notice are all those which will fill less than one-tenth acre of wetland; and all those which will fill less than one-quarter acre of wetland, and result from a private road fill or the construction or expansion of a single-family dwelling unit or a farm building· when the project cannot be modified so as to avoid the fill.                             ··

The City of St. Augusta's decision shall be based on the replacement standards contained in this Section and on the technical determination of the technical evaluation panel concerning the public values, location, size, and type of the wetland being altered. The City of St. Augusta will consider the recommendation of the technical evaluation panel to approve, modify, or reject the proposed replacement plan.

For wetland replacement plans involving both the City of St. Augusta and one or more other local government units, approval of all local government units involved must be obtained before the project may proceed.



65.9	:   TECHNICAL  EVALUATION  PANEL AND PROCEDURES:   The City  of St.
Augusta will form, by resolution, a technical evaluation panel consisting of three persons:

A       A technical professional employee of the Board of Water and Soil Resources.

B.	A  technical  professional  employee  of  the  Stearns  County  Soil  and  Water Conservation District.

C.	A	technical	professional	with	expertise	in  water	resources	management appointed by the City of St. Augusta.

The member appointed by the City of St. Augusta will act as the contact person and coordinator for the panel. Two members of the technical review panel will be knowledgeable and trained in applying methodologies of the "Federal Manual for Identifying	and   Delineating   Jurisdictional   Wetlands"   (January   1989),  and
 
-


evaluation of public values. The technical evaluation panel reserves the right to invite additional wetland experts to help the panel in its work .

The panel will make technical determinations on questions of public values, location, size, and type for replacement plans if requested to do so by the City of St. Augusta, the landowner, or a member of the technical evaluation panel. The panel may review replacement plans and recommend to the City of St. Augusta either approval, approval with changes or conditions, or rejection. The panel will make no determinations or recommendations without at least one  member having made an on-site inspection. Panel determinations and recommendations must be endorsed by at least two of the three members.

The panel, or one of its members when so authorized by all of the members, may assist the City of St. Augusta in making wetland size and type determinations when asked to do so by the City of St. Augusta as part of making an exemption or no-loss determination.

If requested by the City of St. Augusta, the landowner, or a member of the technical evaluation panel, the panel will answer technical  questions  or participate in the monitoring of replacement wetlands and will similarly participate in the monitoring of banked wetlands.



65.10	:	APPEAL OF CITY OF ST. AUGUSTA DECISIONS.

A	Appeal of replacement plan decisions: The decision of the City of St. Augusta to approve, approve with conditions, or reject a replacement plan, becomes final if not appealed to the Board of Water and Soils Resources within 30 days after the date on which the decision is mailed to those required to receive notice of the decision.

Appeal may be  made by the landowner, by any of  those required to receive notice of the decision, or by 100 residents of the county in which a majority of the wetland is located.

Appeal is effective upon mailing of the notice of appeal to the Board of Water and Soils Resources with an affidavit  that a copy of the notice of appeal has been mailed to the City of St. Augusta.  The City of St. Augusta shall then mail a copy of the notice of the appeal to all those to whom it was required by this Section to mail a copy of the notice of decision.

B.	Appeal of exemption and no-loss determinations:
 
-


1.	An exemption or no-loss determination  may be appealed to the board by the landowner after first exhausting all City of St. Augusta administrative appeal options .

2.	Those required to receive notice of replacement plan decisions as provided for in Subd. 65.08 may petition the board to hear an appeal from an exemption or no-loss determination. The board will grant the petition unless it finds that the appeal is meritless, trivial, or brought solely for the purposes of delay. In determining whether to grant the appeal, the board will also give consideration to the  size of the wetland, other factors in controversy , any patterns of similar acts  by the City of St. Augusta or landowner or petitioner, and the consequences of the delay .

3.	The determination of the City of St. Augusta on the exemption or no-loss application is final unless an appeal or petition is mailed to  the  board within 30 days after the decision is mailed to the landowner. The appeal or petition must be accompanied by an affidavit that a copy has been sent to the City of St. Augusta and to the landowner if it is a petition.

C.		Board of Soil arid Water Resources Procedures: The appeal will be decided by the board within 60 days after receiving the notice of appeal and affidavit or granting the petition. Parties to the appeal will be the app llant, the City of St. Augusta and in the case of replacement plan appeals, all those required to receive notice of the City of St. Augusta's decision.

Upon appeal, the City of St. Augusta will forward to the board the record on which it based its decision. The board will make its decision on the appeal after hearing. Thirty days' notice of the hearing will be given by the board to the parties. The parties may present written and oral argument. When the City of St. Augusta has made formal findings contemporaneously with its decision and there is an accurate verbatim transcript of the proceedings and the proceedings were fairly conducted, the board will base its review on the record. Otherwise, it may take additional evidence, or remand the matter.

The board will affirm the City of St. Augusta's decision if the City of St. Augusta's findings of fact are not clearly erroneous; if the City of St. Augusta correctly applied the law to the facts, including this Section; and if the City of St. Augusta made no procedural errors prejudicial to a party. Otherwise, the  board will reverse the decision, amend it, or remand it with instructions for further proceedings .
 
-

65.11	:   COMPENSATION:   Replacement plan applicants who have completed the City of St. Augusta process and the Board of Water and Soil Resources appeal process and the plan has not been approved as submitted, may apply to the Board of Water and Soil Resources for compensation under Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.237.



65.12	: ENFORCEMENT  PROCEDURES:

A		Enforcing Authorities : The commissioner of the Department of  Natural Resources, conservation officers, and other peace officers may issue cease and desist orders and restoration and replacement orders.

B.	Cease and Desist Orders: Site-specific cease and desist orders may be issued when the enforcement authority has probable cause that a drain or fill activity is being or has been conducted in a wetland and does not qualify for an exemption or a no-loss determination and is being or has been conducted without prior approval of a replacement plan by the City of St. Augusta.

A cease and desist order will not be issued if the landowner has a valid certificate of exemption or no-loss from the City of St. Augusta or has evidence to support an exemption. Otherwise:

1.	The enforcement authority may issue a cease and desist order upon discovery of the drain or fill activity;

2.	The order may be withheld to give the landowner time to produce the evidence required by the City of St. Augusta to the enforcement authority of qualification for an exemption or no-loss determination; or

3.	A cease and desist order may be issued with an effective date three weeks   from the date of issuance. The enforcement  authority  may exercise this option when the enforcement authority cannot readily make a determination on the facts and circumstances to deny a landowner's claim of exemption or no-loss, and continued drain or fill activity would not cause irreparable harm to the wetland .

The enforcement authority will advise the landowner  that  the  landowner's application, if any, for an exemption or no-loss determination, should be made immediately to the City of St. Augusta and that whatever drain and fill work the landowner has done may  require  restoration  according  to  a  restoration  plan designed by the soil and · water conservation  district,  if  the  application  for exemption  or  no-loss  determination  is denied.

The enforcement authority issuing a cease and desist order will submit copies to the soil and water conservation district, City of St. Augusta , and department.
 
-



If an application for an exemption or no-loss determination is triggered by a cease and desist order, the City of St. Augusta or the technical evaluation panel will make a decision within three weeks from the date of application. The City of St. Augusta or the technical evaluation panel will review evidence of exemption or no-loss produced by  the landowner, inspect the site if necessary, and determine:

1.	If the area in question is a wetland; and

2.	If the activity qualifies for an exemption or no-loss determination.

In cases where the cease and desist order has been issued to the City of St. Augusta, the determination of exemption or no-loss will be made by the Board of Soil and Water Resources.

If the decision is that the activity is exempt or results in a no-loss determination, the decision maker will issue a certificate of exemption or no-loss, request that the enforcement authority rescind the cease and desist order, and notify the soil and water conservation district, the department, and the landowner.

If the application is denied, the decision-maker shall immediately notify the soil and water conservation district, the department, the enforcement authority, and the landowner.

C.	Restoration and replacement orders: The enforcement authority will issue a restoration order or replacement order when the drain or fill has already been completed when discovered, or after a cease and deist order has been issued and the landowner does not seek an exemption or no-loss determination within three weeks, or the City of St. Augusta denies the application.

Promptly upon being informed by the enforcement authority of the need, the soil and water conservation district staff person shall inspect the site and prepare a plan in consultation with the City of St. Augusta for restoring the site to its prealtered condition, unless the soil and water conservation district person concludes that restoration is impossible. The soil and water conservation district shall incorporate its plan into a restoration or replacement order and send it to the enforcement authority for service in person or by certified mail to the landowner.

The restoration order will specify a date by which the andowner must either:

1.	Restore the wetland according to the soil and water conservation district plan and obtain a certificate of satisfactory restoration from the soil and water conservation district; or
 
-



2.	Submit a replacement plan to the City of St. Augusta.

The order will  state that it will be canceled when the landowner obtains a certificate of exemption or no-loss from the City of St. Augusta or a certificate that restoration has been completed according to  an approved restoration plan. Otherwise , the landowner must restore the wetland in the manner required by the restoration order .

If the soil and water conservation district determines that restoration will not restore all the loss caused by the drain or fill activity, the enforcement authority may order a combination of restoration and replacement, or  may  order replacement rather than restoration, as determined by the soil and water conservation district. The order will direct the landowner to obtain replacement plan approval from the City of St. Augusta. The order must specify that if replacement plan approval is not obtained, the l ndowner must restore the wetland in a manner determined by the soil and water conservation district.

Each cease and desist, restoration, and replacement order will tell the landowner that violation of the order is a misdemeanor .

If, as part of a misdemeanor proceeding, the court orders restoration or replacement, the soil and water conservation district will determine which is appropriate, and if it is restoration, the method of restoration. If the court orders replacement, the landowner must follow the replacement plan process in this Section unless the court orders otherwise.



65.13	: MINING: Wetlands may not be drained or filled as part of a project for which a permit to mine is required by Minnesota Statutes, section 93.481 or by the City of St. Augusta City Code. Draining or filling of wetlands created . by pits, stockpiles or tailing basins by actions whose purpose was not to create the wetland may be exempt. The landowner must contact the City of St. Augusta to verify this exemption.



65.14	:	STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES FOR EVALUATING WETLAND REPLACEMENT  PLANS:

A        Procedures:

1.	General: No person shall drain or fill a wetland, wholly or partially, without first having a wetland value replacement plan approved by the City Council of the City of St. Augusta consistent with this Section  and provided that the activity is not prohibited under the special considerations provisions in Subd. 65.14.D.9.
 
-



2.	Preapplication conference and site visit: Before preparation of a wetland value replacement plan, the landowner must meet with the City of  St. Augusta for a preapplication conference and site visit. A landowner  may submit the sequencing  information required in Subd. 65. 14.B and request a determination of compliance with the sequencing requirements from the City of St. Augusta before preparing a replacement plan.

3.	Evaluation: Technical questions concerning the public value, location, size, and type of wetland shall be submitted to the technical evaluation panel. Wetland boundaries must be determined using the methodologies in the federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (January 1989).

Wetland type must be identified according . to Cowardin, et al. 1979, Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats  of the  United States and according to United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition) 'Wetlands of the United States." The technical evaluation panel will provide its determinations to the City of St. Augusta for consideration.

B.	Sequencing:

1.	Requirement: Except for wetlands located in cultivated fields that are subject to Subd. 65.14.8.8, and calcareous fens that are subject to Subd. 65.14.8.9, the City of St. Augusta will not consider or approve a wetland replacement plan unless the City of St. Augusta finds that the applicant has demonstrated that the activity impacting a wetland has complied with all of the following principles in descending order or priority:

a.	avoids direct or indirect impacts to the wetland that may destroy or diminish the wetland under the criteria in Subd. 65.14.8.3;

b.	minimizes the impact to the wetland by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation under the criteria in Subd. 65.14.B.4;

c.	rectifies the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland under the criteria in Subd. 65.14.8 .6;

d.	reduces or eliminates the impact to the wetland over time by preservation and maintenance operations under the criteria in Subd. 65.14.8.6; and
 
-

e.	replaces unavoidable impacts to the wetland by restoring or creating substitute wetland areas having equal or greater public value as provided for in this Section.

2.	Application options: An applicant may either submit the information required for sequencing analysis as part of the application for replacement plan approval or apply for a preliminary sequencing determination from the City of St. Augusta before preparing a replacement plan. The City of St. Augusta	may request additional information needed to make a determination.	For projects impacting wetland areas less than 0.1 acres, the City of St. Augusta may provide an on-site sequencing determination without written documentation from the applicant.

3.	Determination of impact avoidance :

a.	Avoidance  will   be   required   when   indicated   by   special considerations as stated in this Section.

b.	Wetland dependence determination:

(i)	Based on information provided by the applicant, the City of St. Augusta will determine if the .proposed project is wetland dependent.		A project is wetland dependent if wetland features, functions , or values are essential to fulfill the basic purpose of the project. A wetland present at the site of a proposed	project does not make that project wetland dependent.

(ii)	A  project  that  has  been  determined  by  the  City  of  St.
Augusta  to  be  wetland  dependent  is  exempt  from  the analysis of avoidance alternatives in Subd. 65.14.B.3.c.

c.	Alternative  analysis:

(i)	The applicant shall provide the City of St. Augusta with documentation describing at least two alternatives in addition to the proposed project, one of .which may be the no-build alternative, that would avoid impacts to wetlands. The alternatives may include consideration of alternate sites or alternative project configurations on the proposed site. The alternatives must be judged by the City of St. Augusta as good faith efforts, or the City of St. Augusta will require the applicant to redraft them for reconsideration .
 
-

(ii)	The City of St. Augusta will determine whether any feasible and prudent alternatives are available that would avoid impacts to wetlands . An alternative will be considered feasible and prudent if it is capable of being done from an engineering point of view, is in accordance with accepted engineering standards and practices, is consistent with reasonable requirements of the public health, safety, and welfare, is an environmentally preferable alternative based on a review of social, economic, and environmental impacts, and would create no truly unusual problems. The City of St. Augusta will consider the following in evaluating alternatives as applicable:

(a)	whether the basic project purpose can be reasonably accomplished using one or more other sites in the same general area that would avoid wetland impacts. An	alternate site will not be excluded from consideration only because it includes or requires an area not owned by the applicant that could reasonably be obtained , used, expanded, or managed to fulfill the basic purpose of the proposed project;

(b)	the general suitability of alternate sites considered by the applicant;

(c)	whether reasonable modification of the size, scope configuration,  or  density  of  the  project  would  avoid impacts to wetlands;

(d)	efforts by the applicant to accommodate or remove constraints		on alternatives imposed by zoning standards	or infrastructure, including request for conditional use permits,  variances, or planned unit developments; and

(e)	the physical, economic and demographic requirements of the project. Economic considerations alone do not make an alternative not feasible and prudent.

(iii)	If the City of St. Augusta determines that a feasible and prudent	alternative exists that would avoid impacts to wetlands, it will deny the replacement plan. If no feasible and prudent alternative is available that would avoid impacts to  wetlands,  the  City  of  St.  Augusta  will  evaluate  the
 
-

replacement  plan for compliance with Subd. 65.14.B.4 to Subd. 65.14.B.6.

4.	Determination of impact minimization:

a.	The applicant shall demonstrate to the City of  St.  Augusta satisfaction that the activity will minimize impacts to wetlands. In reviewing the sufficiency of the applicant's efforts to minimize wetland impacts, the City of St. Augusta will consider:

(i)	the spatial requirements of the project;

(ii)	the location of existing structural or natural features that may dictate the placement or configuration of the project;

(iii)	the purpose of the project and how the purpose relates to placement, configuration, or density;

(iv)	the sensitivity of the site design to the natural features of the site,	including topography, . hydrology and existing vegetation ;

(v)	the value, function,  and spatial  distribution  of the wetlands on the site;                                                                   ·

(vi)	individual and cumulative impacts; and

(vii)	an applicant's efforts to:

(a)	modify the size, scope, configuration, or density of the project;

(b)	remove  or  accommodate   site  constraints   including zoning, infrastructure, access, or natural features ; and

(c)	otherwise minimize impacts.

b.	If the City of St. Augusta finds that an applicant has not complied with the requirements to minimize wetland impacts, the City of St. Augusta will list, in writing, its objections to the project. If, within 30 days, the applicant does not withdraw the project proposal or indicate intent to submit an amended project proposal satisfying the City of St. Augusta's objections, the statement of objections shall constitute a denial.
 
-

5.	Determination of impact rectification: Temporary  impacts to  a wetland must be rectified by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland:

a.	Activities may qualify for a no-loss determination in Subd. 65.07 by meeting all of the following conditions:

(i)	the physical characteristics of the affected wetland, including ground	elevations, contours, inlet dimensions, outlet dimensions, substrate,  and hydrologic regime,  are restored to preproject conditions sufficient to ensure that all preproject functions and values are restored;

(ii)	the activity is completed and the physical characteristics of the wetland are restored within six months of the start of the activity; and

(iii)	the party responsible for the activity provides a performance bond to the City of St. Augusta. for an amount  sufficient to cover the estimated cost to restore the wetland to preproject conditions.	The City of St. Augusta will return the performance	bond to the responsible party upon a determination by the City of St. Augusta that the conditions in this item and item b. have been met.

b.	An applicant shall be granted a no-loss determination under the criteria in item a. once in a ten-year ·period for a particular site within a wetland, except that repairs to the original project shall be allowed under the no-loss determination, if the City of St. Augusta determines the request to be necessary and reasonable.

c.	Wetland impacts that do not qualify for a no-loss determination according to the criteria in item a. are subject to replacement under the criteria in 65.14.C to I.

6.	Determination of reduction or elimination of impacts  over time. After  an activity is completed, further wetland impacts from the draining or filling must be reduced or eliminated by maintaining, operating, and managing the project in a manner that preserves and maintains remaining wetland functions and values. The City of St. Augusta will require applicants to implement best management practices to protect wetland functions and values.
 
-


7.	Unavoidable impacts: Unavoidable wetland impacts that remain  after efforts to minimize, rectify, or reduce or eliminate them must be replaced according to 65.14.B to I.

8.	Wetlands on cultivated fields: If the wetland is located on a cultivated field, replacement must be accomplished through restoration  without regard to the priority order in 65.14.8.1. A wetland drained or filled under this provision must not be converted to nonagricultural land for ten years. The landowner must execute and record a notice of this requirement in the office of the county recorder for Wright County.

9.	Calcareous fens: Calcareous fens,  as  identified  by  the  commissioner, may not be filled, drained, or otherwise degraded, wholly or partially, by any action, unless the commissioner, under an  approved  management plan, decides some alteration is necessary, as provided in this Section.

C.	Replacement Plan Components:

On an application form provided by the City of St.  Augusta and with needed attachments supplied by the applicant, the following documentation must be provided, except that for replacement plans utilizing the wetland bank in Subd. 65.15, items 2 and 4 do not apply; instead the applicant shall submit the credit transfer form prescribed in Subd. 65.15.E.2.e:

1.	Organizational information, including the following:

a.	the post office address of the applicant;

b.	for corporations, the principal officers of the corporation, any parent companies, owners, partners, and joint venturers, and a designated contact person;

c.	managing agents, subsidiaries, or consultants that are or may be involved with the wetland draining or fillfng project;

2.	Either an affidavit confirming that the wetland values will be  replaced before or concurrent with the actual draining or filling of a wetland or an irrevocable bank letter of credit to guarantee the successful completion of the wetland value replacement;

3.	For the impacted wetland:

a.	a recent aerial photograph or accurate map of the impacted wetland area;
 
-


b.	the location of the wetland, including the county, watershed name or number, and public land survey coordinate of approximate wetland center;

c.	the size of the wetland, in acres or square feet;

d.	the type of wetland using United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition)  and  National  Wetland  Inventory mapping conventions (Cowardin et al., 1979);

e.	a list of the dominant vegetation in the impacted wetland area, including common names of the vegetation exceeding 20 percent coverage and an estimate of coverage, for example, 50 percent willow, 20 percent cattails, and 30 percent sedge;

f.	a soils map of the site showing soil type and substrate, where available;

g.	the size of the watershed that drains surface water into the wetland as	determined from a United States Government Survey topographical map or other suitable topographical survey;

h.	the locations of any surface inlets or outlets, natural or otherwise, draining into or out of the wetlands, and if the wetland is within the floodplain of a stream, river, or other watercourse, the distance and direction to the watercourse;

i.	a map, photograph, or written description of the land use of the immediate watershed within one mile of the impacted wetland. The surrounding land use information shall also indicate the presence and location, if any, of wetland  preservation regions and areas, wetland development avoidance regions and areas, and wetland deficient regions and areas as identified in the comprehensive water plan;

j.	the nature of the proposed project, its a real extent, and the impact on the wetland must be shown in sufficient detail to allow the City of St. Augusta to determine the amount and types of wetland to be impacted and to demonstrate compliance with the replacement sequencing criteria in Subd. 65.14.B if applicable;

k.	evidence of ownership or rights to the affected areas, including a legal description. When two or  more landowners are involved, including both the impact site and the proposed replacement site, a contract or other evidence of agreement signed by all landowners
 
-


and notarized must be included with the replacement plan. The contract or agreement must contain an acknowledgement of the covenant provisions in Subd. 65.14.C.4-.f by landowners on which a replacement wetland is proposed and the location and acreage of replacement wetlands. The contract  becomes binding upon final approval of the replacement plan;

I.	a list of all other local, state, and federal permits and approvals required for the activity; and

m.		other information considered necessary by the City of St. Augusta for evaluation of the activity;

4.	For the replacement wetland Subd. 65.14.C.3, subitems a. to i. and k. to m., and:

a.	an explanation of the size and type of wetland that will result from successful completion of the replacement plan;

b.	scale drawings showing plan and profile views of the replacement wetland and fixed photo-reference points for monitoring purposes. Photo-reference	points should include views of any control structures and enough additional points to adequately depict the entire project;

c.	how the replacement wetland shall be constructed, for example, excavation or restoration by blocking an existing tile; the type, size, and specifications of outlet structures; elevations, relative to Mean Sea Level or established bench mark, of key features, for example, sill,	emergency overflow, and structure height; and best management practices that will be implemented to prevent erosion or site degradation;

d.	for created wetlands only, additional soils information sufficient to determine the capability of the site to produce and maintain wetland characteristics;

e.	a timetable that clearly states how and when implementation of the replacement plan shall proceed, and when construction of the replacement wetland shall be finalized; .

f.	a notice in a form provided by the board attached to and recorded with	the deed for lands containing a replacement wetland, specifying the following:
 
-
(i)	the location of the replacement wetland;
(ii)	that the wetland is subject to the act;
(iii)	that the fee title owner is responsible for the costs of repairs
or reconstruction, if necessary, or for replacement costs;
(iv)	that reasonable access to the replacement wetland shall be granted to the proper authorities for inspection, monitoring, and enforcement  purposes;
(v)	that costs of title review and document recording is the responsibility of the fee title owner; and
(vi)	that the City of St. Augusta or board can require necessary repairs or reconstruction work to return the wetland to the specifications of the approved replacement plan and require reimbursement of reasonable costs from the wetland owner, or can require replacement of the wetland according to the act;

g.	a statement that the replacement wetland was not previously restored or created under a prior approved replacement plan;

h.	a statement that the replacement wetland was not drained or filled under an exemption during the previous ten years;

i.	a statement that the replacement wetland was not restored with financial assistance from public conservation programs;

j . a statement that the replacement wetland was not restored using private funds other than those of the landowner unless the funds are paid back with  interest to the individual or organization that funded the restoration and the individual or organization notifies the City of St. Augusta in writing that the restored wetland may be considered for replacement;

k.	a plan for monitoring the success of the replacement plan in meeting the project goal Subd. 65.16.D.1, and as specified in this Section; and

I.	other information considered necessary for evaluation of the project by the City of St. Augusta.

5.	The applicant must provide information known to the applicant or readily available	concerning the special considerations criteria in Subd. 65.14.0.9.
 
-


D.	Replacement Plan Evaluation Criteria:

1.	Sequencing: Prior to the City of St. Augusta considering or approving a replacement plan, the applicant must have exhausted all possibilities to avoid and minimize adverse wetland impacts according to sequencing in Subd. 65.14.B.

The  applicant  must  demonstrate  to  the  City  of  St.  Augusta  that  the replacement plan complies with this part and Subd. 65.14.E.

2.	Type of replacement: The order of preference for the method of replacement, from most preferred to least preferred, is project-specific restoration, project-specific creation, then wetland banking. Modification or conversion of nondegraded wetlands from one wetland type to another, for example by impoundment of additional water, does not constitute adequate replacement.

Wetlands drained or filled under an exemption may not be restored for replacement credit for ten years after draining or filling.

3.	Timing of replacement: Replacement of wetland values must be completed before or concurrent with the actual draining or filling of a wetland, unless an irrevocable bank letter of credit is submitted to the City of St. Augusta to guarantee successful completion of the replacement. All wetlands to be restored or created for replacement must be designated for replacement before restoration or creation. Submission to the City of St. Augusta of the information required in Subd. 65.14. C and subsequent approval shall be considered evidence of designation for replacement, provided the information is submitted before the actual restoration or creation.

4.	Location of replacement wetlands: Replacement wetlands must be located within the same watershed or county as the impacted wetlands.

5.	Statewide replacement for public transportation projects: Wetlands impacted by public transportation projects may be replaced statewide, provided they are approved by the commissioner under an established wetland banking system or under this Section.

6.	Size of replacement wetlands: Replacement wetlands must be of a size sufficient to ensure that they provide equal or greater public value than the wetland	that was drained or filled. For a wetland located on nonagricultural land, the minimum  size of the replacement wetland must be. in the ratio of two acres of replaced wetland for each acre of drained or
 
-


filled wetland. For a wetland located on agricultural land, the  minimum size of the replacement wetland must be in the ratio of one acre  of replaced wetland for each acre of drained or filled wetland. The actual replacement ratios required for a replacement wetland may be more than the minimum, subject to the evaluation of wetland functions and values. A review by the City of St. Augusta will determine the actual required replacement ratios.   Future owners may make no use of the wetland after it is altered, other than as agricultural land for a period of ten years unless future replacement to achieve a 2: 1 ratio occurs. The landowner shall record a notice of this restriction in the office of the Stearns County recorder.

7.	Carbon balance: When it is necessary to replace a drained or filled peatland, the replacement wetland must be revegetated with planted or naturally invading vegetation established within three growing seasons.

8.	Ecological consistency: Restoration and replacement of wetlands must be accomplished according to the ecology of the landscape area affected. A replacement plan that would result in wetlands or wetland characteristics that do not naturally occur in the landscape area in which the replacement will occur will not be approved.

9.	Special considerations: The factors in items a. to i., when identified as being applicable to an impact site or a replacement site, will be considered by the City of St. Augusta in the review of replacement plans.

a.	Federal or state-listed endangered species: A replacement plan for activities that involve sites where federal or state-listed endangered species are known to be present will not be approved if it is determined that the proposed activities will constitute a taking of those listed species under Minnesota Statutes, section 84.0895. Limited information on the presence of listed species at a particular site is available from the department's natural heritage program. Activities that involve taking listed species are subject to Minnesota Statutes, section 84.0895.

b.	Rare natural communities: A replacement plan for activities that involve the modification of a rare natural community as determined by the department's natural heritage program will not be approved if the City of St. Augusta determines that the proposed activities will permanently adversely affect the natural community.

c.	Special fish and wildlife resources: A replacement plan for activities that  would  have  a  significant  adverse  impact  that  cannot  be
 
-


mitigated on a special or locally significant fish and wildlife resource will not be approved.  These activities include, but are not limited to:

(i)	fish passage and spawning areas;
(ii)	colonial waterbird nesting colonies;
(iii)	migratory waterfowl concentration areas;
(iv)	deer wintering areas; and/or
(v)	wildlife travel corridors.

Activities  involving  streams  must  not  block  fish  passage  unless approved by the department.

d.	Archaeological or historic sites: A replacement plan for activities that  involve the modification of known archaeological or historical sites on or eligible for the  National Register of Historic Places, as designated  by  the  state  historic  preservation  officer,  will  not  be approved  if the City  of St. Augusta  determines  that the proposed activities	will have a    significant    adverse    impact    on    the archaeological or historical value of the site.

e.	Groundwater sensitivity: A replacement' plan for activities will not be approved if the City of St. Augusta determines the activities would have a significant adverse impact on groundwater quality. The publication	"Criteria and Guidelines for Assessing Geologic Sensitivity of Ground Water Resources in Minnesota"  (MDNR, 1991) may be used as a guide in determining potential impacts.

f.	Sensitive surface waters:   A replacement plan will not be approved if the City of St. Augusta determines the activities will have a significant adverse impact on the water quality of outstanding resource value waters or on trout waters designated by the commissioner .

g.	Education or research use: Wetlands known to be used for educational	or research purposes must be maintained or adequately  replaced.

h.	Waste disposal sites: The City of St. Augusta will evaluate the type and amount of waste material found at the site. Activities involving known or potential hazardous wastes or contaminants must be conducted according to applicable federal and state standards.

i.	Consistency with other plans: The City.of St. Augusta will consider the  extent  to which  proposed  activities  are  consistent  with  other
 
-


mitigated on a special or locally significant fish and wildlife resource will not be approved.  These activities include, but are not limited to:

(i)	fish passage and spawning areas;
(ii)	colonial waterbird nesting colonies;
(iii)	migratory waterfowl concentration areas;
(iv)	deer wintering areas; and/or
(v)	wildlife travel corridors.

Activities  involving  streams  must  not  block  fish  passage  unless approved by the department.

d.	Archaeological or historic sites: A replacement plan for activities that  involve the modification of known archaeological or historical sites on or eligible for the  National Register of Historic Places, as designated  by  the  state  historic  preservation  officer, will  not  be approved  if the City  of St. Augusta  determines  that the proposed activities	will have a    significant    adverse    impact    on    the archaeological or historical value of the site.

e.	Groundwater sensitivity: A replacement plan for activities will not be approved if the City of St. Augusta determines the activities would have a significant adverse impact on groundwater quality. The publication	"Criteria and Guidelines for Assessing Geologic Sensitivity of Ground Water Resources in Minnesota" (MDNR, 1991) may be used as a guide in determining potential impacts.

f.	Sensitive surface waters:   A replacement plan will not be approved if the City of St. Augusta determines the activities will have a significant adverse impact on the water quality of outstanding resource value waters or on trout waters designated by the commissioner .

g.	Education or research use: Wetlands known to be used for educational	or research purposes must be maintained or adequately  replaced.

h.	Waste disposal sites: The City of St. Augusta will evaluate the type and amount of waste material found at the site. Activities involving known or potential hazardous wastes or contaminants must be conducted according to applicable federal and state standards.

i.	Consistency with other plans: The City .of St. Augusta will consider the  extent  to which  proposed  activities  are  consistent  with  other
 
-


plans,  such  as  watershed  management  plans,  land  use  plans, zoning, and master plans.

10.	Evaluation of wetland functions and values:

a.	Evaluation options : Replacement wetlands must replace the functions and values that are lost from a wetland that is drained or filled. A replacement wetland should replace the same combination of functions and values provided by the impacted wetland. The evaluation of wetlands  shall be performed  in accordance  with part
8420.540  of  the  Board  of  Water  and  Soil  Resources  Wetland Conservation Act Rules (August, 1993).

E.	Wetland Replacement Standards :

1.	General requirements: The standards and guidelines in this part shall be used in wetland creation and restoration efforts to ensure adequate replacement of wetland functions and values .

2.	Specific requirements:  The standards in items a. to h. shall be followed in all wetland replacements unless the technical evaluation panel determines  . that a standard is clearly not appropriate.	·

a.	Water control structures must be constructed using specifications provided in the Minnesota Wetland Restoration Guide or their equivalent.	Control structures may be subject to the department dam safety regulations.

b.	Best management practices must be established and maintained adjacent to the entire perimeter of all replacement wetlands.

c.	For replacement wetlands where the dominant vegetation of the wetland type identified as the replacement goal is not likely to recover naturally in a five-year period, wooded and shrub wetlands especially, the replacement wetland must be seeded or planted with appropriate species, as determined by the soil and water conservation district, in coordination with the department. If the replacement wetland is seeded or planted, the seed or planting stock should be of local wetland origin to preserve local genotypes. During the monitoring period, the applicant must take reasonable steps to prevent invasion by any species, for example, purpose loosestrife	and Eurasian water milfoil, that would defeat the revegetation goal of the replacement plan.
 
-


	d.	Erosion control measures as determined by the soil and water conservation district must be employed during  construction  and until permanent ground cover is established to prevent siltation of the replacement wetland or nearby water bodies.
	
e.	
For all restored wetlands where the original organic  substrate  has been stripped away and for  all created wetlands,  provisions must
		be made for providing an organic substrate.	When feasible, the
		organic soil used for backfill should be taken from the drained or
		filled wetland.
	
f.	
The bottom contours of created types 3, 4, and 5 wetlands shall be undulating, rather than flat, to provide a variety of water depths.
	
g.	
Side  slopes  of  created  wetlands  and  buffer  strip  must  not  be
		steeper than 5:1, five feet  horizontally for every one foot vertically
as averaged around the wetland.	Side slopes of 1O:1 to 15:1 are preferred.
	
h.	
Created wetlands shall have an irregular edge to create points and bays.

F.	
Monitoring:	
The purpose of wetland value replacement monitoring is to ensure
that the replacement  wetland achieves  the goal of replacing lost functions  and
values.

G.	Duration of Monitoring: Monitoring shall be by means of an annual report as specified in Subd. 65.14.H and shall continue for five years following completion of the wetland replacement project. Through written notification to the applicant, the City of St. Augusta may extend the required monitoring period for not more than an additional five-year period if, at the end of the initial five-year period, the goal of the replacement plan has not been achieved, but may be achieved with more time.

H.	Monitoring Annual  Report:

1.	Purpose: The purpose of the annual report is to describe actual wetland restoration or creation activities completed during the past year, activities planned for the upcoming year, and the information in 2. The applicant shall submit the annual report to the City of St. Augusta on a date determined by the City of St. Augusta until the applicant has fulfilled all of the requirements of the City of St. Augusta.

2.	Report content: The annual report shall include the following information and other site-specific information identified by the City of St. Augusta:
 
-

	d.	Erosion control measures as determined by the soil and water conservation district must be employed during  construction  and until permanent ground cover is established to prevent siltation of the replacement wetland or nearby water bodies.
	
e.	
For all restored wetlands where the original organic  substrate  has been stripped away  and for  all created wetlands,  provisions must
		be made for providing an organic substrate.	When feasible, the
		organic soil used for backfill should be taken from the drained or
		filled wetland.
	
f.	
The bottom contours of created types 3, 4, and 5 wetlands shall be undulating, rather than flat, to provide a variety of water depths.
	
g.	
Side  slopes  of  created  wetlands  and  buffer  strip  must  not  be
		steeper than 5:1, five feet  horizontally for every one foot vertically
as averaged around the wetland.	Side slopes of 1O:1 to 15:1 are preferred.
	
h.	
Created wetlands shall have an irregular edge to create points and bays.

F.	
Monitoring:	
The purpose of wetland value replacement monitoring is to ensure
that the replacement  wetland achieves  the goal of replacing lost functions  and
values.

G.	Duration of Monitoring: Monitoring shall be by means of an annual report as specified in Subd. 65.14. H and shall continue for five years following completion of the wetland replacement project. Through written notification to the applicant, the City of St. Augusta may extend the required monitoring period for not more than an additional five-year period if, at the end of the initial five-year period, the goal of the replacement plan has not been achieved, but may be achieved with more time.

H.	Monitoring Annual  Report:

1.	Purpose: The purpose of the annual report is to describe actual wetland restoration or creation activities completed during the past year, activities planned for the upcoming year, and the information in 2. The applicant shall submit the annual report to the City of St. Augusta on a date determined by the City of St. Augusta until the applicant has fulfilled all of the requirements of the City of St. Augusta.

2.	Report content: The annual report shall include the following information and other site-specific information identified by the City of St. Augusta:
 
-



(a)	A description of the project location, size, current wetland type (Cowardin classification), and desired wetland type (goal);

(b)	A comparison of the as-built specifications versus the design specifications (first annual plan only) and a rationale for significant changes;

(c)	Hydrology measurements: seasonal water level elevations during the period April through October (msl or referenced to a known bench mark);

(d)	A list of the dominant vegetation in the wetland, including common names of the vegetation exceeding 20 percent coverage and an estimate of coverage, for example, 50 percent willow, 20 percent cattail, and 30 percent sedge; and

(e)	Color photographs of the project area taken anytime during the period June through August, referenced to the fixed photo­ reference points identified on the wetland  replacement plan and labeled accordingly.

I.	Monitoring Determinations by the City of St. Augusta :

1.	Will inspect the project when construction is complete and certify compliance with construction specifications, and may inspect the project at any time during the construction and monitoring period, and any time after that to assess the long-term viability of the replaced wetland. When the City of St. Augusta certifies that the construction specifications have been met, the City of St. Augusta will so advise the applicant and return any bond or other security that the applicant had provided;

2.	May order corrective action at any time during the required monitoring period if it determines that the goal of the approved replacement plan will not be met, and may require the applicant to prepare an amended wetland value replacement plan for review and approval by .the City of St. Augusta which describes in detail the corrective measures to be taken to achieve the goal of replacing lost wetland functions and values;

3.	Shall make a finding based on a site visit at the end of the monitoring period as to whether the goal of the replacement plan has been met. If the goal of the replacement plan has not been met, the City of St. Augusta will order corrective action and extend the monitoring period; and
 
-


4.	Will require one or more of the following actions if during the monitoring period the City of St. Augusta finds that the goal of the replacement plan will not be met:

(a)	Order the applicant to prepare and implement a new replacement plan;

(b)	Issue a cease and desist order on the draining and filling activity if it has not been completed;

(c)	Order restoration of the impacted wetland;

(d)	Obtain forfeiture  of a bond or other security and use the proceeds to replace the lost wetland values;

(e)	Ask the district court to order the applicant to fulfill the replacement plan; or

(f)	Other actions that the City of St. Augusta determines necessary to achieve the goal of the replacement plan.



65.15	:   STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR STATE WETLAND BANKING

A		Purpose:· The purpose of this section is to provide City of St. Augusta standards for procedures related to a state wetland banking system as provided for in parts 8420.0700 to 8420.0760. The City of St. Augusta is responsible for approving bank plans, certifying deposits, and monitoring of banked wetlands and enforcement under the rules.



65.16	:	CALCAREOUS FENS:

A		General: Calcareous fens may not be drained or filled or  otherwise  altered  or degraded  except  as  provided  for   in  a  management   plan  approved   by  the commissioner.	No exemptions shall be granted for any  drain  or fill  activities which affect calcareous fens.
 
 
 
-




SECTION 66
FP, FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT

Subdivision

66.01 Adoption of Stearns County Regulations



66.01:           ADOPTION  OF  STEARNS  COUNTY  REGULATIONS.      The  Stearns
County Floodplain Management Ordinance , Number 147, regulating the use of floodplains in Stearns County, Minnesota, is hereby adopted by reference and attached to this Ordinance as Exhibit C.
 
-



SECTION 67 SCENIC RIVERS DISTRICT

Subdivision

67.1	Adoption of Stearns County Regulations
67.2	Administration and Enforcement



67.1	ADOPTION   OF  STEARNS   COUNTY   REGULATIONS:   The  Steams   County
Mississippi River Scenic River Ordinance, Number 37, regulating the use of bluff lands and shorelands of the Mississippi River in Stearns County, is hereby adopted by referenced and attached to this Ordinance as Appendix D.



67.2	ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT: The provisions of this subdivision shall be administered and enforced by the Stearns County Zoning Administrator .
