CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Title of Code
10.02 Rules of interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Severability
10.07 Reference to other sections
10.08 Reference to offices
10.09 Errors and omissions
10.10 Official time
10.11 Reasonable time
10.12 Ordinances repealed
10.13 Ordinances unaffected
10.14 Effective date of ordinances
10.15 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.16 Ordinances which amend or supplement Code
10.17 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
10.18 Copies of Code
10.19 Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
10.99 General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the City, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered, and consolidated into component Codes, Titles, Chapters, and Sections, shall be known and
designated as the “City Code,” for which designation “Code of Ordinances,” “Codified Ordinances” or
“Code” may be substituted. Code Title, Chapter, and Section headings do not constitute any part of the
law as contained in the Code.
(B) All references to Codes, Titles, Chapters, and Sections are to the components of the Code unless
otherwise specified. Any component Code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic
Code.” Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as
“§ 10.01.” Headings and captions used in this Code other than the Title, Chapter, and Section
3
§ 10.01 Thief River Falls - General Provisions 4
numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any
Section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules
of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of this City shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the
context of the same ordinance:
(1) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or,” whenever the
context requires.
(2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, Code provision, or ordinance requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(3) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed
to include the feminine and neuter genders and vice versa; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the
future, if applicable.
(4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to
the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted
which amend or supplement this Code unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this Code other than the Title, Chapter, and Section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any Section.
5 General Provisions § 10.05
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.
However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) CITY. The City of Thief River Falls, Minnesota. The term CITY, when used in this Code,
may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.
(2) CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The person duly appointed by the City Council and acting in
such capacity. All references in the City Code to City Clerk or City Clerk-Treasurer shall be references to
the City Administrator or, in the absence from the City or disability of the City Administrator, such
references shall be to the Deputy Clerk. All references in the City Code to the City Administrator shall be
references to the City Clerk or City Clerk Treasurer.
(3) CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Thief River Falls, Minnesota.
(4) CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This City Code as modified by
amendment, revision, and adoption of new Titles, Chapters, or Sections.
(5) COUNTY. Pennington County.
(6) MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
(7) MONTH. A calendar month.
(8) OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law.
(9) OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission, or Department of this City unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
(10) PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners
or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers, or agents thereof.
(11) PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
(12) SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
§ 10.05 Thief River Falls - General Provisions 6
(13) SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
(14) STATE. The State of Minnesota.
(15) SUBCHAPTER. A Division of a Chapter, designated in this Code by a heading in the
Chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the Chapter, setting apart a group of Sections
related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all Chapters have Subchapters.
(16) WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or
otherwise.
(17) YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one Section reference is made to another Section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the Section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of
this City exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word
or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which
no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as
though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made
or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
7 General Provisions § 10.15
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
this City for the transaction of all City business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This Code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated by this Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this Code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this Code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the
due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect to it,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged,
§ 10.15 Thief River Falls - General Provisions 8
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it
is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing Chapter or Section of this Code, the
Chapter or Section shall be specifically repealed and a new Chapter or Section, containing the desired
amendment, substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing Code a new Chapter or Section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this Code, the proper number of the Chapter or Section. In
addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be
shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this Code shall be prosecuted
and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This Code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this Code. The liabilities,
proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and
imposed as if this Code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this
Code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
The official copy of this Code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. The
Clerk shall provide a copy for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this Minnesota Basic Code, all future
amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this Code or referenced in
this Code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
Code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the Code to the contrary.
9 General Provisions § 10.99
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this Code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty
which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this Code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not
more than $1,000, or both.
(B) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this Code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
(C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution, and other
court costs, may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official duty imposed by this
Code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
11.01 Ward boundaries
§ 11.01 WARD BOUNDARIES.
The Wards shall be limited and bounded as hereinafter set forth.
WARD 1 (PRECINCT “A”): North Boundary: City Limits; East Boundary: City Limits; South
Boundary: From the easterly City Limits east on the Red Lake River to the Thief River; West Boundary:
From the Thief River north to the City Limits.
WARD 1 (PRECINCT “B”): North Boundary: City Limits; East Boundary: From the City Limits
south on the Thief River to the Red Lake River south to Third Street; South Boundary: From the Red
Lake River west on Third Street to Atlantic Avenue, north on Atlantic Avenue to Fourth Street, west on
Fourth Street to Main Avenue; West Boundary: From Fourth Street north on Main Avenue to City
Limits.
WARD 2: North Boundary: City Limits; East Boundary: From the north City Limits south on Main
Avenue to Fourth Street and east to Atlantic Avenue and south to Third Street and East to the Red Lake
River; South Boundary: At Third Street south on the Red Lake River west on First Street to Brooks
Avenue, north on Brooks Avenue to Second Street, west on Second Street to Barzen Avenue, north on
Barzen Avenue to Third Street (Hwy 59), west on Third Street (Hwy 59) to the City Limits; West
Boundary: City Limits.
WARD 3 (PRECINCT “A”): North Boundary: From the westerly City Limits east on Third Street
(Hwy 59) to Barzen Avenue, south on Barzen Avenue to Second Street, east on Second Street to Brooks
Avenue, South on Brooks Avenue to First Street, east on First Street to Arnold Avenue; East Boundary:
From First Street south on Arnold Avenue to Highway 32, west on Highway 32 to Oakland Park Road
south to City Limits; South Boundary: City Limits; West Boundary: City Limits.
WARD 3 (PRECINCT “B”): North Boundary: From Arnold Avenue east on First Street to the Red
Lake River; East Boundary: From First Street south on the Red Lake River to Greenwood Street, east
on Greenwood Street to the CP Railroad tracks, south on the CP Railroad tracks to the City Limits;
South Boundary: City Limits; West Boundary: From City Limits north on Oakland Park Road to
Highway 32, east on Highway 32 to Arnold Avenue, north on Arnold Avenue to First Street.
11
§ 11.01 Thief River Falls - General Provisions 12
WARD 4: North Boundary: From Greenwood Street north and east on the Red Lake River to Merriam
Avenue; East Boundary: From the Red Lake River south on Merriam Avenue to Gulf Street, west on
Gulf Street to Crocker Avenue, south on Crocker Avenue to Greenwood Street, west on Greenwood Street
to Tindolph Avenue, south on Tindolph Avenue to the City Limits; South Boundary: City Limits; West
Boundary: City Limits north on CP Railroad tracks to Greenwood Street, west on Greenwood Street to
the Red Lake River.
WARD 5: North Boundary: From Merriam Avenue east on the Red Lake River to City Limits; East
Boundary: City Limits; South Boundary: City Limits; West Boundary: From the south City Limits
north on Tindolph Avenue to Greenwood Street, east on Greenwood Street to Crocker Avenue; north on
Crocker Avenue to Gulf Street, east on Gulf Street to Merriam Avenue, north on Merriam Avenue to the
Red Lake River.
Ordinance No. 55, 3rd Series 4/3/12
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL AND CITY OFFICIALS
Section
30.01 Authority and purpose
30.02 Council meetings
30.03 Special meetings
30.04 Procedure at regular meetings
30.05 City Administrator
30.06 Execution of contracts and City seal
30.07 Right to administrative appeal
30.08 Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings
30.09 Disbursement of funds and allowance of accounts
30.10 Facsimile signatures
30.11 Interim emergency succession
30.12 Salaries of Mayor and Council members
30.13 Worker’s compensation
§ 30.01 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
Pursuant to the authority granted by statute, this Chapter is enacted so as to set down for
enforcement the government and good order of the City by and through the Council.
§ 30.02 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chambers on the first and third
Tuesdays of each month at 5:00 p.m.
Amended: Ordinance No. 26, 3rd Series
§ 30.03 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or by any three other members of the
Council by writing filed with the City Administrator stating the time, place and purpose of the meeting.
Notice of a special meeting shall be given by the City Administrator to each member of the Council by
mailing a copy of the filing to all members who did not sign or issue the call at least one day prior to
the time stated therein, or by personal service at least 24 hours prior to the projected time of the
meeting. The City Administrator shall post written notice of the time, place and purpose of the special
meeting on the principal bulletin board of the City. Special meetings may be held without prior written
3
§ 30.03 Thief River Falls - Administration 4
notice to the Council when all Council members are present at the meeting or consent thereto in
writing. Any such consent shall be filled with the City Administrator prior to the beginning of the
meeting. Any special meeting attended by all Council members shall be a valid meeting for the
transaction of any business that may come before the meeting. Meetings of the Council which are
adjourned from time to time shall not be subject to the foregoing notice requirements; nor shall special
meetings which, in the judgment of the Council, require immediate consideration to meet an
emergency require such notice, but may be called by telephone communication or any other
expeditious means. At least three days before the meeting, written notice shall be posted on the bulletin
board of the City and shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to each person who has filed a written
request for notice of special meetings. As an alternative to mailing or otherwise delivering notice to
persons who have requested notice, notice may be published once at least three days before the
meeting in the official newspaper.
§ 30.04 PROCEDURE AT REGULAR MEETINGS.
(A) The City Administrator shall prepare the following items:
(1) An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;
(2) A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified accounts claiming payment for
goods or services rendered the City during the preceding month, the list to be called the "Resolution
Record" indicating the claimant, purpose, and amount; and
(3) A copy of all minutes to be considered.
(B) The City Administrator shall forthwith cause to be mailed to the Mayor, each member of the
Council and the City Attorney copies of all such documents. Robert’s Rules of Order (Revised) shall
govern all Council meetings as to procedural matters not set forth in the City Code.
§ 30.05 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
Pursuant to the authority of Chapter 331 of the Laws of the State of Minnesota for 1967, the
Office of City Administrator shall be, and hereby are, combined in the office of the Administrator and
thereafter the duties of the Administrator shall be performed by the Administrator.
§ 30.06 EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS AND CITY SEAL.
All contracts to which the City is a party, in addition to being signed by the Mayor and City
Administrator, shall be sealed with the City Seal. The Seal shall be kept in the custody of the City
Administrator and affixed by the City Administrator. The official City Seal shall be a circular disc
having engraved thereupon "CITY OF THIEF RIVER FALLS" and such other words, figures and
emblems as the Council may, by resolution, designate.
5 City Council and City Officials § 30.09
§ 30.07 RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.
If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the City Administrator or any
Board or Commission not having within its structure an appellate procedure, the aggrieved person is
entitled to a full hearing, if requested, within one year of the date of the administrative decision before
the Council upon serving a written request therefore upon the Mayor and City Administrator at least
five days prior to any regular Council meeting. The request shall contain a general statement setting
forth the administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant. At such hearing the appellant may
present any evidence the appellant deems pertinent to the appeal, but the City shall not be required to
keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The Mayor, or other officer presiding at the hearing, may,
in the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on their own motion or the motion of
the appellant, the City Administrator, or a member of the Council, adjourn the hearing to a more
convenient time or place, but such time or place shall be fixed and determined before adjournment so
as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening. All requests shall be made within 180 days
of the time that the decision to be appealed was made, unless otherwise provided for.
§ 30.08 RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.
The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure to be followed in all
administrative appeals and other hearings to be held before the Council and other bodies authorized to
hold hearings and determine questions therein presented. The rules of procedure shall be effective 30
days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and maintaining order and decorum in
the proceedings.
§ 30.09 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS AND ALLOWANCE OF ACCOUNTS.
All disbursements shall be made by order signed by the Mayor and City Administrator, duly
authorized by the Council, and every such order shall specify the purpose for which the disbursement
is made and indicate that it is to be paid out of the proper fund. But no such order shall be paid until
there is money to the credit of the fund out of which it is to be paid sufficient to pay the same together
with all then outstanding encumbrances upon the fund. No claim against the City shall be allowed,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, unless accompanied by an itemized account and voucher,
payroll or time sheet signed by a responsible employee who has personal knowledge of the facts in the
case and certifies to the correctness and reasonableness of the claim and that it is a proper claim against
the City; provided, however, that the Council may provide for a regular payment without specific
individual authorization or filing of an itemized account and voucher, payroll or time sheet of the
salaries and wages of regular employees or laborers and any other fixed charges which have been
previously duly and regularly authorized. Filing of a separate account verification may be dispensed
with by the Council if appropriately similar wording is printed near the endorsement space on the order
for payment form.
§ 30.10 Thief River Falls - Administration 6
§ 30.10 FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.
The Mayor and City Administrator are authorized to request a depository of City funds to honor
an order for payment when the instrument bears a facsimile of their signatures and to charge the same
to the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though it were their
manually written signatures. The signatures may also be used on bonds of the City, provided that one
signature is manually affixed as authentication thereof. The authority is granted only for the purpose of
permitting the officers an economy of time and effort.
§ 30.11 INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.
(A) Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack or a natural disaster requiring a
declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to insure the continuity of duly
elected and lawful leadership of the City to provide for the continuity of the government and the
emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for temporary
emergency appointments to their offices.
(B) Succession to local offices. In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States or a natural
disaster affecting the vicinity of the City, the Mayor, Council, and City Administrator shall be
forthwith notified by any one of the persons and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In
the event that safety or convenience dictates, an alternative place of meeting may be designated. Those
gathered shall proceed as follows:
(1) By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a
Chairperson and Secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively;
(2) They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the nuclear attack or natural
disaster and injuries to persons or damage to property already done or the imminence thereof;
(3) They may, based on such facts, declare a state of emergency;
(4) By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all
positions on the Council (including the office of Mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not
be served or who are unable to be present; and
(5) The interim successors shall serve until such time as the duly elected official is again
available and returns to the elected official’s position or the state of emergency has passed and a
successor is designated and qualified as required by law, whichever shall occur first.
(C) Duties of the Interim Emergency Council. The Interim Emergency Council shall exercise the
powers and duties of their offices and appoint other key government officials to serve during the
emergency.
Cross reference:
Emergency management, see Ch. 33
7 City Council and City Officials § 30.13
§ 30.12 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
Effective January 1, 2015, the salary of the Mayor shall be $600 per month, the salary of the Vice-
Mayor shall be $575 per month, and the salary of each Councilmember shall be $550 per month.
§ 30.13 WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
(A) Contractors. The City shall not enter into any contract for doing public work before receiving
from all other contracting parties acceptable evidence of compliance with the worker's compensation
insurance coverage requirement of Minnesota Statutes.
(B) City officers. All officers of the City elected or appointed for a regular term of office or to
complete the unexpired term of office or to complete the unexpired portion of any such regular term
shall be included in the definition of "employee" as defined in Minnesota Statutes relating to coverage
for purposes of worker’s compensation entitlement.
Thief River Falls - Administration 8
(this page is intentionally blank)
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTS, DIVISIONS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
General Provisions
31.001 Departments generally
31.002 Administrative Services Division
31.003 Community Development Division
31.004 Fire Division
31.005 Liquor Division
31.006 Parks and Recreation Division
31.007 Police Division
31.008 Public Utilities Division
31.009 Public Works Division
31.010 Management Information System (MIS) Division
31.011 Boards and Commissions generally
Board of Adjustments and Appeals
31.025 Establishment
31.026 Powers and duties
Cemetery Commission
31.040 Establishment and composition
31.041 Powers and duties
Community Development Advisory Board
31.055 Establishment and composition
31.056 Powers and duties
Housing and Development Authority
31.070 Establishment and composition
31.071 Powers and duties
9
§ 31.001 Thief River Falls - Administration 10
Library Board
31.085 Establishment and composition
31.086 Powers and duties
Planning Commission
31.100 Establishment and composition
31.101 Powers and duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY.
(A) Control. All Divisions of the City are under the overall control of the Council. Heads of all
Divisions and Departments are responsible to the Council and subject to its supervision and direction,
except as otherwise provided herein. The Council may supervise and direct the heads of all Divisions
and Departments through the City Administrator.
(B) Appointment. All Division Heads, Department Heads and employees shall be appointed by
the Council, except temporary employees. All appointments shall be for an indeterminate term, unless
otherwise stated, and subject to any applicable civil service regulations and union contracts in effect in
the City.
(C) Compensation. All wage and salary scales shall be fixed and determined by the Council,
except for temporary employees.
(D) Table of organization and lines of responsibility. The Council may by resolution adopt,
amend and from time to time revise a Table of Organization and define lines of responsibility and
authority for the efficient governmental organization of the City.
(E) Budgetary information. The Heads of all Divisions shall, prior to May 1 in each year, provide
necessary projected financial needs to the City Administrator and City Council to enable the head of
each Division, the City Administrator, and the City Council to determine the projected financial needs
of each Division for the ensuing year. The projected financial needs shall include information as to
maintenance and operation of buildings, equipment, new equipment, personnel, and such other
information as may be requested by the City Administrator.
11 Departments, Boards and Commissions § 31.006
§ 31.002 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DIVISION.
The Administrative Services Division is established. The head of the Administrative Services
Division shall be the City Administrator. The Administrative Services Division shall provide
administrative services to the Council and all City Divisions shall supervise and coordinate the daily
operations of Divisions within the City and shall perform such other functions as directed by the
Council or a Committee of the Council.
§ 31.003 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIVISION.
The Community Development Division is established. The head of the Community Development
Division shall be the Community Development Director. The Community Development Division shall
be responsible for the initiation and administration of community and economic development
activities, shall develop, administer, and enforce codes, ordinances, regulations and statutes concerning
City planning, land subdivision, zoning and buildings and shall perform such other functions as
directed by the Council or a Committee of the Council, or the City Administrator. The Building
Official Department, Community and Economic Development Department and Planning and Zoning
Department shall be a part of the Community Development Division.
§ 31.004 FIRE DIVISION.
The Fire Division is established. The head of the Fire Division shall be the Fire Chief. The Fire
Division shall provide fire control, rescue services, extractions, cover hazardous material incidents and
shall perform such other functions as directed by the Council or a Committee of the Council, or the
City Administrator . The Fire Division may have both employees and volunteers in such numbers as
established from time to time by the Council.
§ 31.005 LIQUOR DIVISION.
The Liquor Division is established. The head of the Liquor Division shall be the Liquor Store
Director. The Liquor Division shall operate a package store and shall perform such other functions as
directed by the Council or a Committee of the Council, or the City Administrator.
§ 31.006 PARKS AND RECREATION DIVISION.
The Parks and Recreation Division is established. The head of the Parks and Recreation Division
shall be the Parks and Recreation Director. The Parks and Recreation Division shall provide and
maintain parks, shall provide recreational opportunities, shall attempt to coordinate activities with
recreational groups, and shall perform such other functions as directed by the Council or a Committee
of the Council, or the City Administrator. The Parks Maintenance Department, Recreation Department
and Forestry Department shall be a part of the Parks and Recreation Division.
§ 31.007 Thief River Falls - Administration 12
§ 31.007 POLICE DIVISION.
The Police Division is established. The head of the Police Division shall be the Chief of Police.
The Police Division shall provide police protection within the City, shall provide investigative
services, shall offer crime prevention programs where possible and shall perform such other functions
as directed by the Council or a Committee of the Council, or the City Administrator. The Mayor shall
have, without the approval of the Council, authority to appoint additional qualified members of the
Police Division for temporary duty when in the Mayor's judgment an emergency exists for the
preservation of life or property.
§ 31.008 PUBLIC UTILITIES DIVISION.
The Public Utilities Division is established. The head of the Public Utilities Division shall be the
Public Utilities Director. The Public Utilities Division shall operate a billing office for utility services,
shall construct, maintain, and distribute electric services to the City, shall construct and maintain
wastewater services to the City, shall construct, maintain, and distribute a water plant and potable
water to the City and shall perform such other functions as directed by the Council or Committee of the
Council, or the City Administrator. The Billing Office Department, Electric Department, Wastewater
Department, and Water Plant/Distribution Department shall be a part of the Public Utilities Division.
§ 31.009 PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION.
The Public Works Division is established. The head of the Public Works Division shall be the
Public Works Director. The Public Works Division shall provide street construction, maintenance, and
repair, shall provide sanitation services, shall manage and maintain the City airport, shall manage and
maintain City buildings, shall provide and arrange for engineering services and shall perform such
other functions as directed by the Council or a Committee of the Council, or the City Administrator.
The Airport Department, Engineering Services Department, Government Buildings Department,
Sanitation Department, and Street Department shall be a part of the Public Works Division.
§ 31.010 MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM (MIS) DIVISION.
The Management Information System (MIS) Division is established. The head of the MIS
Division is the MIS Director. The MIS Division shall provide direction and coordinate all MIS
activities related to purchases of computer software and equipment, shall establish policies and
guidelines, shall establish policies for employee use of MIS equipment and software, and shall perform
such other functions as directed by the Council or Committee of the Council, or the City
Administrator.
Amended Ordinance 35, 3rd Series
§ 31.011 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.
All Board and Commission appointments authorized by ordinance or resolution shall be made by
13 Departments, Boards and Commissions § 31.026
the Mayor, and such appointments shall be confirmed by the Council at the first regular meeting in
January of each year. The term of each appointee shall be established and stated at the time of the
appointment and terms of present Board and Commission members may be re-established and changed
so as to give effect to this Section. New appointees shall assume office on February 1, January 31
being the date of expiration of terms. All appointees to Boards and Commissions shall hold office until
their successor is appointed and qualified. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as for an
expired term, but the appointment shall be only for the unexpired term. No appointed Board or
Commission member shall be an employee of the City except those who are members by virtue of their
office. Except as herein otherwise provided, all appointed Board and Commission members shall serve
without remuneration but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties when the expenses have been authorized by the Council before they were incurred. A
Chairperson and Secretary shall be chosen from and by each Board or Commission membership
annually to serve for one year. Any Board or Commission member may be removed by the Council for
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and the position filled as any other vacancy. Each
Board and Commission shall hold its regular meetings at a time established by each Board and
Commission. Except as otherwise provided herein, one of the members may be a member of the
Council appointed for a term established on an annual basis at the time of appointment, but not to
extend beyond the end of the then current term being served by such Council member or the Mayor.
Except as otherwise provided by statute or another Section of this City Code, the provisions of this
Section shall apply to all Boards and Commissions.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS
§ 31.025 ESTABLISHMENT.
A Board of Adjustments and Appeals is established. The Planning Commission shall act as the
Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have such authority
as is provided by the City Code and Statutes.
§ 31.026 POWERS AND DUTIES.
It is the duty of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals to hear and decide appeals from any
decision of the Zoning Administrator, to interpret the Zoning Chapter of the City Code in cases of
ambiguity and to make final rulings with respect to the application thereof and to review applications
for variances from the provisions of the Zoning Chapter. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall
have all of the powers and duties set forth in International Property Maintenance Code. The decisions
of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall be final subject to appeal to the Council.
Amended Ordinance 23, 3rd Series
Cross reference:
Zoning Code, see Ch. 152
§ 31.040 Thief River Falls - Administration 14
CEMETERY COMMISSION
§ 31.040 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
A Cemetery Commission is established for the management and operation of the cemetery. The
Cemetery Commission shall be composed of five members, one of whom, by virtue of the position,
shall be the City Administrator or the City Administrator’s nominee. No more than one member of the
Commission shall be a funeral director or other person engaged in the manufacture or sale of caskets,
monuments, or other similar equipment or supplies. The Cemetery Commission members, except the
City Administrator and Secretary, shall serve without remuneration. Cemetery Commission members,
except the City Administrator, shall serve staggered three-year terms. A Chairperson and such other
offices as determined by the Cemetery Commission shall be selected by the Cemetery Commission
from the appointed members.
§ 31.041 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Cemetery Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(A) To recommend the employment of a Superintendent and other assistants.
(B) To prepare and recommend to the Council rules and regulations for the care, maintenance,
management, and operation of the City Cemetery. When duly adopted by the Council, the rules and
regulations shall be enforced by the Superintendent.
(C) To recommend management, control, and administer the business affairs of the cemetery.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD
§ 31.055 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
A Community Development Advisory Board is established. The Community Development
Advisory Board shall be composed of seven members. One member shall be the City Administrator or,
in the City Administrator’s absence, the City Administrator’s nominee. One member shall be a Council
member appointed by the Council on an annual basis. The remaining five members shall be selected
from: accounting profession, financial background, Housing and Redevelopment Authority member,
Jobs, Incorporated Board member, and manufacturing and industry background. These five members
shall serve staggered three-year terms. The Community Development Director and Zoning
Administrator shall serve as an ex-officio member. A Chairperson and such other offices as determined
by the Community Development Advisory Board shall be selected by the Community Development
Advisory Board from the appointed members.
15 Departments, Boards and Commissions § 31.085
§ 31.056 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Community Development Advisory Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(A) Manage economic development programs and grant and loan programs with approval of the
Council;
(B) Prepare and recommend to the Council rules and regulations for the management of the
economic development programs and loan programs;
(C) Apply for and administer additional economic development programs and loan programs with
the approval of the Council; and
(D) To otherwise manage, control, and administer the business affairs of the Community
Development Advisory Board.
HOUSING AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 31.070 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
A Housing and Redevelopment Authority (HRA) is established. The HRA shall be composed of
five members. Members shall serve staggered five-year terms. A Chairperson and such other offices as
determined by the HRA shall be selected by the HRA from the appointed members.
§ 31.071 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the HRA shall be those set forth in Minnesota Statutes and the City
Code.
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 31.085 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
A Library Board is established. The Library Board shall be composed of seven members. Library
Board members shall serve staggered three-year terms. A Chairperson and such other offices as
determined by the Library Board shall be selected by the Library Board from the appointed members.
§ 31.086 Thief River Falls - Administration 16
§ 31.086 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Library Board shall be those set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 31.100 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
A Planning Commission is established. The Planning Commission shall be composed of nine
members, eight of whom shall be selected as with other Boards and Commissions. One member shall
be a Council member, appointed by the Council on an annual basis. The Community Development
Director, Public Works Director, and City Administrator, by reason of their positions, shall serve as ex
officio members of the Planning Commission, not to be included in the number herein stated. Planning
Commission members, except the Council members, shall serve staggered three-year terms. A
Chairperson and such other offices as determined by the Planning Commission shall be selected by the
Planning Commission from the appointed members.
§ 31.101 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Planning Commission shall have power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare and keep up to date a master plan for the physical development of the City;
(2) Review proposed subdivisions of land within the City;
(3) Draft for the Council an official map of the City and recommend or disapprove proposed
changes in such map;
(4) Prepare zoning regulations and recommend proposed changes in such regulations;
(5) Prepare plans for the clearance and rebuilding of slum districts and blighted areas within
the City;
(6) Submit to the Mayor a list of recommended capital improvements which, in the opinion
of the Planning Commission, are necessary or desirable to be constructed during the forthcoming
five-year period. The list shall be arranged in order of preference, with recommendations as to which
projects shall be constructed in which year; and
(7) Promote public interest in and understanding of the comprehensive plan and of planning,
zoning, and slum clearance.
(B) The Planning Commission shall have the power to:
17 Departments, Boards and Commissions § 31.116
(1) Require information which shall be furnished within a reasonable time from the
other Divisions of the City government in relation to its work;
(2) Within its budget appropriation, recommend that the City contract with City
Planners and other consultants for such services as it may require;
(3) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land, make examinations and
surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon;
(4) Prepare plans for the replanning, improvement, and redevelopment of
neighborhoods; and
(5) Prepare a plan for the replanning, reconstruction, or redevelopment of any area or
district which may be destroyed in whole or in part or seriously damaged by fire, earthquake,
flood, or other disaster.
(C) The duties of the Planning Commission in zoning administration shall be:
(1) To hold public hearings on applications for amendments to the Zoning Chapter of
the City Code. The Planning Commission shall not have the authority to make changes or
amendments to this Chapter; it shall act in a purely advisory manner to the Council transmitting
recommendations to the Council for final action.
(2) To hold public hearings on applications for Conditional Use Permits provided for
in the Zoning Chapter of the City Code and to transmit its recommended action to the Council
for final action.
§ 31.116 Thief River Falls - Administration 18
(this page is intentionally blank)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
32. CITY POLICIES
1
CHAPTER 32: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
32.01 Funds
32.02 Personnel
32.03 Municipal elections
32.04 Persons who may not purchase; exception
Abandoned Vehicles
32.15 Findings and purpose
32.16 Definitions
32.17 Violation to abandon motor vehicle
32.18 Authority to impound vehicles
32.19 Sale; waiting periods
32.20 Notice of taking and sale
32.21 Right to reclaim
32.22 Operator’s deficiency claim; consent to sale
32.23 Disposition by impound lot
32.24 Disposal authority
32.25 Contracts; reimbursement by MPCA
Disposal of Unclaimed Property
32.35 Definition
32.36 Preliminary notice
32.37 Notice and sale
32.38 Funds and claims thereon
Disposal of Excess Property
32.50 Declaration of excess property and authorizing sale of property
32.51 Excess property worth a total estimated value of less than $500
32.52 Excess property worth a total estimated value of $500 or more
32.53 Receipts from sales of excess property
Background Checks
32.60 Background Checks
32.61 Findings of the City Council.
32.63 Computerized Criminal History and Driver’s License History Inquiries Authorized
32.64 Good Faith Reliance on Record Accuracy
§ 32.01 Thief River Falls - Administration 20
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 FUNDS.
The Council shall establish such funds as it deems necessary for the accurate and efficient
accounting of City funds.
§ 32.02 PERSONNEL.
(A) Residency requirements. The Council may, by resolution, designate those employees or classes
of employees, including volunteers, who must reside within a prescribed and reasonable area or, in the
alternative, the Council may similarly impose a response time residency requirement. Any residency
requirement imposed under this Division must be:
(1) In accordance with a demonstrated job-related necessity; and
(2) Established without regard to political subdivision boundaries.
(B) Additional rules. The Council may, by resolution, establish additional personnel rules setting
forth the rights, duties, and responsibilities of employees. The rules may from time to time be amended.
§ 32.03 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
(A) Timing. The City shall have municipal elections on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November of each even-numbered year beginning in the year 2000.
(B) Transition. To accomplish even-numbered year municipal elections, the City adopts the
following municipal election plan:
(1) November 4, 1997, municipal election: The Mayor, Second Ward Alderman, Fourth Ward
Alderman, and Alderman at large (Schmalz position) shall be elected to three year terms.
(2) November 3, 1998, municipal election: There shall be no municipal election.
(3) November 2, 1999, municipal election: The First Ward Alderman, Third Ward Alderman,
Fifth Ward Alderman, and Alderman at large (Heinrichs position) shall be elected to three year terms.
(4) November 7, 2000, municipal election: The Mayor shall be elected to a two year term and
thereafter to two year terms. The Second Ward, Fourth Ward, and Alderman at large (Schmalz position)
shall be elected to four year terms and thereafter to four year terms.
(5) November 6, 2001, municipal election: There shall be no municipal election.
21 City Policies § 32.16
(6) November 5, 2002, municipal election: The Mayor shall be elected to a two-year term and
thereafter to two year terms. The First Ward Alderman, Third Ward Alderman, Fifth Ward Alderman,
and Alderman at large (Heinrichs position) shall be elected to four year terms and thereafter to four year
terms.
§ 32.04 PERSONS WHO MAY NOT PURCHASE; EXCEPTION.
(A) No employee of the City who is a Division Head, Department Head, Supervisor, member of the
Council or an advisor serving the City in a professional capacity may be a purchaser of property under
this Section. Other City employees may be purchasers if they are not directly involved in the sale, if they
are the highest responsible bidder and if at least one week’s published or posted notice of the sale is
given.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this Section if the purchase is
prohibited by the terms of this Section.
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 32.15 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
M.S. Ch. 168B, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference. Sections
32.15 through 32.25 of this Code are adopted under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, Subd. 2, as it may
be amended from time to time. If any of these provisions are less stringent that the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 168B, as it may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take precedence.
§ 32.16 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) ABANDONED VEHICLE.
(1) A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01 as it may be amended from time to time,
that:
(a) Has remained illegally:
1. For a period of more than 48 hours on any property owned or controlled by a unit
of government, or more than four hours on that property when it is properly posted; or
§ 32.16 Thief River Falls - Administration 22
2. On private property for a period of time, as determined under § 32.18(B), without
the consent of the person in control of the property; and
(b) Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable condition that it has no substantial
potential for further use consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or
storage building.
(2) A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. § 168.10 as it may be amended from time
to time, is not considered an abandoned vehicle.
(3) Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards that are defined,
maintained, and licensed in accordance with M.S. § 161.242 as it may be amended from time to time, or
that are licensed and maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not considered
abandoned vehicles.
(4) A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under police authority or
pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned
while the police hold, writ or court order is in effect.
(B) DEPARTMENT. The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
(C) IMPOUND. To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. There are two types of impounds:
public and nonpublic.
(D) IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR. A person who engages in impounding or
storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. OPERATOR includes an operator of a
public or nonpublic impound lot, regardless of whether tow truck service is provided.
(E) JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that:
(1) Is three years old or older;
(2) Is extensively damaged, with the damage including things as broken or missing wheels,
motor, drive train or transmission;
(3) Is apparently inoperable;
(4) Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and
(5) Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.
(F) MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Has the meaning given “motor vehicle” in M.S. § 169.01,
as it may be amended from time to time.
23 City Policies § 32.18
(G) MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE. Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the operation of or in
the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as tires and used motor oil, but excluding scrap
metal.
(H) MPCA or AGENCY. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(I) NONPUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot that is not a public impound lot.
(J) PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot owned by or contracting with a unit of government
under § 32.24.
(K) UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment pursuant
to § 32.18(B), or M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended from time to time, but is not a junk vehicle or
an abandoned vehicle.
(L) UNIT OF GOVERNMENT. Includes a state department or agency, a special purpose district,
and a county, statutory or home rule charter city, or town.
(M) VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the
mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things as the motor, drive train, and wheels.
§ 32.17 VIOLATION TO ABANDON MOTOR VEHICLE.
Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private property, without the consent of
the person in control of the property, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 32.18 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
(A) Abandoned or junk vehicles. The City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee, or
any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the City may take into custody and
impound any abandoned or junk vehicle.
(B) Unauthorized vehicles. The City Administrator, or the City Administrator’s designee, or any
peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the City may take into custody and
impound any unauthorized vehicle under M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended from time to time. A
vehicle may also be impounded after it has been left unattended in one of the following public or private
locations for the indicated period of time:
(1) In a public location not governed by M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended from time to
time:
(a) On a highway and properly tagged by a peace officer, four hours;
§ 32.18 Thief River Falls - Administration 24
(b) Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic hazard to the traveling public, as
determined by a peace officer, immediately; or
(c) That is a parking facility or other public property owned or controlled by a unit of
government, properly posted, four hours; or
(2) On private property:
(a) That is single-family or duplex residential property, immediately;
(b) That is private, nonresidential property, properly posted, immediately;
(c) That is private, nonresidential property, not posted, 24 hours; or
(d) That is any residential property, properly posted, immediately.
§ 32.19 SALE; WAITING PERIODS.
(A) Sale after 15 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale under § 32.23, 15
days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be:
(1) A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current registration plate and still be
eligible for disposal or sale under this subdivision; or
(2) An abandoned vehicle.
(B) Sale after 45 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale under § 32.23, 45
days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.
§ 32.20 NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.
(A) Contents; notice given within five days. When an impounded vehicle is taken into custody, the
City or impound lot operator taking it into custody shall give notice of the taking within five days. The
notice shall:
(1) Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year, make, model, and serial number of the
impounded motor vehicle if the information can be reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle
is being held;
(2) Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under § 32.21;
and
25 City Policies § 32.22
(3) State that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle
and contents within the appropriate time allowed under § 32.19 shall be deemed a waiver by them of all
right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or
sale of the vehicle and contents pursuant to § 32.23.
(B) Notice by mail or publication. The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any,
of an impounded vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record. The Department makes this
information available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. If it is impossible to determine
with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice
shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was
towed from or abandoned. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy.
(C) Unauthorized vehicles; notice. If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after 30 days
from the date the notice was sent under Division (B) of this Section, a second notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and
to all readily identifiable lienholders of record.
§ 32.21 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
(A) Payment of charges. The owner or any lienholder of an impounded vehicle shall have a right
to reclaim the vehicle from the City or impound lot operator taking it into custody upon payment of all
towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or 45 days, as
applicable under § 32.19, after the date of the notice required by § 32.20. Storage charges for the City
impound lot shall be established by the Council by resolution, which may be changed from time to time
by resolution.
Ord. No. 18, 3rd Series
(B) Lienholders. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impair any lien of a garagekeeper
under the laws of this state, or the right of a lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this Section,
GARAGEKEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor
vehicles.
§ 32.22 OPERATOR'S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.
(A) Deficiency claim. The nonpublic impound lot operator has a deficiency claim against the
registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable costs of services provided in the towing, storage and
inspection of the vehicle minus the proceeds of the sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not
exceed the costs of:
(1) 25 days storage for a vehicle described in § 32.19(A); and
(2) 55 days storage for a vehicle described in § 32.19(B).
§ 32.22 Thief River Falls - Administration 26
(B) Implied consent to sale. A registered owner who fails to claim the impounded vehicle within
the applicable time period allowed under § 32.19 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and
consents to the disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title.
§ 32.23 DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.
(A) Auction or sale.
(1) If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken into custody by the City or any
impound lot is not reclaimed under § 32.21, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when
eligible pursuant to §§ 32.20 and 32.21.
(2) The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the
purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety
check.
(B) Unsold vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the City or public impound lots
pursuant to Division (A) of this Section shall be disposed of in accordance with § 32.24.
(C) Sale proceeds; public entities. From the proceeds of a sale under this Section by the City or
public impound lot of an abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle, the City shall reimburse itself for the
cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and publication costs
incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this Chapter. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale
shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in
the treasury of the City.
(D) Sale proceeds; nonpublic impound lots. The operator of a nonpublic impound lot may retain
any proceeds derived from a sale conducted under the authority of Division (A) of this Section. The
operator may retain all proceeds from sale of any personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that
were not claimed by the owner or the owner's agent before the sale, except that any suspected
contraband or other items that likely would be subject to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over
to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
§ 32.24 DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.
The City may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the inventory
of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap metal and may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the collection, storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal.
The City may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and storage of not more
than five abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day
period.
27 City Policies § 32.35
§ 32.25 CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA.
(A) MPCA review and approval. If the City proposes to enter into a contract with a person licensed
by the MPCA pursuant to this Section or a contract pursuant to § 32.24, the MPCA may review the
proposed contract before it is entered into by the City, to determine whether it conforms to the MPCA's
plan for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA rules. A contract that does so
conform may be approved by the MPCA and entered into by the City. Where a contract has been
approved, the MPCA may reimburse the City for the costs incurred under the contract that have not been
reimbursed under § 32.23. Except as otherwise provided in § 32.24, the MPCA shall not approve any
contract that has been entered into without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons duly
licensed by the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to M.S. § 116.07, as it may be
amended from time to time; does not provide for a full performance bond; or does not provide for total
collection and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve a
contract covering solely collection or transportation of abandoned motor vehicles where the MPCA
determines total collection and transportation to be impracticable and where all other requirements herein
have been met and the unit of government, after proper notice and request for bids, has not received any
bid for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles.
(B) The City may perform work. If the City utilizes its own equipment and personnel pursuant to
its authority under § 32.24, and the use of the equipment and personnel conforms to the MPCA's plan
for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA rules, the City may be reimbursed by the
MPCA for reasonable costs incurred which are not reimbursed under § 32.23.
(C) The City required to contract work. The MPCA may demand that the City contract for the
disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal pursuant to the MPCA's plan for solid waste
disposal. If the City fails to contract within 180 days of the demand, the MPCA, through the
Department of Administration and on behalf of the City, may contract with any person duly licensed by
the MPCA for the disposal.
DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 32.35 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this Subchapter, the term ABANDONED PROPERTY means tangible or
intangible property that has lawfully come into the possession of the City in the course of municipal
operations, remains unclaimed by the owner and has been in the possession of the City for at least 60
days and has been declared such by a resolution of the Council.
§ 32.36 Thief River Falls - Administration 28
§ 32.36 PRELIMINARY NOTICE.
If the City Administrator knows the identity and whereabouts of the owner, the City Administrator
shall serve written notice upon the owner at least 30 days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the
Council. If the City acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and whereabouts of whom are
known by the City Administrator, notice shall also be served upon the prior owner. The notice shall
describe the property and state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or entitlement to
possession established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of
the Council after the expiration of 30 days from the date of the notice.
§ 32.37 NOTICE AND SALE.
Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain property to be abandoned property, the City
Administrator shall publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if known) and
addresses (if known) or prior owners and holders thereof and including a brief description of the
property. The text of the notice shall also state the time, place and manner of sale of all such property,
except cash and negotiables. The notice shall be published once at least three weeks prior to sale. Sale
shall be made to the highest bidder at public auction or sale conducted in the manner directed by the
Council in its resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice.
§ 32.38 FUNDS AND CLAIMS THEREON.
All proceeds from the sale shall be paid into the General Fund of the City and expenses thereof paid
therefrom. The former owner, if the former owner makes claim within eight months from the date of
publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may
be paid the amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefor,
less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and sale expenses but without
interest. The payment shall be also made from the General Fund.
DISPOSAL OF EXCESS PROPERTY
§ 32.50 DECLARATION OF EXCESS PROPERTY AND AUTHORIZING SALE OF
PROPERTY.
The City Administrator may, from time to time, recommend to the Council that certain personal
property (chattels) owned by the City is no longer needed for a municipal purpose and should be sold.
By action of the Council, the property shall be declared excess, the value estimated, and the City
Administrator authorized to dispose of the property in the manner stated herein.
29 City Policies § 32.53
§ 32.51 EXCESS PROPERTY WORTH A TOTAL ESTIMATED VALUE OF LESS THAN $500.
The City Administrator may sell excess property with a total value of less than $500 through
negotiated basis.
§ 32.52 EXCESS PROPERTY WITH A TOTAL ESTIMATED VALUE OF $500 OR MORE.
The City Administrator shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, excess property worth a
total estimated value of $500 or more. Notice of the public sale shall be given stating the time and place
of the sale and generally describing property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of sale by
publication once in the official newspaper. The sale shall be to the person submitting the highest sealed
bid or, if the sale is by auction, to the highest bidder. All sales shall be in conformance to the provisions
of M.S. § 471.345, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 32.53 RECEIPTS FROM SALE OF EXCESS PROPERTY.
All receipts from sales of excess property under this Subchapter shall be placed in the General Fund.
BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 32.60 BACKGROUND CHECKS.
The purpose of this Chapter is to authorize the City to conduct computerized criminal history
and driver's license history inquiries on persons who are finalists for employment positions in the City,
who are volunteers in City programs, and who apply for certain licenses. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to preclude the City from conducting comprehensive background investigations of
applicants for city employment positions and certain licenses, including but not limited to accessing
public data through other automated and non-automated sources and contacting references. Nothing in
this Section shall also be construed to preclude the City from periodically conducting a driver's license
inquiry upon employees or volunteers where possession of a valid driver's license is an essential
qualification of the position.
§ 32.61 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) COMPUTERIZED CRIMINAL HISTORY INQUIRIES. Criminal histories obtained
through the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension's computerized criminal history system.
(B) DRIVER'S LICENSE HISTORY INQUIRIES. Driver's license violations recorded by
the Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
§ 32.62 FINDINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council of the City of Thief River Falls makes the following findings regarding the
need to conduct computerized criminal history and driver's license history inquiries on persons who are
finalists for City positions, who are applying to volunteer in City programs, and who are applying for
certain licenses, recognizing that the City Council has an interest in protecting the general public in the
performance of government services.
(A) Certain City employees and volunteers work independently with and provide public
services to vulnerable members of society: children, senior citizens, developmentally disabled
individuals, and mentally ill persons. Protection of these vulnerable persons warrants the investigation
of persons who are finalists to fill these certain employment positions with the City and who are
applying to volunteer in City programs that provide services to these members of the public.
(B) Some City employees work closely with public funds and accounts and are in
employment positions that have access to property or assets of the City where losses are difficult to
detect or prevent. In order to minimize the risk that the public trust will be violated, computerized
criminal history inquiries of those individuals who are finalists to be employed in such positions are
necessary.
(C) Certain City employees enter the private homes of City residents on a regular basis in
the performance of necessary and worthwhile public services. Computerized criminal history inquiries
on persons who are finalists for such positions are deemed necessary to minimize the risk that the
personal safety of residents in their homes will be violated.
(D) Certain City employees operate heavy machinery, street maintenance equipment, and/or
other City-owned motor vehicles on public right-of-way. In order to minimize the loss of public
property and the loss of life in serious traffic accidents, computerized criminal history inquiries and
driver's license history inquiries of finalists for such positions are appropriate.
(E) In accordance with the state policy of encouraging the rehabilitation of criminal
offenders, the computerized criminal history and driver's license history inquiries prescribed herein
shall not be an automatic bar to public employment but rather used in assessing the rehabilitation of
the finalist in accordance with Minnesota Statues, Sections 364.01 to 364.10.
(F) This Chapter cannot guarantee that certain groups or individuals will be protected from
the criminal acts of employees or volunteers; rather, its intent is to minimize certain risks in the
performance of government services to the general public.
§ 32.63 COMPUTERIZED CRIMINAL HISTORY AND DRIVER'S LICENSE HISTORY
INQUIRIES AUTHORIZED.
(A) Applicants for City Employment.
(1) Criminal History Employment Background Investigations. The City Police Division is
hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal history background
investigation on the applicants for the following positions within the City, unless the City’s hiring
authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed:
All regular part-time or full-time employees of the City and other positions that
work with children or vulnerable adults.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment
applicants, the Police Division is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of
Criminal Apprehensions (BCA) Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance
with the BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Division under the care and custody of the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of Police. A
summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data may be released by the Police
Division to the hiring authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator, or other City staff
involved in the hiring process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Division by
written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the
provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of the information.
Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the City will not reject an
applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly
related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall
notify the applicant in writing of the following:
1. The grounds and reasons for denial;
2. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Section 364.06;
3. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
City shall also have the right to obtain driver’s license history for the above positions, and this
may be through the Police Division or City Administrator’s office.
(B) Applicants for City Licenses.
(1). Criminal History License Background Investigations. The City Police
Division is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal history background
investigation on the applicants for the following licenses within the City:
Liquor licenses.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license
applicants, the Police Division is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of
Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA
policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Division under the
care and custody of the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of Police. A summary of the
results of the Computerized Criminal History data may be released by the Police Division to the hiring
authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator, or other City staff involved in the hiring
process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Division by
written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the
provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of the information.
Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the City will not reject an
applicant for license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related
to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence. If the City rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in
writing of the following:
1. The grounds and reasons for denial;
2. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Section 364.06;
3. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for license; and
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
§ 32.64 GOOD FAITH RELIANCE ON RECORD ACCURACY.
The City may in good faith rely on the accuracy of the criminal history information received
from federal, state, and county authorities in conducting the computerized criminal history or driver's
license history inquiry prescribed herein.
Section 2. City Code Chapter 10 entitled "General Provisions” is hereby adopted in its entirety,
by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and
publication.
Amended Ordinance No. 29, 3rd Series
Amended Ordinance No. 43, 3rd Series
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
33. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
1
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
33.01 Policy and purpose
33.02 Definitions
33.03 Establishment of emergency management organization
33.04 Powers and duties of Director
33.05 Local emergencies
33.06 Emergency regulations
33.07 Emergency management a government function
33.08 Participation in labor disputes or politics
33.98 Violation
§ 33.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and
destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds, or other natural causes or
from sabotage, hostile action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order
to insure that preparations of this City will be adequate, where possible considering the City’s ability to
fund such preparations, to deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health and safety and to preserve the lives and property of the people of
this City, it is found and declared to be necessary:
(A) To establish a City Emergency Management Organization responsible for City planning and
preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters;
(B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters;
(C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this City and other political subdivisions of
this state with respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and
(D) To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time, which
requires that each political subdivision of Minnesota shall establish a local organization for emergency
management.
31
§ 33.02 Thief River Falls - Administration 32
§ 33.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and
safety of any person or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to
property and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to
repair or prevent the injury or loss.
(B) EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action
to prevent disasters from developing or occurring.
(C) EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize
and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature or from sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material mishaps. These functions
include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services,
engineering, warning services, communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary
restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all other
activities necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. Emergency management
includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil defense” functions. The City shall prepare for
and carry out emergency functions which it is able to considering its budgetary constraints and other
obligations. The Council shall determine which emergency functions preparations shall be made for and
the extent of that preparation.
(D) EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in
City-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter or any
rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from City departments, authorized volunteers and
private organizations and agencies.
(E) EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
City-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides City liaison and
coordination with federal, state, and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.
§ 33.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
There is created within the City government an Emergency Management Director, called the
Director. The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed by the Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as established by the City
Council and shall be paid the Director’s necessary expenses. The Director shall establish an Emergency
Management Organization as directed by the Council considering the City’s ability to fund such
33 Emergency Management § 33.04
organization. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of the
Council.
§ 33.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
(A) The Director, with the consent of the Council, may represent the City on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements
with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in
an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted and shall present these agreements to the Council for
its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
(B) The Director may make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, resources and
facilities of the City as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to
plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director may establish the
economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required in
accordance with State and Federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Council.
(C) The Director may prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness of
the City, if prepared, and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval. When the Council has
approved the plan, it shall be the duty of all City agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
City to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in
like manner from time to time. The Director, as allowed by City resources, shall coordinate the
emergency management activities of the City to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated
with the emergency plans of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of
the county and other political subdivisions within the state.
(D) In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director may institute training
programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as
may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster
occurs.
(E) The Director may utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing
departments and agencies of the City. The officers and personnel of all City Departments and agencies
shall cooperate with and extend services and facilities to the City's Emergency Management. The head
of each department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning and
programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the
department or agency.
(F) The Director may, in cooperation with those City Departments and agencies affected, assist in
the organizing, recruiting and training of emergency management personnel which may be required on a
volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the City and State. To the extent that emergency
personnel are recruited to augment a regular City Department or agency for emergencies, they shall be
§ 33.04 Thief River Falls - Administration 34
assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and control of the
department or agency.
(G) Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall coordinate the activity of
municipal emergency management organizations within the City and provide assistance where possible in
establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in
the several services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
(H) The Director, where possible, shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the
Governor with reference to emergency management.
(I) The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities when
requested by the Mayor or Council.
§ 33.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
(A) A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or the Mayor’s legal successor. It shall
not be continued for a period in excess of three days except by or with the consent of the Council. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator.
(B) A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery
aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional disaster plans and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.
(C) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized
by the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency
shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
§ 33.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
(A) Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council may by
resolution promulgate regulations consistent with applicable Federal or State law or regulation,
respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance
and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire and safety regulations, drills or
practice periods required for preliminary training; and all other matters which are required to protect
public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
(B) Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing, shall be dated, shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours.
Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for inspection at the City
35 Emergency Management § 33.98
Administrator's office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of
the City or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution. By
resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
(C) The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded,
every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency
to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to
the extent conflict exists.
(D) During a declared emergency, the City is, under the provisions of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be
amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary,
empowered, through its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the City, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and safety of
persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The City may
exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the timeconsuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies and
the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of
resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to
low bids, and requirement for bids.
§ 33.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
All functions and activities relating to emergency management are declared to be governmental
functions. The provisions of this Section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to
which that person would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker's compensation
law or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or compensation under
any act of Congress.
§ 33.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
The Emergency Management Organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor
shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor
dispute.
§ 33.98 VIOLATION.
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or any regulation adopted thereunder relating
to acts, omissions, or conduct other than official acts of City employees or officers is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
50.01 Definitions
50.02 Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities
50.03 Fixing rates and charges for public utilities
50.04 Contractual contents
50.05 Connection or tapping prohibited; delinquent assessments or charges
50.06 Underground utility construction
50.07 Remote-type water meters required
Rules and Regulations
50.20 Billing, payment, and delinquency
50.21 Application, connection and sale of service
50.22 Discontinuance of service
50.23 Ownership of municipal utilities
50.24 Right of entry
50.25 Meter accuracy
50.26 Unlawful acts
50.27 Municipal utility services and charges a lien
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) COMPANY, GRANTEE and FRANCHISEE. Any City, municipal and public utility system
to which a franchise has been granted by the City.
(B) CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.
3
§ 50.01 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 4
(C) MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any City-owned utility system, including, but not by way of
limitation, electric, water, sewerage and refuse service.
(D) PUBLIC UTILITY. This term shall refer to PUBLIC UTILITIES as defined in state statute.
(E) SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
(F) UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be City-owned facilities or furnished by
public utility companies.
§ 50.02 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by way of limitation, rates for
service, permit fees, deposit, connection and meter testing fees, disconnection fees, reconnection fees,
including penalties for nonpayment, if any, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the Council and
adopted by resolution. The resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and
open to inspection in the office of the City Administrator and shall be uniformly enforced. For the
purpose of fixing the rates and charges, the Council may categorize and classify under the various
types of service, provided that the categorization and classification shall be included in the resolution
authorized by this Section.
§ 50.03 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES.
All rates and charges for public utility franchises, not regulated by an agency of the state, shall be
fixed and determined by the Council and adopted by Council resolution. Upon adoption the rates and
charges shall become provisions of this Chapter. Public utility company rates and charges may be fixed
and determined by the respective franchises in compliance with this Section, as follows.
(A) No rate or charge involving an increase thereof shall become effective until approved by the
Council. To request the increase the franchisee shall prepare its written petition setting forth the then
current and proposed rates and charges, the effective date of the proposed increases, (which may not be
within 90 days of filing the petition) and the reason or reasons necessitating the proposed increase or
increases. The petition shall be filed with the Council by serving the same on the City Administrator in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(B) Within 30 days of the filing, the Council shall adopt a resolution and serve the same upon the
resident superintendent of the franchisee in like manner as the petition may be served either approving
the proposed increases or ordering a hearing thereon to be held within 60 days thereof. If no such
action is taken by the Council, the increase or increases shall take effect on the date stated in the
franchisee’s petition as though approved by the Council.
(C) Prior to the hearing date, the franchisee shall, without delay, comply with the City’s
reasonable requests for examination and copying of all books, records, documents, and other
information relating
5 Utilities Generally § 50.06
to the subject matter of the petition. Should the franchisee unreasonably delay, fail, or refuse the
requests, the same shall be grounds for a continuance of the hearing date.
(D) Notice of hearing shall be in the form and manner stated in the resolution. At the hearing all
persons wishing to be heard thereon shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity. Findings and a
decision shall be made by the Council within 15 days after the hearing and served upon the franchisee.
(E) Should the City have a franchise agreement with a franchisee and should that franchise
agreement include a procedure for fixing rates and charges, the terms of the franchise agreement shall
be used in place of this Section.
§ 50.04 CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.
Provisions of this Chapter relating to municipal utilities shall constitute portions of the contract
between the City and all consumers of municipal utility services and every such consumer shall be
deemed to assent to the same. All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility services other
than municipal utilities shall be in strict accord with the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 50.05 CONNECTION OR TAPPING PROHIBITED; DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS OR
CHARGES.
No permit shall be granted to tap or connect with sewer or water mains when any assessment or
connection charge for the sewer or water main against the property to be connected is in default or
delinquent. If the assessment or connection charges are payable in installments, no permit shall be
granted unless all installments then due and payable have been paid.
§ 50.06 UNDERGROUND UTILITY CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Underground construction required. All utility lines hereafter installed, constructed, or
otherwise placed within the City for electric (except as otherwise provided in this code), telephone, TV
cable or other like or similar services to serve residential, commercial, and industrial customers in
newly platted areas and which utilize metallic conductors to carry electric current, whether owned,
installed, or constructed by the supplier, consumer, or any party shall be installed and placed
underground, subject only to the exceptions hereinafter stated; however, aboveground placement,
construction, modification or replacement of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, and service
connection pedestals shall be allowed. The requirements of this Section shall apply equally outside of
the corporate limits of the City coincident with City jurisdiction of platting, subdivision regulation, or
comprehensive planning as may now or in the future be allowed by law. All companies installing and
operating lines such as those described herein shall be referred to as "utility companies" for purposes
of this Section.
(B) Exceptions to application. The following exceptions to the strict applicability of this Section
may be allowed upon the conditions stated:
§ 50.06 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 6
(1) Transmission lines. Aboveground placement, construction, modification, or replacement
of those lines commonly referred to as "high voltage transmission lines" upon which the conductor’s
normal operating voltage equals or exceeds 69,000 volts (phase to phase) may be allowed; provided,
that 60 days prior to commencement of construction of such a project, the City shall be furnished
notice of the proposed project and, upon request, the utility company involved shall furnish any
relevant information regarding such project to the City. This Section shall not be construed as waiving
the requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of the City as the same may apply to any such
proposed project.
(2) Technical and economic feasibility. Aboveground placement, construction,
modification, or replacement of lines shall be allowed in residential, commercial, and industrial areas
where the Council, following consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission, the
Utilities Committee, and the Public Utilities Director finds that:
(a) Underground placement would place an undue financial burden upon the landowner
or the utility company or deprive the landowner of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial
property rights; or
(b) Underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible due to
topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions which adversely affect underground utility
placement.
(3) Temporary service. Aboveground placement of temporary service lines shall only be
allowed:
(a) During the new construction of any project for a period not to exceed 24 months;
(b) During any emergency to safeguard lives or property within the City; or
(c) For a period of not more than seven months when soil conditions make excavation
impractical.
(C) Repair and maintenance of existing installations. Nothing in this Section shall be construed
to prevent repair and maintenance of existing overhead utility lines. Replacement or modification of
existing overhead utility lines is not permitted hereunder.
(D) Developer responsibility. All owners, platters or developers are responsible for complying
with the requirements of this Section and prior to the final approval of any plat or development plan
shall submit to the Planning Commission written instruments from the appropriate utility companies
showing that all necessary arrangements with the companies for installation of the utilities have been
made.
(E) Placement.
(1) All utility lines shall be placed within appropriate easements or dedicated public ways so
as to cause minimum conflict with other underground services. Whenever feasible, all utilities shall be
placed within the same trench.
7 Utilities Generally § 50.22
(2) All utility companies shall submit annually to the Public Utilities Director and the Public
Works Director current maps revealing locations of underground installations whether such
installations were installed prior to the effective date of this Section hereafter.
§ 50.07 REMOTE-TYPE WATER METERS REQUIRED.
In all new construction using one-inch size water meter, or smaller, remote-type water meters shall
be installed at the expense of the owner.
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 50.20 BILLING, PAYMENT, AND DELINQUENCY.
All municipal utilities shall be billed monthly and an utilities statement or statements shall be
mailed to each consumer each month. All utility charges shall be delinquent if they are unpaid on the
due date set forth in the statement; provided, that if the due date shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday, the time shall be extended to the close of business on the next succeeding day on which
business is normally transacted. A late fee of ten percent of the actual charge for utilities only shall be
added to, and become part of, all delinquent utility bills. If service is suspended due to delinquency it
shall not be restored at that location until a reconnection charge has been paid for each utility
reconnected in addition to amounts owed for service and late fees.
§ 50.21 APPLICATION, CONNECTION AND SALE OF SERVICE.
Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the City and
strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent has been received from the
City to make the same. All municipal utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then
applicable rate applied to the amount of the utilities taken as metered or ascertained in connection with
the rates.
§ 50.22 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued whenever it is found that:
(A) The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any connection with
the municipal utilities, has violated any requirement of this Code relative thereto or any connection
therewith;
(B) Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other financial obligation imposed on the
present owner or occupant of the premises served, is unpaid after the notice thereof;
§ 50.22 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 8
(C) There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection with any
application for service or delivery or charges therefor; and
(D) Discontinuance of service shall be subject to any state requirements that are applicable.
§ 50.23 OWNERSHIP OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions, and appurtenances thereto
shall be and remain in the City and no person shall own any part or portion thereof. However, private
facilities and appurtenances constructed on private property are not intended to be included in
municipal ownership. After construction and the payment of the cost thereof by special assessment or
otherwise, the City assumes the responsibility for the cost of maintenance, repair, and replacement of
water mains, including trunk mains and all connections thereto from the trunk main up to and
including the curb boxes and sewer mains for the trunk main only. The abutting property owner is
responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all sewer facilities extending from their
property to the trunk sewer main, including the joints and connections thereto.
§ 50.24 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The City has the right to enter in and upon private property, including buildings and dwelling
houses, in or upon which is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith, at all times
reasonable under the circumstances for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the purpose of
inspection and repair of meters or a utility system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of
connecting and disconnecting service.
§ 50.25 METER ACCURACY.
(A) All water and electric utilities service shall be supplied through a meter which shall accurately
measure the amount thereof supplied to any consumer. The consumer shall supply a safe and proper
place for the installation of the meters. Meters shall be tested for accuracy by the City upon the request
of any consumer who believes their meter to be inaccurate. If, upon test, it appears that the meter
overruns to the extent of three percent or more, the City shall pay the cost of the tests and shall make a
refund for overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy but for not longer than six years
n the basis of the extent of the inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the tests. If, upon test, it appears
that the meter is slow to the extent of three percent or more, the consumer shall pay for undercharges
since the last known date of accuracy but for not longer than six years on the basis of the extent of the
inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the test. If, when any meter is tested upon the demand of a
consumer it is found to be accurate, slow, or less than three percent fast, the consumer shall pay the
reasonable cost of the testing.
9 Utilities Generally § 50.26
(B) In the event of any other error in utilities charges, the corrective payment for
overcharges or undercharges shall be for a period not to exceed six years.
(C) The City shall offer a payment agreement to consumers who have been undercharged if
no culpable conduct by the consumer or resident of the consumer’s household caused the
undercharge. The arrangement shall cover a period equal to the time over which the undercharge
occurred or a different shorter time period that is mutually agreeable to the consumer and the
City. No interest or delinquency fee shall be charged to consumers who have been undercharged
if no culpable conduct by the consumer or a resident of the consumer’s household caused the
undercharge.
Ordinance No. 33, 3rd Series 07/24/07
§ 50.26 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb
or in any way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment,
fixture, or appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system or commit any act
tending to obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with, opening into, use or alter in
any way any municipal utility system without first having applied for and received written
permission to do so from the City.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been
turned off or disconnected by the City for nonpayment of a bill, or for any other reason, without
first having obtained a permit to do so from the City.
(D) It is unlawful for any person to "jumper" or by any means or device fully or partially
circumvent a municipal utility meter or to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use
the services of any utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no
knowledge.
(E) No contractor, homeowner or other person may pull, remove or tamper with an
electrical meter or socket located within the City of Thief River Falls, without first having
obtained the prior written consent of the Electric Superintendent or Systems Manager. A first
violation of this provision shall result in the imposition of a fine of $250.00 to the violator. A
second or subsequent violation of this provision shall result in the imposition of a fine of $500.00
to the violator for each such violation.
§ 50.27 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 10
§ 50.27 MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICES AND CHARGES A LIEN.
(A) Payment for all municipal utility service and charges shall be the primary responsibility
of the owner of the premises served and shall be billed to the owner unless otherwise contracted
for and authorized in writing by the owner and the tenant, as agent for the owner, and consented
to by the City. The City may collect the same in a civil action or, in the alternative and at the
option of the City, as otherwise provided in this Section.
(B) Each such account is made a lien upon the premises served. All such accounts which are
more than 45 days past due may, when authorized by resolution of the Council, be certified by
the City Administrator to the County Auditor, and the City Administrator in so certifying shall
specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises served and the name of the owner
thereof. The amount so certified shall be extended by the County Auditor on the tax rolls against
the premises in the same manner as other taxes, collected by the County Treasurer and paid to
the City along with other taxes.
11 Utilities Generally § 50.27
(this page is intentionally blank)
TITLE V: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter
51. GARBAGE AND REFUSE
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
51.01 Definition
51.02 Storage and transporting refuse
51.03 Collection and disposal of refuse
51.04 Refuse collection charge
§ 51.01 DEFINITION.
The term REFUSE means and includes all organic material resulting from the preparation of food
and spoiled or decayed food from any source, bottles, cans, glassware, and paper or paper products.
§ 51.02 STORAGE AND TRANSPORTING REFUSE.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to store refuse except as herein provided.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to transport refuse over any street, for hire, except by special
permit from the Council or acting within the course and scope of a written contract with the City or their
employment with the City.
§ 51.03 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
The City shall provide for collection and disposal of all refuse in a sanitary manner to insure the
health, safety, and general welfare of its residents under such terms and conditions as the City may from
time to time deem appropriate.
§ 51.04 REFUSE COLLECTION CHARGE.
A monthly refuse collection charge, as set forth in § 50.02, shall be applied to each household or
housekeeping unit and shall be added to, and billed with, the charge for electrical service to the
household or housekeeping unit. Where no statement is sent for electrical service, a separate statement
shall be made for the refuse collection service and shall be mailed to the person or persons using the
service or occupying the household or housekeeping unit.
11
TITLE V: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter
52. ELECTRICITY
1
CHAPTER 52: ELECTRICITY
Section
52.01 Code requirement
52.02 Services
52.03 Qualifying for interruptible electric heating rate
52.04 Future installations
52.05 Electric rate applicable to each utility customer
52.06 Automatic protective lighting
52.07 Other charges
52.08 Other services
§ 52.01 CODE REQUIREMENT.
All wiring, connections, and appurtenances on public and private property shall be installed and
performed strictly in accordance with the National Electrical Code and National Electrical Safety Code,
whichever applies. Failure to install or maintain the same in accordance therewith or failure to have or
permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the City, be grounds for termination of electric
service to any consumer.
§ 52.02 SERVICES.
(A) Service installation rules and standards shall be established by Council resolution, which may be
amended from time to time.
(B) New or changed service installations shall be made in accordance with the installation rules and
standards for electrical service at the expense of the consumer, and the meter location shall be designated
by the City. The City shall make an installation charge for extraordinary expenses required by a
consumer.
§ 52.03 QUALIFYING FOR INTERRUPTIBLE ELECTRIC HEATING RATE.
In order to qualify for any interruptible electric heating rate, the customer must agree that it shall be
on an interruptible basis without notice, and that the customer must have an alternate source of heat
capable of heating the customer’s facility for an indefinite period of time and of a type acceptable to the
City.
13
§ 52.04 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 14
§ 52.04 FUTURE INSTALLATIONS.
All future electric heating installations for any purpose shall be interruptible and metered at the
option of the City. The City shall provide a load control device or direct other means to interrupt
service.
§ 52.05 ELECTRIC RATE APPLICABLE TO EACH UTILITY CUSTOMER.
The City shall determine the applicable electric rate for each utility customer, by resolution, which
resolution may be changed from time to time.
§ 52.06 AUTOMATIC PROTECTIVE LIGHTING.
(A) Availability. Available to any customer in the City service area for illumination of areas of
private property.
(B) Alternatives. Other sizes and types may be available upon request. Prices shall be established by
the Utilities Committee as per recommendation of the Director of Utilities based on formula for
installation, operation and maintenance of lamps desired.
§ 52.07 OTHER CHARGES.
(A) The reconnection charge where service is disconnected due to delinquency shall be established
by Council by resolution, which may be changed from time to time.
(B) Where applicable, the rates shown are subject to state sales tax. The customer charge is the
minimum charge and is in addition to any energy used.
§ 52.08 OTHER SERVICES.
(A) Energy conservation. The City may provide energy conservation programs to comply with
Federal and State laws and regulations. These programs may consist of energy audits, load
management, rates, rebates, and other programs to assist customers of the City to conserve energy.
(B) Electricity marketing programs. The City may promote the use of electricity. This promotion
may include use of rates to encourage economic development, programs to support the use of electricity,
and other programs.
15 Electricity § 52.08
(C) Service territory. A one-time fee may be assessed to persons whose service territories are
annexed into the City. The fee would apply where the City pays compensation to a rural electric
cooperative for such annexation. This fee shall be set by the City Council for each area annexed. The
City Council shall establish a method of assessing and collecting the fees.
Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 16
TITLE V: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter
53. SEWERS
1
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
53.01 Purpose and policy
53.02 Definitions
53.03 Control by Director
Regulations
53.15 Use of public sewers required
53.16 Private wastewater disposal
53.17 Building sewers and connection designs
53.18 Use of public wastewater treatment facilities
53.19 Tampering prohibited
53.20 Unmetered water supply
Rates and Charges
53.35 Service charge system
53.36 General sewer service
53.37 Significant industrial user service
53.38 Multiple users
53.39 Additional charges
Administration
53.50 Permits
53.51 Wastewater discharge permit
53.52 Agreement application
53.53 Agreement conditions
53.54 Permit duration
53.55 Permit transfer
53.56 Powers and authority of inspectors
53.57 Administration of the Sewer Service Fund
53.60 Storm Water Drainage Utility
17
§ 53.01 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 18
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
(A) This Section sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into the City’s wastewater disposal
system and enables the City to comply with all state and federal laws. The objectives of this Section are
as follows:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater disposal system which will
interfere with the operation of the system or the use or disposal of the sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater disposal system which will
pass through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system; and
(3) To control the volume of wastewater in the Wastewater Treatment System.
(B) This Section provides for the regulation of discharges into the City’s wastewater disposal system
through the issuance of agreements with certain users and through enforcement of the general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user
reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
(C) This Section shall apply to the City and to persons outside the City who are, by agreement with
the City, users of the wastewater disposal and treatment system. Except as otherwise provided herein,
the Public Utilities Director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Section.
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
(B) BOD5 or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20°C and
as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/L).
(C) BUILDING DRAIN. That point of a building which conveys wastewater to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the building wall.
19 Sewers § 53.01
(D) DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge to users of the wastewater treatment facility for the
purpose of repaying capital costs.
(E) DIRECTOR. The Public Utilities Director of the City of Thief River Falls or the person’s duly
authorized representative.
(F) INDUSTRIAL USER. As follows:
(1) Any entity as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (latest edition), as
categorized, that discharges wastewater to the public sewer.
Division A: Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing
Division B: Mining
Division D: Manufacturing
Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Sewers
Division I: Services.
(2) Any user whose discharges, singly or by interaction, with other wastes:
(a) Contaminate the sludge of the wastewater treatment system;
(b) Injure or interfere with the treatment process, create a public nuisance or hazard;
(c) Have an adverse effect on the waters receiving wastewater treatment plant discharges;
(d) Exceed NDSW limitations; or
(e) Exceed normal residential unit volumes of wastewater.
(G) INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). Water other than wastewater that enters the sewer system
from the ground or from surface runoff, as defined in Minnesota Rules.
(H) MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE. A fixed monthly charge to users of a treatment facility that
includes part of the user fee and debt fee to be billed at a fixed rate per month.
(I) MPCA. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(J) NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly owned wastewater treatment
facilities. (Section 307(b) of the Act.)
§ 53.01 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 20
(K) NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A
permit issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally discharge pursuant
to Sections 402 and 405 of the Act.
(L) NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers, which flows
into a body of surface water or ground water.
(M) NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE (NDSW). Wastewater that is primarily
introduced by residential users with BOD5 concentrations not greater than 250 mg/L and total suspended
solids (TSS) concentrations not greater than 350 mg/L.
(N) NONRESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment facility whose building is not used as a
private residence and discharges NDSW.
(O) OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT COSTS (OM&R). Expenditures
necessary to provide for the dependable, economical and efficient functioning of the treatment facility
throughout its design life, including operator training and permit fees. Replacement refers to equipment
replacement costs, not the cost of future replacement of the entire facility.
(P) RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment facility whose building is used primarily as a
private residence and discharges NDSW.
(Q) SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
(1) BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other
place of disposal, also referred to as a service connection.
(2) SANITARY SEWER. A sewer designed to carry only liquid and water carried wastes from
residential, nonresidential and industrial sources together with minor quantities of I/I.
(3) STORM SEWER. A sewer intended to carry unpolluted surface and subsurface water from
any source.
(R) SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The total of the monthly service charge, volume charge, and
surcharges for industrial users.
(S) SLUG. A discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration of flows during normal operation.
(T) STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. A permit issued by MPCA pursuant to M.S.
§ 115.07 for a disposal system as defined by M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 5.
(U) TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory
21 Sewers § 53.15
filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" (latest
edition).
(V) UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect
or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards. An example could be
noncontact cooling water.
(W) USER CHARGE. A charge to users of a treatment facility for the user’s proportionate share of
the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement.
(X) WASTEWATER. Liquid and water carried wastes from residential, nonresidential and
industrial users, together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
(Y) WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES or TREATMENT FACILITIES. The land,
devices, facilities, structures, equipment, and processes owned or used by the City for the purpose of the
transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal wastewater and the disposal of
residues resulting from the treatment.
§ 53.03 CONTROL BY DIRECTOR.
The City Council shall appoint the Director who shall have control and general supervision of all
public sewers and service connections in the City and shall be responsible for administering the
provisions of this Section to ensure that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained. The Director
may delegate responsibilities to designated representatives.
REGULATIONS
§ 53.15 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
Within 45 days of receiving official notification, the owners of all properties within 150 feet of a
sanitary sewer collection system shall install a suitable service connection, at their own expense, in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Any owner of property greater than 150 feet and deemed
by the Director to require connection to a sanitary sewer shall be notified and complete the installation
within 60 days at the owner’s expense.
(A) In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in compliance with a notice given
under this Section, the City will have the connection made and shall assess the cost against the benefited
property.
(B) Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any private facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
§ 53.16 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 22
§ 53.16 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
(A) Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of § 53.15, the building sewer shall
be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the City Code.
(B) Before construction, replacement or modification of a private wastewater disposal system, the
owner shall obtain a written permit signed by the Director. The permit shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the Director’s satisfaction. A designated representative shall be allowed to
inspect any stage of construction. The applicant for the permit shall give notification when ready for the
system’s final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 24 hours of the receipt of notice, exclusive of weekends and holidays.
(C) The City Council shall, by resolution, set a permit and inspection fee, which fee may be
modified by resolution from time to time.
(D) The City shall review and submit documentation required by the State of Minnesota to be
furnished by applicant’s installer and/or designer.
(E) The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply
with all requirements of Minn. Rules Ch. 7080 and applicable local ordinances.
(F) The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times at no expense to the City.
(G) When the public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private wastewater
disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with
this Section, and within 90 days, the private wastewater disposal systems will be cleaned of all sludge.
The bottom shall be broken to permit drainage and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
(H) No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA, the State Department of Health, or other responsible
Federal, State, or local agencies.
(I) (1) A sewage treatment system within shoreland not meeting the requirements of this Chapter
must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required for any
improvement on, or use of, the lot. For the purposes of this Provision, a sewage treatment system shall
not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system’s improper
setback from the ordinary high water level.
(2) Nonconforming sewage treatment systems within shoreland will be upgraded or replaced
within a reasonable period of time after their discovery, not to exceed two years. Sewage systems
installed according to all applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under M.S. § 103F in
effect at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are determined to be
failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits or other deep disposal methods,
or systems with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the Minnesota
23 Sewers § 53.17
Pollution Control Agency’s Chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be
considered nonconforming.
§ 53.17 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTION DESIGNS.
(A) No person shall make any alterations to the public sewer or any appurtenances thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Director. No private building drain shall extend beyond the
limits of the building or property for which the permit has been given.
(B) Any new connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is
available in all downstream facilities, including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD5 and TSS as
determined by the Director.
(C) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each building. Old building
sewers may be used to service new buildings only when they are found to meet all requirements of this
Section.
(D) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, wastewater shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
(E) The construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code, applicable rules and regulations of
the City and the materials and procedural specifications set forth in the American Society of Testing
Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPFC) Manual of Practice No. 9. All
such connections shall be made gas and watertight and verified by proper testing to prevent I/I.
(F) No unpolluted water sources shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
(G) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when the building sewer is
ready for connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of a
designated representative.
(H) An appropriate construction license from the State of Minnesota is required to install a service
connection.
(I) A license for sewer service connection installation shall not be issued until a $2,000 bond to the
City is filed and approved by the Council. The licensee will indemnify the City from all suits, accidents
and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in any street, alley or public ground made by the
licensee or by those in the licensee’s employment.
§ 53.17 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 24
(J) The annual cost of a license for making service connections shall be established by the Council
by resolution and may be changed from time to time by resolution. All licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the license year unless the license is suspended or revoked by the Council for any
reasonable cause.
(K) The Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this Section for any of the
following causes:
(1) Giving false information in connection with the application for a license;
(2) Incompetence of the licensee;
(3) Willful violation of any provision of this Section or any rule or regulation pertaining to the
making of service connections; or
(4) Failure to adequately protect and indemnify the City and the user.
(L) No roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water shall be connected to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless a surcharge as set forth in § 53.39(H) is
paid.
§ 53.18 USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES.
(A) No unpolluted water or storm water shall be discharged to the sanitary sewer. The water shall
be discharged only into storm sewers or to natural outlets approved by the City and other regulatory
agencies.
(B) No person shall discharge any of the following substances into the public sewer:
(1) Liquids, solids, gases, or other substances which singly or by interaction with others may
cause fire or explosion;
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction into the flow in a sewer;
(3) Wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive
or caustic property capable of causing damage or hazard; or
(4) Wastewater containing toxic pollutants, as defined in Section 307(a) of the Water Pollution
Control Act and M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 20.
(C) Discharges of the following substances shall be limited to concentrations or quantities which
will not harm the wastewater facility, streams, soils, vegetation, ground water and will not otherwise
create a hazard or nuisance. The Director may set limitations lower than the prohibition limits outlined
25 Sewers § 53.18
below. Consideration will be given to such factors as the quantity of waste in relation to flows and
velocities, materials of construction, the community’s NPDES and SDS permits, capacity of the
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes, and other pertinent factors:
(1) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.5°C) or causing, individually or in
combination with other wastewater, the influent at the treatment facilities to have a temperature
exceeding 104°F (40°C) or having heat in amounts which will be detrimental to biological activity in the
treatment facilities;
(2) Wastewater containing fats, wax, grease, or oils in excess of 100 mg/L or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65.5°C), except as may be permitted by specific written agreement with the City subject to § 53.51;
(3) A discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration of flows during normal operation;
(4) Food wastes not properly shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely
under normal flow conditions with no particle greater than ½ inch in any dimension;
(5) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids;
(6) Wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process;
(7) Wastewater containing inert suspended solids in such quantities that would cause disruption
to the wastewater treatment facilities;
(8) Radioactive wastes or isotopes in concentrations that exceed limits established by applicable
State and Federal regulations;
(9) Wastewater with BOD5 or suspended solids levels that require additional treatment, except
as may be permitted by specific written agreement with the City subject to § 53.51; or
(10)Wastewater containing substances which cannot be treated to produce effluent quality
required by the permit or causes a violation of any applicable local, state or federal regulation.
(D) In the event of discharges to the public sewers which contain substances or possess
characteristics prohibited in Divisions (B) and (C) of this Section or which in the judgment of the
Director may have a deleterious effect to the treatment facility, receiving waters, soils, vegetation, or
which create a hazard or nuisance, the Director may:
(1) Refuse to accept the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, pursuant
to Section 307(b) of the Act and all addenda thereof;
§ 53.18 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 26
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
(4) Require payment to cover all the added costs of handling, treating, and disposing of wastes
not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges; or
(5) If the Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design,
installation, maintenance, and efficient operation of the facilities and equipment shall be at the owner’s
expense and shall be subject to review and approval by the City pursuant to the requirements of the
MPCA.
(E) No user shall increase the use of process water or in any manner attempt to dilute a discharge as
a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in this Section, the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and any state or local
requirement.
(F) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided at the owner’s expense when, in the opinion
of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in
excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance of interceptors, including proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by
appropriate means and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to review
by the Director.
(G) Any material removal and hauling must be performed by the owner’s personnel or a currently
licensed waste disposal firm and in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.
(H) Where required by the Director, industrial users shall install and maintain at their own expense
a suitable structure or control manhole with the necessary meters and other testing equipment needed to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastewater. The manhole will be safe and
accessible at all times. The City may require submission of laboratory analyses to illustrate compliance
with this Section and any special conditions for discharge established by the City or responsible
regulatory agency. All measurements, tests, and analyses to which reference is made in this Section shall
be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association and kept for a period of five
years.
(I) Where required by the Director, users shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of
substances regulated by this Section. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans and
operating procedures of the facilities shall be submitted to the Director for review and approval prior to
construction of the facility. Approval of the plans and operating procedures shall not relieve user from
the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Section.
27 Sewers § 53.20
(J) Users shall notify the Director immediately if a slug or accidental discharge of wastewater
occurs in violation of this Section. Notification will allow measures to be taken to minimize damage to
the treatment facilities. Notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to
the treatment facilities or for fines imposed on the City by any State or Federal agency as a result of their
actions.
(K) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees of the emergency notification procedure in the event of a slug or accidental
discharge.
(L) No person shall permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit or obstruction of flow
to be discharged into the public sewer. Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed,
or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, the owner shall make repairs as directed by the Director.
(M) Each day that the owner neglects to make the repairs shall constitute a separate violation of this
Section. The Director may then cause the work to be done and recover related expenses from the owner
or agent by an action in the name of the City.
(N) In addition to penalties that may be imposed for violation of any provision of this Section, the
City may assess against the user/owner the cost of repairing or restoring sewers and associated facilities
damaged as a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes and may collect the assessment as an additional
charge for the use of the public sewer system.
(O) No statement contained in this Section shall prevent any special agreement or arrangement
between the City and any industrial user. Industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the facility for treatment, subject to adequate payment by the industrial user, providing that
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and the City’s NPDES and SDS permit limitations are not
violated.
§ 53.19 TAMPERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the wastewater treatment facilities. Any
person violating this Provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of a misdemeanor.
§ 53.20 UNMETERED WATER SUPPLY.
If any premises discharge normal sewage or industrial waste into the sanitary sewage system, either
directly or indirectly, obtain part or all of the water used thereon from sources other than the City, and
the water so obtained is not measured by a meter of equivalent specifications to the meters used by the
City, then in such case the City shall permit the discharge of normal sewage or industrial waste into its
§ 53.20 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 28
sanitary sewage system only when the owner of the premises or some other interested party shall at their
own expense install and maintain for the purpose of metering the water supply a water meter of
equivalent specifications to those installed by the City in connection with the City water system. Each
water meter shall be installed to measure all water received on such premises and the above charges and
rates shall be applied to the quantity of water received as measured by the meter. If, because of the
nature of the source of the water supply the City deems it impracticable to thus meter the water on any
premises, the Council may by resolution establish a flat charge per month in accordance with the
established use of water on the premises.
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 53.35 SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
(A) The City establishes a sewer service charge system. All revenue collected from users of the
wastewater treatment facilities will be used for annual operation, maintenance, replacement, and capital
costs. Each user shall pay a proportionate share of operation, maintenance, and replacement costs based
on the users proportionate contribution to the total wastewater loading.
(B) Charges to users of the wastewater treatment facility shall be determined and fixed in a sewer
service charge system (SSCS).
(C) Revenues collected through the SSCS shall be deposited in a separate fund known as the
Wastewater Fund (WWF).
(D) A separate enterprise fund shall be maintained to account for all revenues, expenses, and debt
service requirements and included as part of the annual audit of the City’s financial statement, in
accordance with “Government Auditing Standards.”
§ 53.36 GENERAL SEWER SERVICE.
(A) Metered and unmetered. Applicable to sewage contributors discharging domestic strength waste
(or less) into the sanitary system and applicable to significant industrial user discharging waste into the
sanitary system together with other charges that apply to the significant industrial users.
(B) Unmetered. Available to sewage customers discharging only normal domestic strength sewage
into the sanitary sewer. When the utility cannot immediately install its water meter to measure discharges
into sewers, or for special discharge requirements, service shall be billed at a rate established by the
Council by resolution, which resolution may be changed from time to time by resolution. This rate shall
be applied to only single-family residential and small commercial customers and approximates the cost of
6,000 gallons per month. If it is determined by the utility that usage is in excess of 6,000 gallons per
month, an additional volume charge as set forth in § 50.02 will be made for estimated additional usage.
29 Sewers § 53.39
§ 53.37 SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER SERVICE.
(A) Metered. Available for sewage contributors determined by the City to be a significant industrial
user. Each water sources shall be metered. Significant industrial users shall not discharge waste into the
sanitary system until the significant industrial user is issued a wastewater discharge permit by the City.
(B) Unmetered. Significant industrial users shall not discharge waste into the sanitary sewer without
a metered water service.
§ 53.38 MULTIPLE USERS.
(A) Charges for sewer service to manufactured home courts, apartment houses and other facilities
where there are multiple users of the sewer system but only a single water meter, the billing shall be the
monthly service charge specified in § 53.36.
(B) Owners must notify the City by the tenth day of each month as to the number of housing units
occupied during the previous month. Failure to notify the City by the tenth day of the month will result
in a billing based on the total number of units serviced by the single water meter.
§ 53.39 ADDITIONAL CHARGES.
(A) The private sewage disposal permit and inspection fee shall be established by the Council by
resolution, which resolution may be changed from time to time by resolution.
(B) The public sanitation sewer connection permit fee shall be established by the Council by
resolution, which resolution may be changed from time to time by resolution.
(C) The residential and commercial service line permit and inspection fee for new buildings shall be
established by the Council by resolution, which resolution may be changed from time to time by
resolution.
(D) The residential and commercial service line permit and inspection fee for modifications to an
existing sanitary sewer service line, not to include a new sewer main connection, shall be established by
the Council by resolution, which resolution may be changed from time to time by resolution.
(E) The industrial service permit and inspection fee for new buildings shall be established by the
Council by resolution, which resolution may be changed from time to time by resolution.
(F) The industrial service permit and inspection fee for modification to an existing sanitary sewer
service line, not to include a sewer main connection, shall be established by the Council by resolution,
which resolution may be changed from time to time by resolution.
§ 53.39 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 30
(G) (1) Any person connecting their property to City sewer service shall pay a connection charge in
lieu of special assessment if their property has not been assessed a special assessment for sewer service.
(2) The connection charge shall be a rate established by the Council by resolution, which
resolution may be changed from time to time by resolution or the actual per benefitted front foot project
cost if higher.
(3) The connection charge shall be paid in full prior to obtaining sewer service unless the
Council agrees to allow payment on an installment basis.
(4) Benefitted front foot shall be determined in the same manner as benefitted front foot for
street improvement assessments, including equalization for irregular shaped lots.
(H) Any user discharging water from roof drain systems, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains
or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary system shall pay a surcharge with the monthly sewer
billing at a rate established by the Council by resolution, which resolution may be changed from time to
time by resolution for residential users and at a rate established by the Council by resolution, which
resolution may be changed from time to time by resolution for all other users. The Director shall apply
the surcharge as deemed necessary. Any user refusing the City access to inspect the sewer drain system
shall pay the surcharge as though the user is discharging into the sanitary sewer.
ADMINISTRATION
§ 53.50 PERMITS.
All users proposing to connect or to commence a new discharge to the wastewater disposal system
shall obtain a connection permit from the Director before commencing construction of the building
sewer. This requirement applies to residential, commercial and industrial users of the system. Additional
requirements regarding the connection permit are further explained under § 53.17. Connection permit
and inspection fees, as set forth in § 53.39, shall be paid prior to the granting of the permit.
§ 53.51 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.
The City may require special agreements with certain industries or other significant users of the
system.
31 Sewers § 53.53
§ 53.52 AGREEMENT APPLICATION.
(A) Users required to obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit shall complete and file with the
Director an application in the form prescribed by the Director. Existing users shall apply for a
Wastewater Discharge Permit within 30 days after the effective date of this Section, and proposed new
users shall apply at least 60 days prior to connecting or discharging into the wastewater disposal system.
(B) The Director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City may issue a Wastewater
Discharge Permit subject to terms and conditions herein.
§ 53.53 AGREEMENT CONDITIONS.
Wastewater Discharge Permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Section and all
other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the City. Agreements may contain the
following:
(A) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged into
the wastewater disposal system;
(B) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(C) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge requirements for flow regulation
and equalization;
(D) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(E) Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of pretreatment facilities;
(F) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and
method of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedule;
(G) Compliance schedules;
(H) Requirements for submissions of technical reports or discharge reports;
(I) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as
specified by the Director, but in no case less than three years, and affording Director access thereto;
(J) Requirements for notification to and acceptance by the Director of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
§ 53.53 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 32
(K) Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharges as provided in § 53.18 and
reporting of agreement violations;
(L) Requirements for disposal of sludges, floats, skimmings, and the like;
(M) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this Chapter; and
(N) The above notwithstanding, no condition of the agreement shall allow the City’s NPDES permit
limitation or National Categorical Pretreatment Standards to be violated.
§ 53.54 PERMIT DURATION.
Wastewater Discharge Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years.
The terms and conditions of the agreement may be subject to modification by the Director during the
term of the agreement as limitations or requirements as identified in § 53.18 are modified or other just
cause exists. The City or user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the agreement at least 90
days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the agreement shall include
a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 53.55 PERMIT TRANSFER.
A Wastewater Discharge Permit is issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or
changed operation without the approval of the City. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply
with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
§ 53.56 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
(A) Duly authorized employees of the City, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for inspection, observations, measurement, sampling, testing, repair,
and maintenance in accordance with the Provisions of this Section.
(B) Industrial users shall be required to provide information concerning industrial processes which
have a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the collection system. An industry may
withhold information considered confidential. However, the industry must establish that the information
in question might result in an advantage to competitors and that the industrial process does not have
deleterious results on the treatment process.
33 Sewers § 53.60
§ 53.57 ADMINISTRATION OF THE SEWER SERVICE FUND.
(A) A designated representative shall maintain a proper system of accounts and records suitable for
determining the operation, maintenance, replacement (OM&R) and debt retirement costs of the treatment
facilities and shall furnish the Council with a report of such costs annually.
(B) At the time the Council shall determine whether sufficient revenue is being generated for the
effective management of the facilities and debt retirement, the Council will also determine whether the
user charges are distributed proportionately. If necessary, the SSCS shall be revised to insure
proportionality of user charges and sufficient funds. The City shall cause notice of any proposed changes
in user charges to be published in the official newspaper of the City at least 30 days prior to the changes
being adopted by the Council. Failure to publish the notice shall not invalidate any change in user
charges.
(C) Sewer service charges shall be billed on a monthly basis as defined in Ch. 50.
§ 53.60 STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
(A) Establishment. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §444.075, the City hereby establishes a
Storm Water Drainage Utility and authorizes the imposition of just and reasonable charges for the use
and availability of a storm water drainage system. The Storm Water Drainage Utility operation shall be
part of the Public Works Division and under the administration of the Director of Public Works.
(B) Findings and Determination.
(1) In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to promote public health,
safety, convenience, and general welfare, the City has constructed, operated, and maintained a storm
water drainage system (the “system”). This section is adopted in the further exercise of such authority
and for the same purposes.
(2) The system, as constructed heretofore, has been financed and paid for through the
imposition of special assessments and ad valorem taxes. It is now necessary and desirable to provide an
additional method of recovering some or all of the future costs of improving, establishing, enlarging,
replacing, repairing, maintaining, and operating the system through the imposition of charges as
provided in this section.
(3) In imposing charges, it is necessary to establish a methodology that undertakes to make
them just and equitable. Taking into account the status of completion of the system, past methods of
recovering system costs, the topography of the City, and other relevant factors, it is determined that it
would be just and equitable to assign responsibility for some or all of the future costs of improving,
establishing, enlarging, replacing, repairing, maintaining, and operating the system on the basis of the
expected storm water runoff from the various parcels of land within the City during a standard rainfall
event.
(4) Assigning costs and making charges based upon expected typical storm water runoff cannot
be done with mathematical precision but can only be accomplished within reasonable and practical limits.
The provisions of the section undertake to establish a reasonable and practical methods for making such
charges.
53.60 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 34
(C) Establishment of Storm Water Drainage Utility. The system shall be operated as a public
utility pursuant to Minnesota Statues §444.075. Pursuant thereto, the City establishes a Storm Water
Drainage Utility and authorizes the imposition of just and reasonable charges for the use and availability
of the system, subject to the provisions of this section. Such charges shall be placed in a storm water
drainage utility fund to be used for improving, establishing, enlarging, replacing, repairing, maintaining,
and operating the system.
(D) Equivalent Residential Unit (hereinafter “ERU” defined). For the purpose of this
Section, one ERU is defined as a ratio of the average volume of surface water runoff generated by one
acre of a given land use to the average volume or runoff generated by one acre of typical single family
residential land, during the standard one year rainfall event.
(E) Storm Water Drainage Charges. In determining the charges, the City Council shall fix,
determine, and amend from time to time by resolution, a basic per acre system rate to be charged
monthly. The charge to be made against each parcel of land shall be determined multiplying the ERU for
the parcel’s land use classification times the parcel acreage times the basic system rate. Multiple parcels
of land under common ownership and use shall be deemed as one parcel of land for calculation of
charges. The calculation of charges shall include 100 percent of the first five acres, 50 percent of the
second five acres, and 20 percent of the balance of the acreage of the parcel of land. No parcel of land
shall be charged less than an equivalent 1/3 acre residential parcel of land, unless otherwise specified
herein. The ERA values for various land types are as follows:
STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY – RATE STRUCTURE
Land Use Classification: ERU
(a) Single Family. 1
(b) Manufactured Home. 1
(c) Multi-Family Residential 2.5
(d) Commercial/Industrial (the impervious area only), or 2.5
(e) Commercial/Industrial (entire parcel of land). 1.5
(f) Schools, Churches, Institutional (the impervious area only), or 2.5
(g) Schools, Churches, Institutional (entire parcel of land). 1.5
(h) City-Owned Land. 0
(i) Vacant, Vegetative, and Unimproved Land. 0
(F) Standardize Acreage. For the purpose of calculating storm water drainage charges, all
developed single-family parcels of land, including manufactured home lots, shall be considered to have
an area of 1/3 acre.
(G) Other Land Uses. Other land uses not listed in the foregoing table shall be classified by the
Director of Public Works by assigning them to classes most nearly like the listed uses, from the
standpoint of runoff value for the standard rainfall event. An appeal of such classifications from the
determination by the Director of Public Works may be made to the City Council.
(H) Adjustment of Charges. The City Council authorizes the Director of Public Works to
negotiate storm water drainage charges for parcels of land based upon land use status supplied by
affected lands owners which demonstrate a runoff volume for a standard rainfall event or other
circumstances substantially different from ERU being used for such parcels of land. Such adjustments
35 Sewers § 53.60
for storm water drainage charges shall not be made retroactively.
(I) Exemptions. Public street right-of-ways, vacant, and unimproved land with substantially all of
its surface having vegetation as ground cover, or land owned by the City are exempt from
storm water drainage charges.
(J) Supplying Information. The owner, occupant, or person in charge of any parcel of land shall
supply the City with such information as the City may reasonably request related to the use,
development, and area of parcel of land. Willful failure to provide such information or to
falsify such information is a violation of this Section.
(K) Payment of Charges. Storm water drainage charges shall be billed on a monthly basis on
the utility statement for that parcel of land, or such other method as deemed necessary by the City
Council.
(L) Establishment of Tax Lien. Any past due storm water drainage charges will be certified to
the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes against the parcel of land served by the Storm
Water Drainage Utility established in this Section for collection as other taxes are collected in the
following year pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §444.075, Subd. 3, and City Code. In addition, the City
shall have the right to bring a civil action or take other legal remedies to collect unpaid storm water
drainage charges.
(Ord. No. 10, 3rd Series – adopted 08/10/04)
Section
CHAPTER 54: WATER
Deficiency of water and shutting off water
Repair of leaks
Abandoned service
Service pipes
Private water supplies
Restricted hours for sprinkling
Private fire hose connections
Opening hydrants
Unmetered service
Code requirement
Connection fees
Service charges
Connection charges
Water Usage in a Critical Water Deficiency
54.01
s4.02
54.03
54.04
54.05
54.06
54.07
s4.08
54.09
54.10
54.11
54.12
54.13
54.14
s 54.01 DEFICIENCY OF WATER AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.
The City is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to consumers whether
occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other
cause whatever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to insure a supply for
firefighting. In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time and
kept off so long as may be necessary.
s s4.02 REPATR OF LEAKS.
(A) Consumer/Owner Responsibility: It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain
the service pipe from the valve (curb stop) into the house or other building. In case of failure upon the
part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in the consumer's or owner's service pipe
within 24 hours after oral or written notice has been given the owner or occupant of the house or
building, the water may be shut off by the City and will not be turned on until a reconnection charge
has been paid and the service pipe has been repaired. If I the opinion of the City, the waste of water is
great or when damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be tumed off if the repair is not
proceeded with immediately.
36
37 Water s s4.06
(B) City Responsibility. The Water Systems Department will, without expense to the owner of the
property, make all necessary repairs to the line from the water main to the valve (curb stop).
(C) Valve. Should the City turn off the water supply at the valve (curb stop), and should the
visible leak appearing on the ground surface stop flowing or if the City's leak detection equipment
does not detect a leak, the consumer or owner of the property shall make all necessary repairs to
include the valve (curb stop). Should the visible leak appearing on the ground surface continue to flow
or if the City's leak detection equipment detects the leak, the Water Systems Department shall make all
necessary repairs to include the valve (curb stop). The City shall provide a curb stop for residential
consumer or owner. Determination of the location of the leak shall be made by the Water Systems
Superintendent or a designated representative of the Water Systems Superintendent.
(Ord. 50, 3'd Series - Adopted 11/02/10)
s 54.03 ABANDONED SERVTCE.
All service installations connected to the water system that have been abandoned or for any reason
have become useless for further service shall be disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises
served by this service shall pay the cost of the excavation. The City shall perform the actual
disconnection and all pipe and appurtenances removed from the street right-of-way shall become the
property of the City. When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones, and it is desired to
increase the old water service, a new permit shall be taken out and the regular tapping charge shall be
made as if this were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any service pipe to
be hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow of water or to save expense in
improperly removing the pipe from the main. Also, the improper disposition thereof shall be corrected
by the City and the cost incurred shall be borne by the person causing or allowing the work to be
performed.
$ s4.04 SERVTCE PTPES.
Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service
pipe shall be placed not less than eight feet below the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent
rupture and stoppage by freezing. Service pipes must extend from the curb box to the inside of the
building, or if not taken into a building, then to the hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to
supply. A valve, the same size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the
building, ahead of the meter and well protected from freezing. Joints on copper tubing shall be flared
and kept to a minimum. Not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length. All
joints shall be left uncovered until inspected. Minimum size connection with the water main shall be %
inches nominal diameter or as directed by the City.
$ 54.05 PRTVATE WATER SUPPLIES.
No water pipe of the City water system shall be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or any
device that is connected with any other source of water supply and when such are found, the City shall
notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the City water shall
be turned off. Before any new connections to the City system are permitted, the City shall ascertain
that no cross connections will exist when the new connection is made. When a building is connected to
City water, the private water supply may be used only for such purposes as the City may allow.
s 54.06 RESTRTCTED HOURS FOR SPRINKLING.
Whenever the City shall determine that a shortage of water threatens the City, it may limit the
times and hours during which water may be used from the City water system for lawn and garden
sprinkling,
s s4.07 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 38
irrigation, car washing, air conditioning and other uses, or either or any of them. It is unlawful for any
water consumer to cause or permit water to be used in violation of the determination after public
announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically indicating the restrictions
thereof.
s 54.07 pRrvATE FrRE HOSE CONNECTTONS.
Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may apply to the Director for and
obtain permission to connect the street mains with hydrants, large pipes, and hose couplings for use in
case of fire only, at their own installation expense, and at such rates as the Council may adopt by
resolution as herein provided.
$ 54.08 OPENTNG HYDRANTS.
It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire Division or other person duly
authorized by the City, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw
water from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so
authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except
for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use.
s 54.09 UNMETERED SERVICE.
Unmetered service may be provided for construction, flooding skating rinks, and certain other
purposes. The service shall be at a duly adopted rate. Where it is difficult or impossible to accurately
measure the amount of water taken, unmetered service may be provided and the unmetered rate applied
provided; however, by acceptance thereof the consumer agrees to have the City estimate the water
used. In so estimating, the City shall consider the use to which the water is put and the length of time
of unmetered service.
$ 54.10 CODE REQUTREMENT.
All piping, connections, and appurtenances shall be installed and performed strictly in accordance
with the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Failure to install or maintain the same in accordance therewith, or
failure to have or permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the City, be an additional
ground for termination of water service to any consumer.
s s4.11 CONNECTTON FEES.
full
Service shall be furnished only after proper application has been made and connection fees paid in
39 Water $ s4.r3
s 54.12 SERVICE CHARGES.
(A) There shall be a disconnect fee where service is discontinued due to delinquency in payment
of charges or discontinued at the request of the consumer, which charge shall be established as set forth
in $ 50.02.
(B) There shall be a water connection permit fee, which fee shall be established as set forth in
$ s0.02.
(C) Unmetered service shall be furnished at the charges set forth in $ 50.02, plus 6,000 gallons at
the charges shown in $ 50.02; if it is determined by the City that usage is in excess of 6,000 gallons per
month, an additional charge as shown in $ 50.02 shall be made for any estimated additional usage as
determined by the City.
Ord. 7, 3'd Series Adopted 1t/26/03
s 54.13 CONNECTTON CHARGES.
(A) Any person connecting their property to City water service shall pay a connection charge in
lieu of special assessment if their property has not been assessed a special assessment for water
service.
(B) The connection charge shall be established as set forth in $ 50.02, or the actual per benefited
front foot project cost ifhigher.
(C) The connection charge shall be paid in full prior to obtaining water service unless the Council
agrees to allow payment on an installment basis.
(D) Benefited front foot shall be determined in the same manner as benef,rted front foot for street
improvement assessments, including equalization for irregular shaped lots.
s s4.14 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 40
$ 54.13 WATER USAGE IN A CRITICAL WATER DEFICIENCY.
SECTION 1. PURPOSE.
This ordinance establishes water conservation restrictions; and the plan will be in effect at any time the
governor declares by executive order a critical water deficiency, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section
t03G.291.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.
2.1 Clerk in statutory cities means the person assigned duties pursuant to Minn. Stat. $ 412.151; or the
city manager pursuant to Minn. Stat. $ 412.601 - 412.751 or in charter cities as determined by city
charter.
2.2Department means the city water department.
2.3 Emergency means the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the governor
2.4lrrigation means the watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens, lawns, or any other
outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for agricultural purposes.
2.5 Notification to public means notif,rcation through local media, including interviews and issuance
of news releases.
2.6 Public water supplier means the city or other entity that owns, manages, or operates a public
water supply, as defined in Minn. Stat. $ 144.382, subdivision 4.
2.7 Reclaimed water means water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other collection devices
and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the natural water cycle.
2.8 Water recirculation system means any system which enables a user to reuse water at least once
prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
SECTION 3. APPLICATION.
3.1 This ordinance applies to all customers of public water suppliers who own or control water use on
any premises.
3.2 No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received from a public water supply
for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to
any provision in this ordinance.
3.3 Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based upon the declaration of a
critical water emergency by the governor.
SECTION 4. DECLARATION OF CRITICAL WATER DEFICIENCY.
Upon the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the governor, the public water suppiier shall
immediately post notice of the emergency declaration at the usual meeting place of the city council, or
the official city bulletin board. The city shall provide notification to the public as quickly as possible or
through established water supply plans emergency response plans or procedures.
4t Water s s4.14
SECTION 5. MANDATORY EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES.
Upon declaration of a water emergency and notification to the public, the following mandatory
restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced:
(l) Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and other non-agricultural
land, except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed water, is prohibited.
(2) Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or other
paved areas with water from any pressurized source, including garden hoses, except to
alleviate immediate health or safety hazards, is prohibited.
(3) The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a pressurized source is
prohibited.
(3) Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited from serving water to their
customers, unless water is specifically requested by the customer.
(5) Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is prohibited.
(6) The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other exterior water features is
prohibited.
(7) The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of mobile equipment is
prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water recirculation systems, and for vehicles
requiring frequent washing to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
SECTION 6. VARIANCES.
The City Clerk or their designee, is authorized to grant variances to this ordinance where strict
application of its provisions would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted
only for reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a variance within
five (5) days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the City Clerk. The City Council shall
hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
SECTION 7. VIOLATION.
7.1 Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Clerk or his/her designee. A violator may
appeal the citation within five (5) days of its issuance by submitting a written appeal to the City. The
City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is
final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence is provided that equipment failure
was the cause of the violation. A letter from a qualified vendor or equipment invoice will be required
to show proof of equipment failure.
7.2Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a
warning letter that sets forth the violation and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future
violations.
7.3 Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall be issued, either personally or
by mail, a citation that sets forth the violation and shall describe the remedy.
Fines shall be added to the monthly water bill of the owner or current occupant of the premises where
the violation occurred. The imposition of the fine shall in no way limit the right of the City to pursue
other legal remedies.
s s4.14 Thief River Falls - Public Utilities 42
SECTION 8. ENFORCEMENT.
The City Clerk or hisftrer designee is authorized to designate city employees or law enforcement
personnel to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 9. SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this ordinance or the application of any provision to a particular situation is held to
be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of the ordinance and the
application of the ordinance to any other situation shall not be invalidated.
Ord. I I t, 3'd Series - Adopted 07/03/2018
(this page is intentionally blank)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
70.01 Statutes adopted by reference
70.02 Application
70.03 Scope and orders of a peace officer
70.04 Traffic and parking control
§ 70.01 STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this title or in this code, the regulatory and procedural
provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, commonly referred to as Traffic Regulations, as amended, is incorporated
herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this title, or elsewhere in this Code, M.S. §§ 171.01, 171.02,
171.08, 171.22, 171.23 and 171.24, as amended, are incorporated herein and adopted by reference,
including the penalty provisions thereof.
§ 70.02 APPLICATION.
(A) The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets shall apply to
the drivers of all vehicles, including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the United States,
this state or any county, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exemptions as may be set forth in this Code.
(B) Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a
street shall be subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those
provisions which by their nature can have no application. Provisions specifically referring to bicycles
shall be in addition to other provisions of this Code applying to vehicles.
§ 70.03 SCOPE AND ORDERS OF A PEACE OFFICER.
(A) Scope. The provisions of this title relate exclusively to the streets, alleys, and private roads in
the City and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and parking of
vehicles upon the streets, alleys, and private roads.
3
§ 70.03 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 4
(B) Orders of a peace officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
§ 70.04 TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.
(A) Council action. No device, sign, or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or parking
control unless the Council shall first have approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided
in this Section; provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted, the marking or
sign-posting shall attest to Council action thereon.
(B) Temporarily restricting or directing traffic and parking; curb painting.
(1) When clearly marked, barricaded, or sign-posted, traffic and parking may be temporarily
restricted for any public or private use. All such restrictions shall be in accordance with the uniform
policy promulgated by the Chief of Police who shall be ultimately responsible to the Council for the
proper enforcement thereof.
(2) Restricted or prohibited use of parking and traffic lanes may be designated by painting the
same upon streets and curbs. The work shall be done under the direction of the Chief of Police and in
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary to sign-posting or marking authorized
and described in this Section.
(4) Temporary restrictions and directions may be placed on traffic and parking by the Chief of
Police. It is unlawful to violate any restriction or direction when the same has been duly marked,
barricaded, or sign-posted.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
71. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
1
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
71.01 Exhibition driving
71.02 Obstructions to visibility
71.03 U-turns
71.04 Shod animals prohibited
71.05 Load limits
§ 71.01 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
(A) Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition driving when a motor vehicle
stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates or turns at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to
squeal, gears to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing or skidding or, as to two-wheeled
or three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or roadway surface.
(B) Unlawful act. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to do any exhibition driving on any
street, parking lot or other public or private property, except when an emergency creates necessity for
such operation to prevent injury to persons or damage to property, provided that this Section shall not
apply to driving on a racetrack. For purposes of this Section, a RACETRACK means any track or
premises whereon motorized vehicles, horses, dogs or other animals, or fowl legally compete in a race
or timed contest for an audience, the members of which have directly or indirectly paid a consideration
for admission.
§ 71.02 OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISIBILITY.
It is unlawful to erect or maintain any structure or vegetation within a radius of 20 feet from the
corner created by the projections of the curb lines at intersecting streets. Trees are not obstructions to
vision if branches are trimmed to the trunks and to a height of eight feet above the curb level, nor shall
traffic control signs or signals be considered obstructions. This Section shall not apply to that portion of
the City zoned C-2.
Cross reference:
Zoning Code, see Ch. 152
5
§ 71.03 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 6
§ 71.03 U-TURNS.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle by turning so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any street except at a street intersection and then only if the street intersection is not
sign-posted prohibiting a U-turn or otherwise controlled by a traffic signal; provided, any person making
a permitted U-turn shall yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles.
§ 71.04 SHOD ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
(A) Unlawful act. It is unlawful to ride, drive, or lead any horse upon any street, except as
provided herein.
(B) Exception. This Section shall not apply to a horse ridden or driven along a route when a written
permit for a parade has been applied for, or for special events such as weddings or anniversaries. A
permit shall be obtained from the Chief of Police for special events. The permit holder shall be
responsible for any cleanup and for any damage.
§ 71.05 LOAD LIMITS.
The City may, from time to time, impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or all of the streets such
load limits as may be necessary or desirable. The limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads
are limited, shall be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
operate a vehicle on any street in violation of the limitation so posted. Provided, however, that this
Section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, City vehicles, and school buses, unless
otherwise directed by the Public Works Director.
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
72.01 Registered owner deemed agent of driver
72.02 General parking prohibitions
72.03 Unauthorized removal
72.04 Recreational camping vehicle parking
72.05 Direction to proceed
72.06 Parallel parking
72.07 Parking hours
72.08 Calendar parking
72.09 Truck parking on streets
72.10 Parking in municipal parking lots and ramps
72.11 Loading zones
72.12 Unattended vehicle
72.13 Vehicle repair on street
72.14 Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling
72.15 Courtesy parking
72.16 Physically handicapped parking
72.17 Impounding and removing vehicles
§ 72.01 REGISTERED OWNER DEEMED AGENT OF DRIVER.
A driver who is not the registered owner of an unattended motor vehicle found to be in violation
of any provision of this Chapter or found to be parked in violation of this title shall be deemed to be
the agent of the registered owner of the unattended motor vehicle. The registered owner of the
unattended motor vehicle shall be jointly and severally liable with the driver for any civil fine imposed
for violation of any provision of this Chapter or for parking in violation of this title.
§ 72.02 GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITED.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a peace officer or
traffic control device in any of the following places:
(A) On a sidewalk;
7
§ 72.02 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 8
(B) In front of a public or private driveway;
(C) Within an intersection;
(D) Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
(E) On a crosswalk;
(F) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk;
(G) In a sign-posted fire lane;
(H) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal
located at the side of a street;
(I) Within 20 feet of an uncontrolled intersection;
(J) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(K) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite
the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly sign posted;
(L) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the stopping, standing, or
parking would obstruct traffic;
(M) On the street side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(N) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;
(O) At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping, standing, or parking;
(P) In any alley, except for loading and unloading, and then only so long as reasonably necessary
for the loading and unloading to or from adjacent premises; or
(Q) On any boulevard which has been curbed.
§ 72.03 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to move a vehicle not owned by the person into any
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
§ 72.04 RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE PARKING.
(A) Definition. The term RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE means any of the following:
9 Parking Regulations § 72.07
(1) The term TRAVEL TRAILER means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently
identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer of the trailer;
(2) The term PICK-UP COACH means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis
for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation;
(3) The term MOTOR HOME means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; or
(4) The term CAMPING TRAILER means a folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation, and vacation uses.
(B) Prohibited act. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to leave or park a recreational
camping vehicle on or within the limits of any street, right-of-way or public lot for a continuous period
in excess of 24 hours, except in a designated campground.
§ 72.05 DIRECTION TO PROCEED.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed or
ordered to proceed by any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
§ 72.06 PARALLEL PARKING.
Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb marking or sign-posting
or both, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a street shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels of the vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the right-hand edge of the traveled surface,
and, where painted markings appear on the curb or the street, the vehicle shall be within the markings,
front and rear, provided that upon a one-way street all vehicles shall be so parked, except that the lefthand
wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches from the left-hand edge of the
traveled surface, so that the front of the vehicle is pointed in the direction of the flow of traffic upon
the one-way street. It is a petty misdemeanor to stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle in violation of
this Section.
§ 72.07 PARKING HOURS.
Parking on streets shall be limited as follows:
(A) It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle upon any
street for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours, unless otherwise posted.
§ 72.07 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 10
(B) The Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets blocks, or portions of streets or
blocks, as five-minute, ten-minute, 15-minute, 30-minute, one-hour, two-hour, four-hour, six-hour, or
eight-hour limited parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. The
zones shall be established whenever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic
hazards and preserve a free flow of traffic. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to stop, park, or
leave standing any vehicle in any space so limited when sign-posted.
(C) It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to remove, erase, or otherwise obliterate any mark or
sign placed upon a tire or other part of a vehicle by a peace officer, or designee, for the purpose of
measuring the length of time the vehicle has been parked.
(D) For the purpose of enforcement of this Section, any vehicle moved less than one block in a
limited time parking zone shall be deemed to have remained stationary.
§ 72.08 CALENDAR PARKING.
(A) Streets and Avenues. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to park or leave standing,
between November 15 and March 15 of the following year, any motor vehicle on any street designated
as an "avenue" between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays,
or on any designated street, road, boulevard, circle, court, cul-de-sac, drive, or lane between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays.
(B) Parking Lots. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to park or leave standing, between
November 15 and March 15 of the following year, any motor vehicle in City parking lots identified as
parking lot west of LaBree Avenue and north of First Street, west half of parking lot located between
Second Street and Third Street west of Knight Avenue, and the west half of the parking lot located
between LaBree Avenue and Horace Avenue north of Fourth Street between the hours of midnight and
6:00 a.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, or in City parking lots identified as parking lot east
of LaBree Avenue and from Second Street to 150 feet south of Second Street, east half of the parking
lot between Second Street and Third Street west of Knight Avenue, and the east half of the parking lot
between LaBree Avenue and Horace Avenue north of Fourth Street between the hours of midnight and
6:00 a.m. on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays.
Amended by Ordinance No. 35, 3rd Series 11/06/07
§ 72.09 TRUCK PARKING ON STREETS.
(A) It is a petty misdemeanor to park a detached semi-trailer upon any street, City-owned parking
lot, or other public property.
(B) It is a petty misdemeanor to park a semi-trailer, whether or not attached to a truck tractor,
within an area zoned as a Residential District, except while loading or unloading the same.
(C) It is a petty misdemeanor to park a commercial vehicle of more than one ton capacity upon
any street in an area zoned for commercial or industrial uses which has been duly sign-posted
prohibiting the same, but parking of the vehicle for a period of not more than 20 minutes shall be
permitted in the space
11 Parking Regulations § 72.07
for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property for loading and unloading when the access
cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not so
restricted.
(D) It is a petty misdemeanor to park a commercial vehicle of more than one-ton capacity upon
any street in an area zoned residential except when necessary for the purpose of access for loading or
unloading cargo when the access cannot be otherwise reasonably secured.
(E) It is a petty misdemeanor to park a truck or other vehicle using or equipped with a trailer or
extended body or other extension or projection beyond the original length of the vehicle, or any
passenger bus, except for a time sufficient to load or unload, and in such case, only parallel parking
shall be permitted. A truck may stand backed up to the curb if the weight or bulk of the load makes
parallel parking impracticable, but then only for a period of time sufficient to load or unload.
(F) Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and sign-posted loading zones
and in alleys for a period of up to 20 minutes, provided that the alley parking does not prevent the flow
of traffic therein, all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or adjacent property for
loading or unloading.
§ 72.10 PARKING IN MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS AND RAMPS.
In municipally-owned parking lots and ramps, the Council may limit the sizes and types of motor
vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of parking and prescribed method of parking, provided that the
limitations and restrictions are sign-posted thereon. It is a petty misdemeanor to drive in a direction
opposite the flow of traffic marked by "one-way" signs or arrows or to park any vehicle in any
municipally-owned parking lot or ramp contrary to the restrictions or limitations sign-posted therein.
§ 72.11 LOADING ZONES.
The Council may, by resolution, establish loading zones to be used for the specific purpose of
loading or unloading merchandise from a commercial vehicle or vehicle temporarily being utilized in
the transport of merchandise. The loading zone shall be duly sign-posted.
§ 72.12 UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
(A) It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended while the engine
is running.
(B) It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended with the key in
the ignition.
§ 72.14 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 12
§ 72.13 VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to service, repair, assemble, or dismantle any vehicle
parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to service the vehicle with gasoline or to provide
emergency repairs thereon.
§ 72.14 PARKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING OR SELLING
MERCHANDISE.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to stop, park, or leave standing a vehicle on any street for
the purpose of selling merchandise thereon or therein or advertising any merchandise for sale or a
forthcoming event for a period longer than 15 minutes.
§ 72.15 COURTESY PARKING.
The Chief of Police is authorized to waive hours of parking limitations herein stated upon an
application duly filed on any day and to any particular group; provided, members of the group shall
have displayed in their motor vehicles a "courtesy parking" sticker card or other similar
designation.
§ 72.16 PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PARKING.
(A) Statutory parking privileges for physically handicapped shall be strictly observed and
enforced. Peace officers are authorized to tag vehicles on either private or public property in
violation of the statutory privileges.
(B) It is a petty misdemeanor for any person, whether or not physically handicapped, to stop,
park, or leave standing a motor vehicle:
(1) In a sign-posted fire lane at any time; or
(2) In sign-posted lanes where, and during such hours as, parking is prohibited.
§ 72.17 IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.
When any peace officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or municipally-owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, the officer is authorized to require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this Chapter. When any
peace officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or municipally-owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, the officer is authorized to impound the unlawfully parked
vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage or
other facility; provided, if any charge shall be incurred for cost of removal or storage, or both, by
anyone called upon to assist therewith the same, that cost shall be paid prior to removal from the
place of storage by the person claiming the vehicle. Disposition of impounded vehicles shall by
13 Parking Regulations § 72.14
made in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 32. In the alternative, a citation for a petty
misdemeanor offense may be issued.
Cross reference:
City policies, see Ch. 32
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
73. BICYCLES; ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES; ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS
Section
Bicycles
73.01 Definition
73.02 Traffic laws apply
73.03 Manner and number riding
73.04 Hitching rides
73.05 Where to ride
73.06 Right-of-way; sidewalks
73.07 Carrying articles
73.08 Lighting and brake equipment
73.09 Sale with reflectors
Roller Blades, Roller Skates, and Skateboards
73.25 Definitions
73.26 Unlawful acts
73.27 Right-of-way
73.28 Hours of use
73.29 Violations
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) BICYCLE. Every device propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices, and including any device generally
recognized as a BICYCLE though equipped with two front or rear wheels.
13
15 Bicycles; Roller Blades, Roller Skates, And Skateboards § 73.02
§ 73.02 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a street or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by this Chapter, except as to special regulations in this Chapter and except as to those
provisions of this Chapter which by their nature can have no application.
§ 73.03 MANNER AND NUMBER RIDING.
(A) It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride other than upon or astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.
(B) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped, except on a baby seat attached to the bicycle, provided that the seat is equipped
with a harness to hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is provided against the child’s feet
hitting the spokes of the wheel or in a seat attached to the bicycle operator.
§ 73.04 HITCHING RIDES.
It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, roller blades, skate
board, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the same or themselves to any vehicle upon a street.
§ 73.05 WHERE TO RIDE.
(A) Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as near to the right side of the street as
practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(B) Persons riding bicycles upon a street shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or
parts of streets set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
§ 73.06 RIGHT-OF-WAY; SIDEWALKS.
Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
§ 73.07 CARRYING ARTICLES.
It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
§ 73.08 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 16
§ 73.08 LIGHTING AND BRAKE EQUIPMENT.
(A) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with, or its operator shall carry, a
lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front
and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department of Public Safety which is
visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. No person may, at any other time when there is
not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500
feet ahead, operate a bicycle unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with reflective surfaces that
shall be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when viewed in front of lawful lower beams
of headlamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective surfaces shall include reflective materials on each side
of each pedal to indicate their presence from the front or the rear and with a minimum of 20 square
inches on each side of the bicycle or its operator of white reflective material. All reflective materials
used in compliance with this Section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the Commissioner of
Public Safety.
(B) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked
wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
§ 73.09 SALE WITH REFLECTORS.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any new bicycle unless it is equipped with such
reflectors as are prescribed in § 73.08.
ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS
§ 73.25 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
(A) BUSINESS DISTRICT. That part of the City bounded on the north by the south curbline of
Fourth Street, on the south by the north line of the north sidewalk of First Street, on the west by the west
curbline of Knight Avenue and on the east by the west curbline of Atlantic Avenue from Fourth Street to
Second Street and by the north curbline of Second Street from Atlantic Avenue to Horace Avenue and by
the west curbline of Horace Avenue from Second Street to First Street.
(B) OPERATE. To ride on or upon or control the operation of roller blades, roller skates, or a
skateboard.
17 Bicycles; Roller Blades, Roller Skates, And Skateboards § 73.26
(C) OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of roller blades, roller
skates, or a skateboard.
(D) ROLLER BLADES/ROLLER SKATES. A shoe with wheels attached or a device with wheels
which is designed to be attached to a shoe.
(E) SKATEBOARDS. A device for riding-upon, usually while standing, consisting of an oblong
piece of wood, or of other composition, mounted on skate wheels.
§ 73.26 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to operate roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard under the
circumstances set forth hereafter:
(1) On any public sidewalk, street, or public parking lot within the Business District;
(2) On private property of another without the express permission to do so by the owner or
occupant of the property; or
(3) In any careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the
safety of any person or property of any other person.
(B) It is unlawful for any person operating roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard to attach the
same, or the person of the operator, to any vehicle upon a street.
(C) Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard upon a street shall ride as
close as possible to the right-hand curb or edge of the street.
§ 73.27 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
The operator of roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard emerging from any alley, driveway, or
building upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway shall yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the street
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the street.
§ 73.28 HOURS OF USE.
It is unlawful for any person to use roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard upon a public street,
sidewalk, or other roadway from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. except on private property with express
permission of owner, and except if the roller blades, roller skates, skateboard, or operator are equipped
with reflective surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when viewed in
§ 73.28 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 18
front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective material shall be a
minimum of 40 square inches. All reflective materials used in compliance with this Section shall meet
the requirements as prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ 73.29 VIOLATIONS.
A person apprehended by a peace officer in violation of the provisions of this Subchapter does by
their use of the public sidewalks, streets, and public parking lots consent to the impoundment by a police
officer of the roller blades, roller skates, or skateboard for a period of three days upon a first offense, a
week upon the second offense and 30 days upon a third or additional offense. Any operator aggrieved by
the impoundment of their roller blades, roller skates or skateboard may petition the Council for a hearing
thereon at the next regular Council meeting following the impoundment. This provision is in addition to
the provisions for fines and penalties as set forth in this Code.
CHAPTER 74: SNOWMOBILE; ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Section
74.01 Definitions
74.02 Scope of application
74.03 Operation
74.04 Special orders
74.05 Direct crossings
74.06 Yielding the right-of-way
74.07 Unlawful act
74.08 Equipment
74.09 Emergencies
74.10 Animals
74.11 Signal from officer to stop
74.12 Certain statutes adopted
74.13 Permits
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
(A) ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A motorized floatation tired vehicle as defined by Minnesota
Statutes §84.92.
(B) BUSINESS DISTRICT. That part of the City bounded on the north by the south curbline of
Fourth Street, on the south by the north line of the north sidewalk of First Street, on the west by the
west curbline of Knight Avenue, and the east by the west curbline of Atlantic Avenue from Fourth
Street to Second Street and by the north curbline of Second Street from Atlantic Avenue to Horace
Avenue and by the west curbline of Horace Avenue from Second Street to First Street.
(C) DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE. A device which when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving
mechanism.
(D) NATURAL TERRAIN. Areas other than streets or driveways (private or public), parking
lots and other areas the surface of which has been intentionally modified for motor vehicle operation
thereon.
(E) OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or all-terrain
vehicle.
(F) OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile
or all-terrain vehicle.
19
§ 74.01 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 20
(G) OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile
or all-terrain vehicle or entitled to the use or possession thereof.
(H) SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice steered by skis
or runners.
§ 74.02 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
Notwithstanding provisions of this Chapter to the contrary, this Section shall apply to control of
traffic and regulation of those certain classes of vehicles falling within the definition of snowmobiles
and all-terrain vehicles as to matters set forth herein.
§ 74.03 OPERATION.
Except as otherwise herein permitted, it is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or
all-terrain vehicle not licensed as a motor vehicle as follows:
(A) Except for all-terrain vehicles, on any street within the business district except during an
emergency as herein otherwise provided;
(B) On the portion of any right-of-way of any street used for motor vehicle travel, except that a
snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle may operate upon the most right hand lane of a street and may in
passing or making a left hand turn operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the
same direction;
(C) On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel, except to cross the same at a 90 degree
angle or where signs are erected pursuant to resolution of the Council permitting such travel;
(D) On boulevards within any public right-of-way, except where sign-posted and designated
pursuant to resolution of the Council;
(E) On the private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in
control of the property;
(F) At a rate of speed greater than the posted speed limit or speed limit set by City Ordinance or
Minnesota Statutes, and in no event greater than reasonable or proper under all surrounding
circumstances;
(G) At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the
rights or safety of others or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or
damage to any person or property;
(H) So as to tow any person or thing except through use of a rigid towbar attached to the rear of
the snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle;
21 Snowmobile; All-Terrain Vehicles § 74.05
(I) At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in M.S. § 169A.20,
M.S. § 84.87, M.S. § 84.928 and M.S. § 84.91 which are incorporated herein by reference;
(J) Within 100 feet of any pedestrian, fisherman, skating rink or sliding area where the
operation would conflict with the use or endanger other persons or property;
(K) Except while traveling in a direct route to a public or private area where operation is
unrestricted except as to requirements of Minnesota Statutes. This limitation shall not be construed to
prevent the use of snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles to travel to and from the driver’s place of
employment, or for all-terrain vehicles, as alternative transportation; and
(L) Without front and rear lights being lit at all times while on public streets.
(M) For all-terrain vehicles, after sunset and before sunrise or in inclement weather or when
visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at any time when there is
insufficient visibility to clearly see persons and vehicles on a roadway at a distance of 500 feet;
unless equipped with original equipment headlights, taillights, and rear facing brake lights; and,
(N) For all-terrain vehicles, on Highway 32 and Highway 59 within the City.
§ 74.04 SPECIAL ORDERS.
In addition to the regulations herein provided for, it is unlawful to operate a snowmobile or allterrain
vehicle on any public place where prohibited by order of the Council.
§ 74.05 DIRECT CROSSINGS.
A snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle may make a direct crossing of a street or highway,
provided:
(A) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street
or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(B) The snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way;
(C) The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate
hazard; and,
(D) In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of the
street or highway with another public street or highway.
§ 74.06 YIELDING THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
It is unlawful for any person operating a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle to enter any
intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so
close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
§ 74.06 Thief River Falls - Traffic Code 22
§ 74.07 UNLAWFUL ACT.
It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle to permit the snowmobile or
all-terrain vehicle to be operated contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 74.08 EQUIPMENT.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle any place within the
City unless it is equipped with the following:
(A) Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation of
the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass,
straight pipe, or similar device on a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle motor;
(B) Braking system equipped with a rear facing brake light and adequate to control the
movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle under any condition of
operation; and,
(C) A safety or so-called "deadman" throttle in operating condition.
§ 74.09 EMERGENCIES.
Notwithstanding the prohibition of operating a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle upon a street to
the contrary, a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the street renders travel
by automobile impractical.
§ 74.10 ANIMALS.
It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over, or kill any animal with a snowmobile or
all-terrain vehicle.
§ 74.11 SIGNAL FROM OFFICER TO STOP.
It is unlawful for a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle operator, after having received a visible or
audible signal from any peace officer, to come to a stop or to:
(A) Operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle in willful or wanton disregard of the signal;
(B) Interfere with or endanger the peace officer or any other person or vehicle; or
(C) Increase operator’s speed or attempt to flee or elude the officer.
23 Snowmobile; All-Terrain Vehicles § 74.11
§ 74.12 CERTAIN STATUTES ADOPTED.
M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.929, inclusive, as amended, together with rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, are adopted by reference, incorporated herein and made a part hereof,
except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 74.13 PERMITS.
(A) An individual must have a permit from the City for the operation of an all-terrain vehicle
pursuant to this Chapter.
(B) The application for the permit shall be available from the City Police Department, shall be
completed, and shall be submitted to the City Police Department, along with an application fee, which
fee is to be established by the Council by resolution from time to time;
(C) The application shall be reviewed by the City Police Chief and a permit shall be issued by the
City Police Chief should the application qualify;
(D) The applicant must demonstrate evidence of insurance complying with the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes §65B.48, Subd. 5;
(E) The permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three years and may be renewed;
(F) All permits shall be effective from January 1st through December 31st of the third year;
(G) Applicants must be age 16 or greater holding a valid driver’s license recognized by the State
of Minnesota, and where necessary, a Department of Natural Resource’s Certification permitting
operation of all-terrain vehicles; the permit to be issued under this section shall only be valid during
the time and under the circumstances that the applicant’s driver’s license would allow operation of a
motor vehicle in the State of Minnesota; and,
(H) The permit may be revoked at any time if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot
safely or legally operate, or has not safely or legally operated, the all-terrain vehicle within the City or
if the applicant’s driver’s license is no longer recognized as valid in the State of Minnesota. An
applicant may appeal any such revocation or denial to the City Council by filing notice of appeal at the
City Administrator’s Office not later than 14 days after the date of notice of the action to be appealed
from.
Amended by Ordinance No. 41, 3rd Series 04/07/09
Amended by Ordinance No. 42, 3rd Series 04/21/09
Amended by Ordinance No. 45, 3rd Series 04/06/10
Amended by Ordinance No. 53, 3rd Series 07/05/11
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: FAIR HOUSING
Section
90.01 Declaration of fair housing policy
90.02 Definitions
90.03 Prohibited acts in regard to housing
90.04 Enforcement procedures
90.05 Statute of limitations
90.06 Civil enforcement procedure
§ 90.01 DECLARATION OF FAIR HOUSING POLICY.
Discrimination with regard to housing on the basis of race, sex, creed, religion, marital status, or
disability adversely affects the health, welfare, peace, and safety of the community. Persons subject to
such discrimination suffer depressed living conditions and create conditions which endanger the public
peace and order. The public policy of the City is declared to be to foster equal opportunity for all to
obtain decent, safe and sanitary housing without regard to their race, creed, color, national origin,
marital status, disability status, sex and strictly in accord with their individual merits as human beings. It
is also the policy of the City to protect all persons from all unfounded charges of discrimination.
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Includes segregate or separate.
(B) DISABILITY. A mental or physical condition which constitutes a handicap. Nothing in this
Section shall be construed to prohibit any program, service, facility, or privilege afforded to a person
with a disability which is intended to habitate, rehabilitate, or accommodate that person.
(C) MARITAL STATUS. The standing, state, or condition of one as single or married person.
§ 90.03 PROHIBITED ACTS IN REGARD TO HOUSING.
It is an unlawful discriminatory practice:
3
§ 90.03 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 4
(A) For any person to discriminate on grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex, marital status,
status with regard to public assistance, national origin, age or disability in the sale, lease or rental of any
housing unit or units;
(B) For any broker, agent, salesperson, or other person acting in behalf of another to so
discriminate in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or units belonging to such other person;
(C) For any person engaged in the business of financing the purchase, rehabilitation, remodeling or
repair of housing units, or in the business of selling insurance with respect to housing units to refuse to
provide the financing or insurance or to discriminate with regard to the terms or conditions thereof
by reason of the race, color, sex, religion, creed, national origin, marital status, status with regard to
public assistance, age or disability of the applicant, or because of the location of the unit or units in areas
of the City occupied by persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion, creed, national origin, marital
status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability, or to discriminate by treating differently
any person or group of persons who desire to purchase, lease, acquire, construct, rehabilitate, repair or
maintain real property in a specific urban area because of social, economic, or environmental conditions
of the area in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying, or renewing or in the rates, terms,
conditions or privileges of any such financial assistance or in the extension of services in connection
therewith. The bona fide programs of federal, state, or local governmental units or agencies, however
structured or authorized to upgrade or improve in any manner a specific urban area, shall not be deemed
to be a violation of this Section;
(D) For any person having sold, leased, or rented a housing unit or units to any person, to
discriminate with respect to facilities, services or privileges of occupancy by reason of race, color, sex,
creed, religion, national origin, age, disability, marital status or status with regard to public assistance;
(E) For any person to make or publish any statement evidencing an intent to discriminate on
grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex, national origin or ancestry, marital status, status with regard
to public assistance, age or disability in the sale, lease or rental of a housing unit or units;
(F) For any person to make an inquiry regarding race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability or to keep any record or use any
form of application designed to elicit such information in connection with the sale, lease, rental or
financing of a business unit or units;
(G) For any person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which they may
benefit financially:
(1) To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition of the
block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located in respect of the race, color, sex, creed,
religion, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability of those
living there; or
5 Fair Housing § 90.05
(2) To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of property values, an
increase in crime or antisocial behavior or a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood,
or area concerned.
(H) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require any person or group of persons selling,
renting, or leasing property to modify the property in any way or exercise a higher degree of care for a
person having a disability than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this Section be
construed to relieve any person or persons of any obligations generally imposed on all persons regardless
of any disability in a written lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale or to forbid
distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations of the
lease, agreement, or contract;
(I) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
(1) The rental of a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for two families, one of
which is occupied by the owner; or
(2) The rental by an owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation in which the owner or
occupier rents a room or rooms in such accommodation to another person or persons if the
discrimination is by sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability. Nothing in
this Section shall be construed to require any person or group of persons selling, renting, or leasing
property to modify the property in any way or exercise a higher degree of care for a person having a
disability than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this Section be construed to relieve
any person or persons of any obligations generally imposed on all persons regardless of any disability in
a written lease, rental agreement or contract of purchase or sale or to forbid distinctions based on the
inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations, of the lease agreement or
contract.
§ 90.04 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
The Community Development Division is designated as the enforcement agency for this Section and
shall have the power to receive, hear, and determine complaints as provided herein. The Community
Development Director shall promptly investigate, upon complaint or upon the Community Development
Director’s own motion, any violations of this Section. If, after investigation, the Community
Development Director shall have reason to believe a violation has occurred, the Community
Development Director may refer the matter to the City Attorney for criminal prosecution, initiate civil
enforcement procedures as herein provided, or enter into a settlement agreement which, when approved
by the Council, shall have the same force as a Council order.
§ 90.05 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
No action may be brought for civil enforcement or criminal prosecution unless the charge of alleged
discriminatory practice was filed with the City within 180 days from the occurrence of the practice.
§ 90.06 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 6
§ 90.06 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
Civil enforcement procedures shall be prosecuted by the Community Development Director before
the Council in the following manner:
(A) The Community Development Director shall serve upon the respondent by certified mail a
complaint, signed by the Community Development Director, which shall set forth a clear and concise
statement of the facts constituting the violation, set a time and place for hearing and advise the
respondent of the respondent’s right to file an answer to appear in person or by an attorney and to
examine and cross-examine witnesses;
(B) The hearing shall not be less than 20 days after service of the complaint. Any time prior to the
hearing the respondent may file an answer. Facts not denied by answer shall be deemed admitted. If the
answer sets out new matter, it shall be deemed denied by the Community Development Director;
(C) The complaint or answer may be amended at any given time prior to the hearing with the
consent of the opposing party;
(D) Hearings shall be before the Council;
(E) The Community Development Director may obtain subpoenas from the District Court to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at any hearing; and
(F) If, after the hearing, the panel shall conclude that a violation has occurred, it shall prepare an
order which may contain any provision deemed desirable to do justice to the complainant or to prevent
further violations. It may include provisions which require the respondent to rent, sell, or lease particular
housing to the complainant or to do any other thing as may be just. The panel’s findings of fact and
order shall be served on the respondent and each member of the Housing and Redevelopment Authority
(hereinafter referred to as the HRA) by mail and shall become the findings and order of the HRA unless,
within ten days after mailing of the findings and order, HRA shall revoke or amend the order, but any
order of a panel may be modified by the HRA at any time.
Section
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
General Provisions
Assessable current services
Tree diseases
Nuisances
Public nuisance
Public nuisances affecting health
Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
Duties of City officers
Abatement
Recovery of cost
Weeds/Grass Control
Jurisdiction
Defi nitions; exclusions
Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like
Filing complaint
Notice of violations
Appeals
Abatement by City
Liability
Future Abatements
Open Barning
Definitions
Prohibited materials
Permit required for open burning
Purposes allowed for open burning
Permit application for open burning; permit fees
Permit process for open burning
Permit holder responsibility
Revocation of open burning permit
91.01
91.02
91.15
91.r6
91.t7
91.18
9r.19
91.20
91.21
91.35
91.36
91.37
91.38
91.39
91.40
91.41
91.42
91.43
91.60
91.61
91.62
91.63
91.64
91.65
91.66
91.67
7
s el.01 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 8
91.68
91.69
91.70
91.71
Denial of open burning permit
Burning ban or air quality alert
Burning of leaves
Rules and laws adopted by reference
91.80 Other Public Nuisances
98.81 Inoperable Motor Vehicles
GENERAL PROWSIONS
$ 91.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVTCES.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this Section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CURRENT SERWCE. Shall mean one or more of the following: snow, ice, or rubbish
removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks or from private
property; removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property,
any hazatdous building included in M.S. $$ 463.15 through 463.26 as they may amerded from"rC tliumdein tgo
time; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling, street flushing, or other dust
treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees; and removal of unsound
and insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the operation of a street
lighting system.
(B') Snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish.
(l) Duty of owners and occupants. The owner or occupant of any property adjacent to a
public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall
allow snow, ice, dirt, or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 48 hours, or 24 hours in the central
business district defined for this purpose as the area bordered by Fourth Street on the north, Knight
Avenue on the west, First Street on the south, and the Canadian Pacific Railroad on the east, after its
deposit thereon. Failure to comply with this section will constitute a violation.
(2) Removal by City. The City Administrator or other person designated by the City
Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish u, ,oo, ui
possible beginning 48 hours, or 24 hours in the central business district defined for this purpose as the
area bordered by Fourth Street on the north, Knight Avenue on the west, First Street on the south, and
the Canadian Pacific Railroad on the east, after any matter has been deposited thereon, or after the
snow has ceased to fall. The City Administrator or other designated person shall keep record showing
the cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.
Ordinance No. t 17, 3'd Series t t/27/2018
(C) Public heslth and safety hazards. When the City removes or eliminates public health or
safety hazards from private property under the following provisions of this Chapter, the administrative
officer responsible for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination
against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the City
Administrator.
(D) Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the City installs or repairs water
service lines serving private property under Chapter 54 of this Code, the City Administrator shall keep
a record of the total cost of the installation or repair against the property.
9 Nuisances s 91.01
(E) Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
(l) Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the City abutting a public sidewalk or
alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in
accordance with the standard specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the office of
the City Administrator.
(2) Inspectionsl notice. The City Council or its designee shall make inspections as are
necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the City are kept in repair and safe for
pedestrians or vehicles. If it is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe
and in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a notice to be served, by registered oi certified mail
or by personal service, upon the record owner of the property, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk
or alley repaired and made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the City will
do so and that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and if unpaid it will be made a special
assessment against the property concerned.
(3) Repoir by City. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30 days after receipt of the
notice, the City Administrator shall report the facts to the City Council and the City Council inutt Uy
resolution order the work done by contract in accordance with law. The City Administrator shall keep
a record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of property.
(F) Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service has
been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service. As soon as the service has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator, or other designated official, shall prepare a
bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
office of the City Administrator.
(G) Damoge to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object or
contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be liable for all damages which the
surface or structure thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the
vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any vehicle,
equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or
this code. When the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but is
operating, driving or moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner
and the driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any such damage. Any person who willfully acts
or fails to exercise due care and by that act damages any public property shall be liable for the amount
thereof, which amount shall be collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. $ 514.67, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(H) ,4ssessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Administrator shall list the total
unpaid charges for each type of current service and charges under this Section against each separate lot
or parcel to which they are attributable under this Section. The City Council may then spread the
charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under the authority of M.S. $ 429.101 as it
may be amended from time to time and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor
s e1.0r Thief River Falls - General Regulations 10
and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten,
as the City Council may determine in each case.
Ordinance No. 44,3'd Series 10/06/09
s 91.02 TREE DTSEASES.
(A) Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public nuisances whenever they
may be found within the City:
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Dutch Elm
disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles
Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
(2) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps, firewood, or other elm
material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark
beetle insecticide;
(3) Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Oak Wilt
fungus C er at o cy s t i s fa gac e arum;
(4) Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the designated officer
constitutes ahazard, including but not limited to logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood, or other oak
material which has not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide; or
(B) Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as
defined in Division (A) of this Section to remain on any premises the person owns or controls within
the City. The City Council may by resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on that
resolution, the City Council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to
abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to the affected property owner and published once no
less than one week prior to the meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the
street affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed basis of
assessment, if any, of costs. At such hearing or adjoumment thereof, the City Council shall hear any
property owner with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed project. The City Council
shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with modifications as it considers
desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by contract.
(C) Record of costs. The City Administrator shall keep a record of the costs of abatement done
under this Section for all work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the
description of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.
(D) Unpaid charges. On or before September I of each year, the City Administrator shall list the
total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable
(5) Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
1l Nuisances s el.16
under this Section. The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the
property involved as a special assessment as authorizedby M.S. $ 429.101as it may be amended from
time to time and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the
following year along with the current taxes.
Penalty, see $ 10.99
NUISANCES
$ 91.15 PUBLTC NUTSANCE.
Whoever by their act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the following is
guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
(A) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety,
health, morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;
(B) Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-ofway
or waters used by the public; or
(C) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or $$ 91.16,91.17 or 91.18, or any
other part of this Code to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
$ 91.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(A) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;
(B) All diseased animals running at large;
(C) All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
(D) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
(E) Accumulations of manure, refuse, or other debris;
(F) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly{ight or which are so
maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;
s e1.16 Thief River Falls - General Regulations t2
(G) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage,
industrial waste, or other substances;
(H) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property;
(I) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;
(J) All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
(K) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating under local license.
(L) Construction debris and solid waste.
Ordinance No. 31, 3'd Series 7/10/07
$ 9T.r7 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(A) All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as otherwise authorized by
federal, state, or local law;
(B) Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatus used in those occupations;
(C) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling
houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses;
(D) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of law or
where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating
liquor, or where intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all
liquor and other property used for maintaining that place; or
(E) Any vehicle used for the unlau{ul transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous
sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
$ 91.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety
(A) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 48 hours, or 24 hours in the central
business district defined for this purpose as the area bordered by Fourth Street on the north, Knight
Avenue on the west, First Street on the south, and the Canadian Pacif,rc Railroad on the east, after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
(B) All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent people from having a clear
view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
13 Nuisances $ e1.18
(C) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to
constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(D) All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as they may be amended from
time to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into this code.
(E) The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the exhaust of any stationary
internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or
any recreational device except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations;
(F) The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine, or other device for producing or reproduction of
sound in a distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any
person nearby. Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it
is located, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be
prima facie evidence of violation of this Section;
(G) The participation in a party or gathering of people giving rise to noise which disturbs the
peace, quiet or repose ofthe occupants ofadjoining or other property;
(H) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
public grounds except under conditions as are permitted by this Code or other applicable law;
(I) Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
(J) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the
street or sidewalk, except for City approved events;
(K) All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, so situated
so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;
(L) The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street
or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
(M) Any barbed wire fence which fence abuts any street or within ten feet of a property line;
(N) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private
property as to attract the public;
(O) Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties;
s e1.18 Thief River Falls - General Regulations t4
(P) Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household appliances,
automobile bodies, or other material in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or
vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire,
health, or safety hazards from accumulation;
(Q) Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in another condition as to
constitute ahazard to any child or other person coming on the premises where it is located;
(R) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter, or
ditch with trash of other materials;
(S) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any glass, tacks,
nails, bottles, or other substance which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire
when passing over the substance;
(T) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property;
and
(U) All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or property of
anyone.
Ordinance No. 44, 3'd Series t0/06/09
Ordinance No. I17, 3'd Series 1l/27/2018
$ 91.19 DUTTES OF CrTY OFFTCERS.
The Police Division or Sheriff, if the City has at the time no Police Division, shall enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace officer shall have the power to inspect private premises
and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances.
s 91.20 ABATEMENT.
(A) Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place, and subject of any hearing
before the City Council; notice of City Council order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement
hearing shall be given as set forth in this Section.
(l) Notice of violation Written notice of violation shall be served by a peace officer on the
owner of record or occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the
premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses
to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.
(2) Notice of CW Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council hearing to determine
or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record and occupant of the premises either in
person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is
unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council hearing,
notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the premises.
15 Nuisances s e1.21
(3) Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by the City to require
summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council order shall be made as provided in M.S.
$ 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
(4) Notice of motionfor summary enforcemenL Written notice of any motion for summary
enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. $ 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building
Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Procedure. Whenever a peace officer determines that a public nuisance is being maintained
or exists on the premises in the City, the officer shall notify in writing the owner of record or occupant
of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice of
violation shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the
nuisance is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified, the
officer shall report that fact forthwith to the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after
notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition identified
in the notice of violation is a nuisance and fuither order that if the nuisance is not abated within the
time prescribed by the City Council, the City may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City
Council order and notice of motion for summary enforcement.
(C) Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where delay in
abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in Divisions (A) and
(B) of this Section will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or
welfare, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with
summary enforcement, the officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained
on premises in the City and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public
health, safety, or welfare. The officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of
the nature of the nuisance and of the City's intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and
place of the City Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement. The City Council
shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a
nuisance, whether public health, safety, or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in
abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in Division (A) of this Section, and may order
that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated
or abated, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
(D) Immediate abatemenL Nothing in this Section shall prevent the City, without notice or other
process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to
human life or safety.
$ 91.21 RECOVERY OF COST.
(A) Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the City
shall be personally liable for the cost to the City of the abatement, including administrative costs. As
soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator or other official
s e1.21 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 16
shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately
due and payable at the office of the City Administrator.
(B) ,4ssessment. If the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private property, the
accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside
the traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Administrator shall, on or
before September I next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with
all other the charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. $ 429.101
against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then
spread the charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to
the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.
(C) Alternative. The City Administrator shall, in the altemative, upon direction of the City
Council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover costs and damages, any costs to the
City, attorney's fees, and costs and disbursements of a civil action therefor.
WEEDS/GRASS CONTROL
s 91.3s JURTSDTCTTON.
This Subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county ordinance presently in effect,
subsequently added, amended, or repealed.
S 91.36 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
(A) For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(l) DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice served by the City Council or designated City
official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance violation.
(2) PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal title, or a
person having control over the property of another, such as a right-of-way, easement, license, or lease.
(3) WEEDS, GR4S,SES and RANK WGETATION. Includes but is not limited to the
following:
(a) Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be limited to: alum
(allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock,
Dodder, Field Bindweed, French Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle,
t7 Nuisances $ e1.3e
Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle,
Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated
Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, and Wild
Parsnip;
(b) Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned, sprayed,
cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive years;
(c) Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry, further known as
berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
(d) Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental
plants, growing to a height exceeding six inches.
(e) Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth of annuals and
perennial plants; and
(f) The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants, or crops.
(B) In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have been defined by state
statute or administrative rule as being noxious or detrimental plants.
S 91.37 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.
All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or disposal and elimination of
weeds, grasses, and rank vegetation or other uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the
time of notice, is in excess of six inches in height.
$ 91.38 FTLING COMPLAINT.
Any person, including the City, who believes there is property located within the corporate limits
of the City which has growing plant matter in violation of this Subchapter shall make a written
complaint signed, dated and filed with the City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee. If
the City makes the complaint, an employee, officer or Council Member of the City shall file the
complaint in all respects as set out above.
s 91.39 NOTTCE OF VTOLATTONS.
(A) Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds in violation of this Subchapter, a
person designated by the City Council shall make an inspection. Upon concluding that there is a
probable belief that this Subchapter has been violated, the person designated by the City Council shall
forward written notification in the form of a "Destruction Order" to the property owner or the person
s e1.3e Thief River Falls - General Regulations 18
occupying the property as that information is contained within the records of the City Administrator or
any other City agency. The notice shall be served in writing by mail. The notice shall provide that
within seven days after the date of the order that the designated violation shall be removed by the
property owner or person occupying the property.
(B) (1) All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with the City Administrator.
(2) Mailing to the City Administrator or others is deemed filed on the date of posting to the
United States Postal Service.
s 91.40 APPEALS.
(A) The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of objections with the City Council
within 48 hours of the notice, excluding weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the
destruction notice. It is the property owner's responsibility to demonstrate that the matter in question is
shrubs, trees, cultivated plants, or crops or is not otherwise in violation of this Subchapter, and should
not be subject to destruction under the Subchapter.
(B) An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the City Council and shall be
decided by a majority vote of the Council Members in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or
special meeting of the City Council.
s 91.41 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the "Destruction Order" within seven
days and has not filed a notice within 48 hours to the City Administrator of an intent to appeal, the City
Council may employ the services of City employees or outside contractors and remove the weeds or
grass to conform to this Subchapter by all lawful means.
s 91.42 LTABTLTTY.
(A) The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting, or destruction of weeds or grass
as defined by this Subchapter.
(B) The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated with weed or grass
destruction, including but not limited to court costs, attomey's fees, and interest on any unpaid amounts
incurred by the City. If the City uses municipal employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate per
hour rate for employees, equipment, supplies, and chemicals which may be used.
(C) All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the City Administrator and to be
deposited in a general fund as compensation for expenses and costs incurred by the City.
19 Nuisances s e1.42
(D) All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special assessment as provided
by M.S. 5 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
s 91.43. FUTURE ABATEMENTS.
For properties for which there have been one or more notices issued within the prior 6-month
period, compliance with $ 91.39 and $ 91.40 shall not be required. For those properties, the first notice
issued within a 6-month period shall contain a general notice that the City may abate future violations
without providing additional specific notice of the violation.
Amended: Ordinance 67, 3'd Series
OPEN BURNING
$ 9r.60 DEFTNTTTONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chiel
Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Division which provides fire protection services
to the City.
(B) OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products are
emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct, or chimney, except a
"recreational fire" as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal
grills, wood smokers, and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as "open burning."
(C) RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three feet in
height, contained within the border of a "recreational fire site" using dry, clean wood; producing little
detectable smoke, odor, or soot beyond the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all
times; for recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished completely
before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions, neighbors, burning bans, and air
quality so that nuisance, health, or safety hazards will not be created. No more than one recreational
fire is allowed on any property at one time.
(D) RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a three foot diameter circle
(measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by non-combustible and
non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks, or ferrous
metal only and which area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included are
permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a "recreation fire site" as defined
herein. Recreational fire sites shall not be located closer than25 feet to any structure.
(E) .STAfiTER FaELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard, or charcoal
fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only.
Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start
an open burn.
20 Nuisances s e1.60
(F) WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, "presto logs," charcoal, cord
wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include wood that is green with leaves or
needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated with paint, glue, or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used
for recreational fires when cut into three foot lengths.
s 91.61 PROHTBTTED MATERTALS.
(A) No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning oils, petro fuels, rubber, plastics,
chemically treated materials, or other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as
tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation,
composition board, sheetrock, wiring, paint, or paint fillers.
(B) No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of hazardous waste or salvage
operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process or from
a service or commercial establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial
or institutional structures.
(C) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded material resulting from
the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving, or consumption of food.
(D) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or grass clippings,
except as provided in $ 91.71.
$ 91.62 PERMTT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNTNG.
No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the City without first having
obtained an open bum permit, except that a permit is not required for any fire which is a recreational
fire as defined in $ 91.60 and for the burning of leaves as defined in $ 91.70.
s 91.63 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNTNG.
(A) Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
(1) Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other practical means;
(2) Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
(3) Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or wildlife habitat, and in the
development and maintenance of land and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading,
or other alternative methods are not practical;
(4) Disposal ofdiseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected nursery stock, diseased
bee hives; or
2t Nuisances s er.63
(5) Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes generated from
construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other alternative disposal methods are not practical.
(B) Fire Training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
$ 91.64 PERMIT APPLICATION FoR OPEN BURNING; pERMIT FEES.
(A) Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form prescribed the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire Division. The permit application
shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and
processing those applications.
(B) An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees shall be in the amount
established by resolution, which may be amended from time to time.
$ 91.65 PERMTT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNTNG.
Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed
burn site, note special conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety
considerations.
s 91.66 PERMTT HOLDER RESPONSTBTLITY.
(A) Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible for confirming that no
burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the
permit holder or the permit holder's competent representative. The open burning site shall have
available, appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire safety plan.
(B) The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder or the permit
holder's representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person present. It is
the responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this Subchapter, available
for inspection on the site by the Police Division, Fire Division, MPCA representative, or DNR forest
officer.
(C) The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of all general conditions,
special conditions, and the bum event safety plan as established in the permit issued. The permit
holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
s e1.67 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 22
$ 91.67 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR forest officer, the Fire
Chiel Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals. Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a
fte hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit
being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the
course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame present.
s 91.68 DENTAL OF OPEN BURNTNG PERMIT.
If established criteria for the issuance of an open buming permit are not met during review of the
application, it is determined that a practical alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a
pollution or nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be drafted to the
satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals, these officers may deny the
application for the open burn permit.
s 91.69 BURNTNG BAN OR AIR QUALTTY ALERT.
No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the City or DNR has officially declared a
burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality
Alert.
$ 91.70 BURNTNG OF LEAVES.
(A) The burning of leaves will only be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) Such burning of leaves will only be permitted October I through November 15
(2) A responsible person shall be in constant attendance until the fire is completely
extinguished.
(3) Burning will only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. All fires are
to be extinguished by 8:00 p.m.
(4) Such fires shall not be less than five feet from any property line.
(5) The buming of leaves is prohibited on City streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards,
riverbanks, or any public property by private citizens.
(6) No open burning of leaves shall take place during an air pollution alert warning or
emergency declared by the Minnesota Environmental Protection Agency.
23 Nuisances s 91.70
(7) The Council may temporarily discontinue burning between October I and November 15
due to unsafe conditions (such as, excessive dryness, and the like). At the Council's discretion, the last
day of burning may be extended through December l.
(B) This Section pertains only to the burning of leaves. It is unlawful for any person to burn
rubbish, trash, or other material.
s 91.71 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED By REFERENCE.
The provisions of M.S. $$ 88.16 to 88.22 and the Minnesota State Fire Code, including Rules and
Standards 7510.3510, as the Code and rules and standards may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted by reference and made apart of this Subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
Amended: Ordinance 23, 3'd Series
s e1.80 Thief River Falls - General Regulations
S 91.80 OTHER PUBLIC NUISANCES: It is hereby determined that the storage or
accumulation of dilapidated fences, trash, rubbish, junk, building materials, and demolition
materials, upon any private property within the city tends to result in blighted and deteriorated
neighborhoods, the spread of vermin and disease, and is contrary to the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the community.
(A) DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning
(1) BUILDING MATERIAZS. Building materials shall include, without limitation,
lumber, bricks, concrete, cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electric wiring or
equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement,
nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure.
(2\ DEMOLITION MATERIAZS. Demolition materials shall include, without
limitation, debris resulting from the demolition of buildings such as concrete,
stone, plaster, bricks, concrete blocks, and other materials that are a result of the
demolition and construction operations.
(3) DILAPIDATED FENCES. A dilapidated fence is any fence, in whole or in part,
which has fallen on the ground, or because of decay or disrepair has deteriorated
to such an extent that it presents a danger of imminent collapse on its own, or as a
result of normal weather conditions.
(4) JUNK. Junk shall include, without limitation, parts of machinery or motor
vehicles, unused furniture, stoves, refrigerators or other appliances, unused
televisions or other electronics, remnants of wood, metal, or any other cast off
material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use.
(5) TRASH AND RUBBISH. Trash and rubbish shall include any and all forms of
debris not herein otherwise classified.
(B) PUBLIC NUISANCE. The storage or accumulation of (1)building materials, (except
for a business located in a proper zoning district which customarily sells building
materials) (2) demolition materials, (3) dilapidated fences, (4) junk, and (5)trash and
rubbish, upon any private property within the City is hereby declared a public nuisance
and subject to the penalties and abatement of this Chapter.
24
25 Nuisances
s 98.81 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHTCLES.
(A) DECLARATION OF NUISANCE. Any motor vehicle described in this Section
shall constitute a hazardto the health and welfare of the residents of the City as such motor
vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding ground for vermin, and
present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and citizens. Motor vehicles also
contain various fluids which, if released into the environment, can and do cause significant
health risks to the City.
(B) INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store, or
abandon any motor vehicle that is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for repair
or parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, kept for scrapping,
dismantling, or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly licensed for operation within the
State, pursuant to Minn. Stat. $ 1688.011, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
(C) SCREENING. This Section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a
building and/or kept out of view from any street, road, or alley, and which does not foster
complaint from a resident of the City. Secure privacy fencing is permissible.
Amended: Ordinance 63, 3'd Series
s 98.81
CHAPTER 92: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
92.001 Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation
Ice and Snow on Public Sidewalks
92.020 Placing snow or ice in public street or on other City property
Construction and Reconstruction of Street
Surface, Sidewalk and Curb and Gutter
92.040 Methods of procedure
92.041 Permit required
92.042 Specifications and standards
92.043 Inspection
92.044 Painting or coloring
Street Openings or Excavations
92.050 Election to manage the public right-of-way
92.051 Definitions and adoption of rules by reference
92.052 Permit requirement
92.053 Permit applications
92.054 Issuance of permit; conditions
92.055 Permit fees
92.056 Right-of-way patching and restoration
92.057 Supplementary applications
92.058 Denial of permit
92.059 Installation requirements
92.060 Inspection
92.061 Work done without a permit
92.062 Supplementary notification
92.063 Revocation of permits
92.064 Mapping data; information required
92.065 Location of facilities
92.066 Damage to other facilities
92.067 Right-of-way vacation
92.068 Indemnification and liability
92.069 Abandoned facilities; removal of abandoned facilities
92.070 Appeal
92.071 Reservation of regulatory and police powers
Obstructions, Fire Dumping, Signs and Other Structures
92.075 Obstructions
92.076 Fires
92.077 Dumping in streets
92.078 Signs and other structures
92.079 Continuing violation
Parades
92.090 Definition
92.091 Application
92.092 Procedure and granting
92.093 Fee
92.094 Distribution
92.095 Violation
Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair
92.110 Primary responsibility
92.111 Construction, reconstruction and repair specifications
92.112 Notice; no emergency, emergency
92.113 Failure of owner to reconstruct or make repairs
Trail Designation
92.20 Trail Designation
Permitting of an outdoor sidewalk commerce zone
92.301 Permit – Required
92.302 Permit – Application
92.303 Permit – Fee
92.304 Report and Recommendation of City Public Works Director
92.305 Authority to Issue and Set Conditions
92.306 Minimum Sidewalk Clearance
92.307 Dining Permits – Limited to restaurants that serve food
92.308 Limitations on outdoor sidewalk retail area/dining facilities
92.309 Indemnification and Insurance
92.310 Notice of Violation and/or Termination
92.311 Impoundment
92.312 Appeal
92.313 Appeal of Public Works Director’s Decisions Under This Title
92.314 Police and License Enforcement Personnel – Access to Premises
92.315 Violation – Penalty
92.316 Violation – Other Remedies
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 92.001 REQUIREMENT OF SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL
INSTALLATION.
(A) Requirement of Sewer and Water Laterals. No petition for the improvement of a street shall be
considered by the Council if the petition contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or
stabilized base, or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have been made
therein, including the installation of service laterals to the right-of-way line of the street, if the area
along the street will be served by such utilities installed in the street.
(B) Sewer Main Service and Water Main Service Laterals. No sewer system shall be hereafter
constructed or extended unless service laterals to platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be
extended simultaneously with construction of mains.
(C) Waiver. The Council may waive the requirements of this Section only if it finds the effects thereof
are burdensome and upon such notice and hearing as the Council may deem necessary or proper.
ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS
§ 92.020 PLACING SNOW OR ICE IN PUBLIC STREET OR ON OTHER CITY PROPERTY.
It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a specific contract with the City, to remove snow
from private property or alleys and place the same on a public street. It is also a misdemeanor for any
person not acting under a contract with the City to dump snow on City property.
CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF STREET SURFACE,
SIDEWALK AND CURB AND GUTTER
§ 92.040 METHODS OF PROCEDURE.
(A) Abutting or affected property owners may contract for, construction or reconstruction of street
surfaces, sidewalks, or curbs and gutters in accordance with this Section.
(B) With or without petition by the methods set forth in the Local Improvement Code of Minnesota
Statutes, presently beginning with M.S. § 429.011, as the same may from time to time be amended.
§ 92.041 PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is a misdemeanor to construct a sidewalk, curb and gutter, driveway apron, or street surface in any
street or other public property in the City without obtaining a permit in writing from the Public Works
Director. No permit shall be required for any such improvement ordered and installed by the Council.
A permit from the City shall not relieve the holder from damages to the person or property of another
caused by the work.
(A) Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the Public Works Director on an
application provided by the Public Works Director. The permit may be issued by the Public Works
Director upon payment of required fee and completion of other requirements. All such applications
shall contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this Chapter and specifications and
standards consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
(B) Fees. The permit fee for construction or reconstruction of street surface, sidewalk, or curb and
gutter shall be established by the Council by resolution which may be changed from time to time by
resolution.
§ 92.042 SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS.
All construction and reconstruction of street surface, sidewalk, and curb and gutter improvements,
including curb cuts, shall be strictly in accordance with specifications and standards on file in the
office of the Public Works Director and open to inspection and copying there. The specifications and
standards may be amended from time to time by the Public Works Director but shall be uniformly
enforced.
§ 92.043 INSPECTION.
The Public Works Director, or designee, shall perform inspections required herein and such other
inspection of the work as deemed necessary. Any work not done according to the applicable
specifications and standards shall be removed and corrected at the expense of the permit holder. Any
work done hereunder may be stopped by the Public Works Director, or designee, if found to be
unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the specifications and standards, but this shall not place a
continuing burden upon the City to inspect or supervise the work.
§ 92.044 PAINTING OR COLORING.
It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter, or color any street, sidewalk, or curb and gutter for
advertising purposes, or to paint or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purpose,
except as the same may be done by City employees acting within the course or scope of their
employment. This provision shall not apply to uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing, or
uniformly painted house numbers, as such coloring may be approved by the City Public Works
Director. In addition, the Council may approve certain markings on any street, sidewalk or curb and
gutter.
STREET OPENINGS OR EXCAVATIONS
§ 92.050 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
In accordance with the authority granted to the City under state and federal statutory, administrative,
and common law, the City hereby elects pursuant to this Chapter to manage rights-of-ways within its
jurisdiction.
§ 92.051 DEFINITIONS AND ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
Minn. Rules Ch. 7819, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and is
incorporated into this Code as if set out in full. The definitions included in Minn. Rules Part
7819.0100 subps. 1 through 23, as it may be amended from time to time, are the definitions of the
terms used in the following provisions of this Subchapter.
§ 92.052 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
(A) Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct or excavate
any right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the City.
(1) Excavation Permit. An Excavation Permit is required to excavate that part of the right-of-way
described in the permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-ofway
by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
(2) Obstruction Permit. An Obstruction Permit is required to hinder free and open passage over the
specified portion of right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An Obstruction Permit is not required if a person already
possesses a valid Excavation Permit for the same project.
(B) Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates
specified in the permit unless the person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way
permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
(C) Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules Part 7819.1000 subp. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time and notwithstanding Division (B) of this Section, the City shall establish and impose
a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established by resolution, which resolution may be amended
from time to time.
(D) Permit Display. Permits issued under this Subchapter shall be conspicuously displayed or
otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the
Public Works Director.
§ 92.053 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the
requirements of the following provisions:
(A) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, scaled
drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project, and the location of all known existing
and proposed facilities, and the following information:
(1) Each permittee’s name, gopher one-call registration certificate number, address and e-mail address
if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers;
(2) The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a
local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the
time of registration;
(3) A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
(a) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the Public Works
Director;
(b) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well
as claims for property damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of facilities and
equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of
underground facilities, and collapse of property;
(c) Naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force
and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all coverages;
(d) Requiring that the Public Works Director be notified 30 days in advance of cancellation of the
policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
(e) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers compensation,
and umbrella coverage established by the Public Works Director in amounts sufficient to protect the
City and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this Chapter.
(4) The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
(5) If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as
it may be amended from time to time as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and
(6) A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities
Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have
the certificate from the Commission or other state or federal agency.
(B) Payment of money due the City for:
(1) Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management costs;
(2) Prior obstructions or excavations;
(3) Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because of the applicant's prior
excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the City; or
(4) Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
§ 92.054 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
(A) Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this Chapter, the Public Works
Director shall issue a permit.
(B) Conditions. The Public Works Director may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of
the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety, and welfare or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
§ 92.055 PERMIT FEES.
Permit fees shall be in an amount established by resolution, which resolution may be amended from
time to time.
(A) Excavation Permit Fee. The City shall establish an excavation permit fee by resolution, which
resolution may be amended from time to time, in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
(1) The City management costs; and
(2) Degradation costs, if applicable.
(B) Obstruction Permit Fee. The City shall establish the obstruction permit fee by resolution, which
resolution may be amended from time to time, and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the City
management costs.
(C) Payment of Permit Fees. No Excavation Permit or Obstruction Permit shall be issued without
payment of Excavation or Obstruction Permit fees. The City may allow applicant to pay those fees
within 30 days of billing.
(D) Non-Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the Public Works Director has
revoked for a breach as stated in § 92.063 are not refundable.
(E) Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be
charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the
franchise.
(F) All permit fees shall be established consistent with the provisions of Minn. Rules Part 7819.100,
as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 92.056 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
(A) Timing. The work to be done under the Excavation Permit, and the patching and restoration of the
right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased
by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under this Subchapter.
(B) Patch and Restoration. The City shall designate who is responsible for restoring the various
portions of the right-of-way.
(1) City Restoration. If the City restores any part of the right-of-way, the permittee shall pay the costs
thereof within 30 days of billing. If following the restoration, the pavement settles due to the
permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the City, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with having to correct the defective work.
(2) Permittee Restoration. If the permittee restores any portion of the right-of-way itself, it shall at
the time of application for an excavation permit post a construction performance bond in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rules Part 7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.
(C) Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration according to the standards
and with the materials specified by the City and shall comply with Minn. Rule Part 7819.1100, as it
may be amended from time to time. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to prescribe
the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or
on a case-by-case basis.
(D) Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or restoration performed
by the permittee or its agents. The permittee upon notification from the Public Works Director, shall
correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the Public Works
Director. The work shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the
Public Works Director, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under this Subchapter.
(E) Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the
condition required by the Public Works Director, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all
restoration required by the Public Works Director, the Public Works Director at its option may do the
work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the City, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring
the right-of-way. If the permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
(F) Degradation Fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user
may elect to pay a degradation fee as established by resolution, which resolution may be amended
from time to time. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the
degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
§ 92.057 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
(A) Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified
in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as
provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit
must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area make application for a permit
extension and pay any additional fees required thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit
extension.
(B) Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit.
No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue
working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must
apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of
the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary
application must be submitted before the permit end date.
§ 92.058 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this Chapter or if
the City determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. Permits shall not be issued for excavation of
the bituminous or concrete portion of any street from October 15 until May 1 unless an emergency
exists.
§ 92.059 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way
shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules Part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to
time and other applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with M.S.
§§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
§ 92.060 INSPECTION.
(A) Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee
shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minn. Rule Part 7819.1300, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(B) Site Inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site available to City personnel and to all
others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work.
(C) Authority of Public Works Director.
(1) At the time of inspection, the Public Works Director may order the immediate cessation of any
work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety, or well-being of the public.
(2) The Public Works Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work which does not
conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall
state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days
after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Public Works Director that the
violation has been corrected. If proof has not been presented within the required time, the Public
Works Director may revoke the permit pursuant to § 92.063.
§ 92.061 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
(A) Emergency Situations.
(1) Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately notify the City of any event
regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed
to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after
the occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees
associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance
with this Chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
(2) If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the City will attempt to contact the
local representative of each facility owner affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any
event, the City may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of
which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
(B) Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having
obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a
permit, and as a penalty pay double the normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required
by this Code, deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and
comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter.
§ 92.062 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on
the permit, the permittee shall notify the Public Works Director of the accurate information as soon as
this information is known.
§ 92.063 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
(A) Substantial Breach. The City reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way
permit, without a fee refund if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by the
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited, to the following:
(1) The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the
perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens;
(3) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit;
(4) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension is obtained or
unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittees control; or
(5) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated on
an order issued pursuant to § 92.060.
(B) Written Notice of Breach. If the City determines that the permittee has committed a substantial
breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit
the City shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy that violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as
stated above, will allow the City, at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the
permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
(C) Response to Notice of Breach. Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, the
permittee shall provide the City with a plan, acceptable to the City, that will cure the breach. The
permittee's failure to so contact the City, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation
of the permit.
(D) Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City
for the City's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in connection with the revocation.
§ 92.064 MAPPING DATA; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the City in accordance with Minn.
Rules Parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 92.065 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
(A) Compliance Required. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with
applicable laws, and with Minn. Rules Parts 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, as they may be
amended from time to time, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
(B) Corridors. The City may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular
segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current
technology, the City expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the City involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
(C) Limitation of Space. To protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use, the Public Works Director shall have the power to prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making those decisions, the
Public Works Director shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential
users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with
respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City
plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the
public interest.
§ 92.066 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
When the City does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move
facilities to protect it, the Public Works Director shall notify the local representative as early as is
reasonably possible and placed as required. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that
registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.
Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another
registrant caused during the City's response to an emergency occasioned by that owner’s facilities.
§ 92.067 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
If the City vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a registrant, the registrant’s rights in
the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minn. Rules Part 7819.3200, as it may be amended from
time to time.
§ 92.068 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
By applying for and accepting a permit under this Chapter, a permittee agrees to defend and indemnify
the City in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time
to time.
§ 92.069 ABANDONED FACILITIES; REMOVAL OF ABANDONED FACILITIES.
Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way
if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this
requirement is waived by the Public Works Director.
§ 92.070 APPEAL.
A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied a permit; has had permit
revoked; or believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely
written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the
denial, revocation, or fee as imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings
establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
§ 92.071 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
A permittees or registrants rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
OBSTRUCTIONS, FIRE DUMPING, SIGNS AND OTHER STRUCTURES
§ 92.075 OBSTRUCTIONS.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to place, or deposit, or to display or offer for sale any fence, goods,
or other obstructions upon, over, across or under any street or other public property without first
having obtained a written permit from the Council and then only in compliance in all respects with the
terms and conditions of the permit and taking precautionary measures for the protection of the public.
An electrical cord or device of any kind is included, but not by way of limitation, within the definition
of an obstruction.
§ 92.076 FIRES.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a street.
§ 92.077 DUMPING IN STREETS.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to throw or deposit in any street or any other public place any nails,
dirt, glass, tin cans, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass, tree limbs, shreds or rubbish, snow or any
water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon; the effect of this Section shall extend, but not
by way of limitation, to depositing grease, oil and other fuel or lubricants in such places and to place a
motor vehicle with essential parts (as defined in Minnesota Statutes) removed, except the vehicles as
are temporarily disabled for a period not in excess of 12 hours.
§ 92.078 SIGNS AND OTHER STRUCTURES.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to place or maintain a sign or other structure in the traveled or
untraveled portion of any street or other public property without first having obtained a written permit
from the Council, except as provided in Chapter 152.
§ 92.079 CONTINUING VIOLATION.
Each day that any person continues in violation of this Section shall be a separate offense and
punishable as such.
PARADES
§ 92.090 DEFINITION.
The term PARADE means any movement of vehicles, persons or animals, or any combination thereof,
which either moves together as a body so as to in some way impede or affect the free and unobstructed
flow of traffic or which moves so that some part thereof is in violation of one or more traffic laws or
regulations if such movement is without permit hereunder.
§ 92.091 APPLICATION.
Application for a parade permit shall be made to the City Administrator on an application provided by
the City Administrator, at least 30 days in advance of the date on which it is to occur.
§ 92.092 PROCEDURE AND GRANTING.
The City Administrator shall forthwith refer all applications for parades to the Chief of Police for
consideration, which shall take no longer then seven days. If any state trunk highways are in the route
the Chief of Police shall make all necessary arrangements with the Minnesota Department of
Transportation for alternate routes or whatever may be necessary. If the Chief of Police finds that such
a parade will not cause a hazard to persons or property, and will cause no great inconvenience to the
public, and if able to make arrangements for necessary direction and control of traffic, the Chief of
Police shall endorse acceptance and return the application to the City Administrator. If the Chief of
Police finds the parade described in the application to be a hazard, a substantial inconvenience, or if
unable to make adequate arrangements for direction or control of traffic, the Chief of Police shall
return the same to the City Administrator with reasons for denial, and the permit shall not be granted
unless all conditions and objections of the Chief of Police are met or removed by the applicant.
§ 92.093 FEE.
The permit fee for a parade shall be established by the Council by resolution which may be changed
from time to time.
§ 92.094 DISTRIBUTION.
Candy and other items shall not be distributed from floats, vehicles, or other objects taking part in any
parade. Candy and other items may be distributed by individuals walking along the parade route, near
the street curb and away from that part of the street over which the parade is traveling. Violation of this
Section shall be a petty misdemeanor.
§ 92.095 VIOLATION.
It is unlawful to sponsor or participate in a parade for which no permit has been obtained from the
City, and it is unlawful to obtain a parade permit and not conduct the same in accordance with a permit
granted by the City.
SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
§ 92.110 PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY.
It is the primary responsibility of the owner of property upon which there is abutting any sidewalk to
keep and maintain the sidewalk in safe and serviceable condition.
§ 92.111 CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR SPECIFICATIONS.
All construction, reconstruction, or repair of sidewalks shall be done in strict accordance with
specifications and standards on file in the office of the Public Works Director.
§ 92.112 NOTICE; NO EMERGENCY, EMERGENCY.
(A) No Emergency. Where, in the opinion of the Public Works Director no emergency exists, notice
of the required repair or reconstruction shall be given to the owner of the abutting property. The notice
shall require completion of the work within 90 days and shall be mailed to the owner or owners shown
to be such on the records of the County Auditor.
(B) Emergency. If the repair is required because an emergency exists, the notice shall require
completion of the work within ten days and shall be mailed to the owner or owners shown to be such
on the records of the County Auditor.
§ 92.113 FAILURE OF OWNER TO RECONSTRUCT OR MAKE REPAIRS.
If the owner of the abutting property fails to make repairs or accomplish reconstruction as herein
required, the Council may order the work to be done under its direction and the cost thereof assessed to
the abutting property owner as any other special assessment.
TRAIL DESIGNATION
§ 92.200 TRAIL DESIGNATION.
The City may, by resolution, designate City Trails to be used for recreational purposes.
Maintenance, repair, and snow removal of City Trails shall be the responsibility of the City. The
City shall maintain a map of the City Trails.
PERMITTING OF AN OUTDOOR SIDEWALK COMMERCE ZONE
92.301 Permit – Required.
Any person desiring to erect, construct, place or maintain an encroachment upon any public
sidewalk for outdoor sidewalk commerce area/dining facilities in the Central Business Zoning
District (C-3) must first obtain an annual outdoor sidewalk commerce area/dining permit pursuant
to this chapter. Each applicant for an annual permit shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter and any other applicable laws. This permit would not exempt Permit Holder from
compliance with any Minnesota Department of Transportation requirements relating to a state
highway.
92.302 Permit – Application.
The City Administrator shall establish an application form for an annual outdoor sidewalk
commerce area/dining permit, including any application materials deemed necessary to enable
complete review of the application.
92.303 Permit – Fee.
Each applicant for an annual outdoor sidewalk commerce area/dining permit under this chapter
shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee as established from time to time by resolution of
the city council. Each holder of such permit shall be required to submit a renewal application along
with a non-refundable renewal application fee as established from time to time by resolution of the
city council each year to obtain a new annual permit.
92.304 Report and Recommendation of City Public Works Director.
The director shall transmit a copy of each application for an annual outdoor sidewalk commerce
area/dining permit to the chief of police and city public works director. The chief of police and/or
city public works director may require of the applicant such additional information pertinent to the
outdoor sidewalk commerce area/dining permit as they may deem necessary, and shall advise the
public works director in writing of all material facts which they consider necessary for determining
whether an outdoor sidewalk commerce area/dining permit should be approved, approved with
conditions, or denied.
92.305 Permit – Authority to Issue and Set Conditions.
The city council in acting upon any application for an annual outdoor sidewalk commerce
area/dining permit shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the issuance of a permit
based on the following principles and standards:
A. That the proposed use of the public sidewalk is in compliance with all applicable provisions of
this chapter;
B. That the proposed use of the public sidewalk is so arranged as to ensure the protection of public
health, safety and general welfare and prevent interference with users of the highway right-of-way
and with holders of other similar permits; and
92.306 Minimum Sidewalk Clearance.
A. Outdoor sidewalk retail area / dining facilities shall not be permitted on sidewalks which are
less than 9 feet wide.
B. All outdoor sidewalk commerce area/dining facilities shall be located at least four feet from the
curb, and if no curb from the edge of the pavement, and any sidewalk obstruction which shall
include, but not be limited to, street light poles, trees, sign posts, news racks, mail boxes, and utility
poles.
C. An unimpeded pedestrian corridor no less than five (5) feet at its narrowest width continuing in
a linear direction more or less parallel to the right of way the full length of the sidewalk past the
outdoor sidewalk commerce/dining area shall be maintained free and clear of any obstructions at all
times.
D. The remainder of the outdoor sidewalk area located 9 feet from the curb, or if no curb, from the
edge of the pavement, may be used by the Permit Holder as a “Commerce Zone” subject to all other
requirements of the encroachment permit.
92.307 Dining Permits - Limited to Restaurants That Serve Food.
All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to outdoor sidewalk dining facilities
established in conjunction with and abutting restaurants that are licensed or permitted for the sale
and/or service of food. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or served, unless permitted by the City
Council under separate permit.
92.308 Limitations on Outdoor Sidewalk Retail Area / Dining Facilities.
All outdoor sidewalk commerce areas/dining facilities shall be placed, installed, used or maintained
as follows:
A. All outdoor dining furnishings and equipment such as chairs, tables, fences, planters and such
related furnishings and equipment, and all retail items displayed or offered for sale, shall not exceed
48 inches in height;
B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, any umbrella used in conjunction with the
aforementioned furnishings and equipment or any portable heater may exceed 48 inches in height if
the umbrella or heater does not encroach upon the air space required in the five-foot sidewalk
clearance area. Any portable heater must be secured in such a manner to prevent it from tipping or
falling into the area of the sidewalk reserved for pedestrian travel.
C. No items of furnishings or equipment, including but not limited to umbrellas, chairs, tables,
fences, planters and related furnishings and equipment, and no retail items displayed or offered for
sale, shall be attached to the sidewalk or sidewalk surface, nor shall any of those items cause
damage to the sidewalk in any manner, unless otherwise authorized by separate permit approved by
the City Council.
D. Outdoor sidewalk dining shall only be allowed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.,
unless otherwise authorized by separate permit.
E. The maximum number of tables, chairs or other items of furnishings or equipment allowed under
any permit shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable laws. The
decision of the public works director with regard to the total number of tables, chairs or other items
of furnishings or equipment, and retail items displayed or offered for sale, which may be permitted
under the permit granted hereunder shall be final.
92.309 Indemnification and Insurance.
As a condition of the issuance of an annual outdoor sidewalk commerce area/dining permit, the
permit holder shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, officials, agents and
employees, and shall present, along with each application or renewal application for an annual
permit, evidence of liability insurance in a form and in an amount acceptable to the City, which
shall name the City as an additional insured.
92.310 Notice of Violation and/or Termination.
A. If the public works director believes that a permittee is in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the public works director may issue a notice of violation to the permittee. The notice shall
be served on the permittee, either in person or by first class mail. The notice of violation shall set
forth the basis for the violation and indicate that the permit is subject to termination unless, within
10 calendar days of service of the notice, the violation is either corrected or an appeal is requested.
B. If the director determines that a permittee has committed a violation of this chapter; or will not
be able to continue to meet the requirements of this chapter because of a proposed public highway
right-of-way improvement, the public works director shall notify the permittee, either in person or
by first class mail, that the permit will be terminated. The notice of termination shall be served on
the permittee, either in person or by first class mail. The notice shall indicate that the permit is
subject to termination unless, within 10 calendar days of service of the notice, an appeal is
requested.
C. Notices made pursuant to any section of this chapter shall be deemed served and effective upon
the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine or email, or two calendar days
after sending by first class mail. The failure of any person to receive a notice shall not affect in any
manner the validity of any proceeding or action under this chapter.
92.311 Impoundment.
A. The public works director may impound any furnishings, equipment and/or inventory believed to
be in violation of this chapter if the furnishings, equipment and /or inventory are deemed a hazard
to public health, safety or welfare. Before impounding any furnishings, equipment and/or inventory,
the director shall provide not less than 10 calendar days’ notice prior to impoundment. The notice
shall set forth the basis for the impoundment and shall also notify the permittee of its appeal rights.
B. If, however, the violation constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare,
the director may impound furnishings, equipment and/or inventory without any advance notice to
the permittee. In such case, written notice of the impound shall be served to the permittee of record
not later than two working days after the impoundment. The notice shall inform the permittee of the
right to seek the return of the impounded furnishings and equipment and the right to appeal the
public work director’s decision.
C. Notices made pursuant to any section of this chapter shall be deemed served and effective upon
the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine or email, or two calendar days
after sending by first class mail. The failure of any person to receive a notice shall not affect in any
manner the validity of any proceeding or action under this chapter.
D. The permittee or, if there is no permittee, a claimant who provides sufficient proof of ownership
of impounded furnishings and equipment may, no later than 30 calendar days after impoundment
or, if an appeal has been filed, not later than 30 calendar days after any such appeal becomes final,
obtain a return of the furnishings, equipment and/or inventory, upon paying an impound fee as
established from time to time by the city council, plus the reasonable cost, if any, of impounding
and storing the furnishings, equipment and/or inventory, in excess of the impound fee established
by the city council. The furnishings, equipment and/or inventory shall be returned without payment
of any impound fee or costs if so determined by the public works director or on appeal.
E. If any furnishings, equipment and or inventory are impounded for more than 30 calendar days
after impoundment or, if an appeal has been filed, for more than 30 calendar days after the appeal
becomes final, then the public works director may cause the sale or disposal of the impounded
furnishing and equipment.
92.312 Appeal.
A permittee or person responsible for furnishings, equipment and/or inventory governed by this
chapter may appeal any denial of a permit, notice of violation, notice of termination or
impoundment.
92.313 Appeal of Public Works Director’s Decisions Under This Title.
A. Except as otherwise provided in the applicable chapter, any person who is aggrieved by the
notices, orders, decisions, or determinations made by the public works director relative to the
application of any standards under this title may appeal to the city council.
B. Such appeal shall be in writing and must be filed with the City Administrator not less than 10
calendar days following the date of service of the public works director’s order, decision or
determination on the person aggrieved. The appeal must indicate a return address, set forth the basis
for the appeal, include the applicable appeal fee as set by city council resolution, and must be filed
with the public works director’s office. If the appeal deadline falls on a day City Hall is closed, then
the deadline shall be extended until the next regular business day.
C. As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the city shall fix a date, time
and place for hearing before the city council. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing
may be served by personal service, facsimile or by first class mail, at the return address indicated on
the written appeal. Service of the appeal notice must be made at least 10 calendar days prior to the
date of the hearing to the person aggrieved. The notice shall be deemed served and effective upon
the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine, email, or two calendar days after
sending by first class mail. The failure of the person aggrieved to receive such notice of the hearing
shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter.
D. The city council shall conduct an orderly, fair hearing and accept evidence on which persons
would commonly rely in the conduct of their ordinary business affairs as follows. The city
administrator shall administer oaths and accept testimony by declaration under penalty of perjury
relating to the issues presented on appeal. The person aggrieved, or his or her agent or attorney, or
any other interested person may present testimony or evidence concerning the issues presented on
appeal. For purposes of an appeal hearing, a valid notice, order, decision, or determination of the
public works director shall be prima facie evidence of that fact.
E. The city council shall make findings based on the record of the hearing and make a written
decision based on the findings. The city shall preserve all exhibits submitted by the parties and shall
serve the decision by first class mail on the appellant within 10 calendar days after the hearing.
F. The city council may reduce, waive or modify any penalties, conclusions or conditions stated in
the public works director’s notice, order, decision or determination if mitigating circumstances are
shown and the city council states specific grounds for reduction, waiver or modification in the
written decision. The decision of the city council shall be final, subject only to further review in a
court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to state law.
G. Failure of an aggrieved person to file an appeal and appear for a hearing in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of that person’s rights to administrative
determination of the merits of the public works director’s order, decision or determination, and shall
also constitute a forfeiture of any fines, costs and appeal fees. If no timely appeal is filed to the city
council, the public works director’s notice, order, decision or determination shall be deemed a final
administrative order. Failure to appeal a decision to the city council shall also constitute a failure to
exhaust the aggrieved person’s administrative remedies.
92.314 Police and License Enforcement Personnel – Access to Premises.
All police officers of the City shall have the right at any time to enter in and upon any such
Permitted premises, and it shall be unlawful to refuse any officer of the police force, City personnel
and/or License Enforcement Officers of the City admittance to or access to such premises for the
purpose of police control, regulation and inspection of such Permitted premises.
92.315 Violation – Penalty.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
92.316 Violation – Other Remedies.
The provisions of this chapter are cumulative to any other remedies authorized by law.
Streets and Sidewalks
(this page is intentionally blank)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
93. TREES
CHAPTER 93: TREES
Section
93.01 Policy and purpose
93.02 Definitions
93.03 Scope and adoption by reference
93.04 Unlawful act
93.05 Inspection and diagnosis
93.06 Abatement of nuisance
93.07 Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood
93.08 Spraying trees
93.09 Transporting wood prohibited
93.10 Interference prohibited
93.11 Diseased trees in streets
93.12 Additional duties of City Forester
93.13 Subsidies
93.14 City to control tree planting
93.15 Permit to plant or remove trees
93.16 City may order work done
§ 93.01 POLICY AND PROCEDURE.
The City has determined that the health of oak and elm trees is threatened by fatal diseases known as
oak wilt and Dutch elm disease. It has further determined that the loss of oak and elm trees located on
public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the safety,
good order, general welfare, and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the
Council to control and prevent the spread of these diseases and provide for the removal of dead or
diseased trees as nuisances.
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
41
§ 93.02 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 42
(A) CITY FORESTER. The person appointed by the Council, or such other employee of the City as
the Council may designate, and who shall thereafter qualify, together with duly designated assistants.
(B) NUISANCE. This term means:
(1) Any living or standing tree infected to any degree with a shade tree disease; or,
(2) Any logs, branches, stumps or other parts of any dead or dying tree, so infected, unless the
parts have been fully burned or treated under the direction of the City Forester.
(C) SHADE TREE DISEASE. Dutch elm disease or oak wilt disease.
(D) TREE INSPECTOR. The person designated as City Forester.
§ 93.03 SCOPE AND ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
M.S. §§ 18.023 through 18.024, inclusive, are adopted by reference, together with the Rules and
Regulations of the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture relating to shade tree diseases; provided, that
this Section shall supercede such statutes, rules, and regulations only to the extent of inconsistencies.
§ 93.04 UNLAWFUL ACT.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to keep, maintain, or permit upon premises owned by the
person or upon public property where the person has the duty of tree maintenance any nuisances as
herein defined.
§ 93.05 INSPECTION AND DIAGNOSIS.
It is the power and duty of the City Forester to enter upon public and private property, at any
reasonable time, for the purpose of inspection for and diagnosing shade tree disease. In cases of
suspected shade tree disease, and in performance of the City Forester’s duties, the City Forester may
remove such specimens, samples, and biopsies as may be necessary or desirable for diagnosis.
§ 93.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
Abatement of a nuisance shall be by spraying, removing, burning, or otherwise effectively treating
the infected tree or wood to prevent spread of shade tree diseases. The abatement procedures shall be
carried out in accordance with the current technical and expert methods and plans as may be designed by
the Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of Minnesota. The City shall establish specifications for
tree removal and disposal methods consistent therewith.
43 Trees § 93.07
§ 93.07 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES AND WOOD.
(A) Whenever the City Forester finds with reasonable certainty that the infection, or danger of
infection, exists in any tree or wood on any public or private property, the City Forester shall proceed as
follows:
(1) If the City Forester finds that the danger of infection of other trees is not imminent because
of dormancy of shade tree disease, the City Forester shall make a written report of the finding to the
Council which shall proceed by:
(a) Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under M.S. Chapter 429, or
(b) Abating the nuisance as provided in Division (B) of this Section.
(2) If the City Forester finds that danger of infection of other trees is imminent, the City
Forester shall notify the owner of the property, or the abutting property, as the case may be, by first
class mail that the nuisance shall be abated within 15 days from the date of mailing of the notice. If the
nuisance is not abated within that time, the City Forester shall notify the owner by certified mail that the
nuisance shall be abated within five days from the date of mailing of the notice. The City Forester shall
immediately report the action to the Council, and after the expiration of the time limited by the notice,
the City Forester may abate the nuisance.
(3) If the City Forester finds with reasonable certainty that immediate action is required to
prevent the spread of shade tree disease, the City Forester may proceed to abate the nuisance forthwith.
The City Forester shall report the action immediately to the Council and to the abutting property owner
or to the owner of the property where the nuisance is located.
(B) Upon receipt of the City Forester’s report required by Subsection (A)(1), the Council shall by
resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on the resolution, the City shall publish
notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed
to affected property owners and published once no less than one week prior to the meeting. The notice
shall state the time and place of the meeting, the streets affected, actions proposed, the estimated cost of
the abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs. At the hearing or adjournment
thereof, the Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the
proposed project. The Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with
such modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by
contract.
(C) The City Forester shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done under this Section and
shall report monthly to the City all work done for which assessments are to be made stating and
certifying the description of the land, lots, or parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.
(D) On or before September 1 of each year, the City shall list the total unpaid charges for each
abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this Section. The
Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special
§ 93.07 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 44
assessment under M.S. § 429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection the following year along with current taxes.
(E) No damage shall be awarded the owner for destruction of any tree, wood, or part thereof
pursuant to this Section.
§ 93.08 SPRAYING TREES.
(A) Whenever the City Forester determines that any tree or wood is infected or threatened with
infection, the City Forester may spray or treat all nearby high value trees with an effective concentrate,
fungicide, or both. Activities authorized by this Section shall be conducted in accordance with technical
and expert opinions and plans of the Commissioner of Agriculture and under the supervision of the
Commissioner and the Commissioner’s agents whenever possible.
(B) The notice and assessment provisions of § 93.07 apply to spraying and treatment operations
conducted under this Section.
§ 93.09 TRANSPORTING WOOD PROHIBITED.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to transport any elm wood, or, in the months of April,
May, or June, to transport any oak wood, without having obtained a permit from the City Forester. The
City Forester shall grant the permits only when the purposes of this Section will be served thereby.
§ 93.10 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the City Forester while
the City Forester is engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this Section.
§ 93.11 DISEASED TREES IN STREETS.
The rights, duties, and responsibilities of property owners set forth in this Section shall be equally
applicable to and binding upon abutting property owners with tree maintenance responsibilities under Ch.
91.
§ 93.12 ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF CITY FORESTER.
It is the additional duty of the City Forester to coordinate, under the direction and control of the
Council and the Parks and Recreation Director, all activities of the City relating to the control and
prevention of shade tree disease. The City Forester shall recommend to the Council the details of a
45 Trees § 93.16
program for the control of the diseases and perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the
Council.
§ 93.13 SUBSIDIES.
The duty of any property owner to bear the cost of removing or maintaining trees, whether by
private contract or assessment, shall be subject to a subsidy policy, if any, established by the City for the
treatment or removal of trees affected with shade tree disease.
§ 93.14 CITY TO CONTROL TREE PLANTING.
The City shall have control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees upon or overhanging all
streets or other public property. The City may establish and enforce uniform standards relating to the
species and types of trees to be planted, placement and the maintenance and removal thereof. The
standards shall be kept on file in the office of the Parks and Recreation Director and may be revised
from time to time by action of the Council upon the recommendation of the City Forester.
§ 93.15 PERMIT TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES.
No person shall plant or remove any shrub or tree upon or overhanging streets or other public
property without first procuring from the City Forester a permit in writing to do so.
§ 93.16 CITY MAY ORDER WORK DONE.
If any such owner, occupant or agent fails to comply with this Chapter and after written notice given
by the City has not within seven days of the notice complied, the City shall cause the work to be done
by its forces or with contracted forces and the expenses thus incurred shall be a lien upon the real estate.
The City shall certify to the County Auditor of Pennington County a statement of the amount of the cost
incurred by the City. The amount, together with interest, shall be entered as a special assessment against
the lot or parcel of land and be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes.
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
94. ANIMALS
CHAPTER 94: ANIMALS
Section
94.01 Definitions
94.02 Dogs and cats
94.03 Non-domestic animals
94.04 Farm animals
94.05 Impounding
94.06 Nuisances
94.07 Seizure of animals
94.08 Animals presenting a danger to health and safety of City
94.09 Diseased animals
94.10 Dangerous animals
94.11 Dangerous animal requirements
94.12 Basic care
94.13 Enforcing officer
94.14 Pound
94.15 Interference with officers
94.99 Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and poultry), or
other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom. Animals shall be classified as
follows:
(1) DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household
pets. Unless otherwise defined, domestic animals shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils,
hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting
reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.
(2) FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing work
in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, farm animals shall include members of the
equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl
47
§ 94.01 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 48
(ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees, and other animals associated
with a farm, ranch, or stable.
(3) NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild
and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous
to the health, safety, and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, non-domestic animals shall
include:
(a) Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions, tigers, cougars,
bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats;
(b) Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae) including wolves,
foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs;
(c) Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless the
crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet;
(d) Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk (whether or not
descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly
accepted as domesticated pets;
(e) Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member of the reptile
or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators; and
(f) Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can be reasonably
defined by the terms of this Section, including but not limited to bears, deer, monkeys, and game fish.
(B) AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and control of the owner
or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise restrained or confined.
(C) CAT. Both the male and female of the felidae species commonly accepted as domesticated
household pets.
(D) DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as domesticated
household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
(E) OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association, or corporation owning, keeping, or
harboring an animal.
(F) RELEASE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Animal Control Officer or other person in charge
of the pound for the release of any animal that has been taken to the pound. A Release Permit may be
obtained upon payment of a fee to the City Administrator in accordance with the regular license
requirement if the animal is unlicensed, payment of a release fee, and any maintenance costs incurred in
capturing and impounding the animal. The release fee shall be established by resolution, which
resolution may be amended from time to time.
49 Animals § 94.02
§ 94.02 DOGS AND CATS.
(A) Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns,
harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat
which runs at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a
responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible person, so as
to be effectively restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless
the City has posted an area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”
(B) License required.
(1) All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored, or maintained by their owners in the
City, shall be licensed and registered with the City. Dog licenses shall be issued by the Police Division
upon payment of the license fee as established by resolution, which resolution may be amended from
time to time . The owner shall state, at the time application is made for the license and upon forms
provided, the applicant’s name and address and the name, breed, color, and sex of each dog owned or
kept by the applicant. No license shall be granted for a dog that has not been vaccinated against
distemper and rabies, as evidenced by a certificate by a veterinarian qualified to practice in the state in
which the dog is vaccinated.
(2) It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to this Section to pay to the Police
Division the license fee established by resolution.
(3) Upon payment of the license fee, the Police Division shall issue to the owner a license
certificate and metallic tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall have stamped on it the year for which it
is issued and the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall be
required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the
collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by
the Police Division. A charge shall be made for each duplicate tag in an amount established by
resolution, which resolution may be amended from time to time. Dog tags shall not be transferable
from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag because of death of
a dog or the owner's leaving the City before the expiration of the license period.
(4) The licensing provisions of this Division (B) shall not apply to dogs whose owners are
non-residents temporarily within the City, nor to dogs brought into the City for the purpose of
participating in any dog show, nor shall this provision apply to “seeing eye” dogs properly trained to
assist blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place.
(5) The funds received by the Police Division from all dog licenses and metallic tags fees shall
first be used to defray any costs incidental to the enforcement of this Chapter; including, but not
restricted to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and maintenance of the dogs.
(C) Cats. Cats shall be included as controlled by this Division insofar as running-at-large, pickup,
impounding, boarding, licensing and proof of anti-rabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions of
this Section shall also apply to cats unless otherwise provided.
§ 94.02 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 50
(D) Vaccination.
(1) All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or transported within the City shall be
vaccinated at least once every three years by a licensed veterinarian for:
(a) Rabies - with a live modified vaccine; and
(b) Distemper.
(2) A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the date of vaccination, owner's
name and address, the animal's name (if applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine,
and the veterinarian's signature. Upon demand made by the Police Division, the Animal Control Officer
or a police officer, the owner shall present for examination the required certificate(s) of vaccination for
the animal(s). In cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal(s) shall
have seven days in which to present the certificate(s) to the Police Division or officer. Failure to do so
shall be deemed a violation of this Section.
§ 94.03 NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer for sale, any non-domestic animal
within the City. Any owner of a non-domestic animal at the time of adoption of this Code shall have 30
days in which to remove the animal from the City after which time the City may impound the animal as
provided for in this Section. An exception shall be made to this prohibition for animals specifically
trained for and actually providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals
brought into the City as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or a
licensed show or exhibition.
§ 94.04 FARM ANIMALS.
Farm animals shall only be kept in an Agricultural District of the City provided that no animal
shelter shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece of property. An exception shall be made to this
Section for those animals brought into the City as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific
research laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
§ 94.05 IMPOUNDING.
(A) Running at large. Any unlicensed animal running at large is hereby declared a public nuisance.
Any Animal Control Officer or police officer may impound any dog or other animal found unlicensed
or any animal found running at large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner of the dog or
other animal, if known. In case the owner is unknown, the officer shall post notice at the City office that
if the dog or other animal is not claimed within the time specified in Division (C) of this Section, it will
be sold or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, it shall be
51 Animals § 94.06
unlawful to kill, destroy, or otherwise cause injury to any animal, including dogs and cats running at
large.
(B) Biting animals. Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine and
which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are
required, shall be confined in the City pound for a period of not less than ten days, at the expense of the
owner. The animal may be released at the end of the time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies,
and by the payment of all costs by the owner. However, if the owner of the animal shall elect
immediately upon receipt of notice of need for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily and
immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the owner's
choosing, not outside of Pennington County, Minnesota, and provide immediate proof of confinement in
the manner as may be required, the owner may do so. If, however, the animal has been inoculated with
a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed
veterinarian, the owner may confine the dog or other animal to the owner's property.
(C) Reclaiming. All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane treatment and
sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least five regular business days, unless the animal is a
dangerous animal as defined under § 94.11 in which case it shall be kept for seven regular business days
or the times specified in § 94.11, and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal in which case it
shall be kept for ten regular business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as
provided by this Section. In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound,
the following shall be required, unless otherwise provided for in this Code or established from time to
time by resolution of the City Council:
(1) Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release permit;
(2) Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or any part of day while
animal is in the pound; and
(3) If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee, and valid certificate of vaccination
for rabies and distemper shots is required.
(D) Unclaimed animals. At the expiration of the times established in Division (C) of this Section,
if the animal has not been reclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this Section, the officer
appointed to enforce this Section may let any person claim the animal by complying with all provisions
in this Section, or may transfer to a humane society, or cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper and
humane manner and shall properly dispose of the remains thereof. Any money collected under this
Section shall be payable to the City Administrator.
§ 94.06 NUISANCES.
(A) Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which habitually
barks or cries. Habitual barking shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least five
§ 94.06 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 52
minutes with less than one minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner's
or caretaker's premises.
(B) Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person's dog or other animal to damage any
lawn, garden, or other property, whether or not the owner has knowledge of the damage.
(C) Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the custody or control of any
sanitary manner whether on their own property, on the property of others or on public property.
§ 94.07 SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.
Any peace officer or Animal Control Officer may enter upon private property and seize any animal
provided that the following exist:
(A) There is an identified complainant other than the peace officer or Animal Control Officer
making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
(B) The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the barking dog criteria set out in
§ 94.06(A); the criteria for cruelty set out in § 94.12; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in
§ 94.01(E);
(C) The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous complaint of a barking
dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or that the animal was at large at this address on a prior date;
(D) The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the dog and the property to
be entered and those attempts have either failed or have been ignored;
(E) The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence. Use of a pass key
obtained from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other authorized person to have that key shall
not be considered unauthorized entry; and
(F) Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the owner of
the dog is not possible.
§ 94.08 ANIMALS PRESENTING A DANGER TO HEALTH AND SAFETY OF CITY.
If, in the reasonable belief of any person or the Animal Control Officer or peace officer, an animal
presents an immediate danger to the health and safety of any person, or the animal is threatening
53 Animals § 94.10
imminent harm to any person, or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the person or
officer may destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner. Otherwise, the person or officer may
apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound for confinement under § 94.05. If the animal is
destroyed, the owner or keeper of the animal destroyed shall be liable to the City for the cost of
maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examination. If the animal is
found not to be a danger to the health and safety of the City, it may be released to the owner or keeper in
accordance with § 94.05(C).
§ 94.09 DISEASED ANIMALS.
(A) Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on the person’s premises, or on
premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in the City, any animal which is diseased so as to
be a danger to the health and safety of the City, even though the animal be properly licensed under this
Section.
(B) Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and presenting a threat to the
health and safety of the public, may be apprehended and confined in the pound by any person, the
Animal Control Officer or a peace officer. The officer shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the
animal. If the animal is found to be diseased in a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of
the City, the officer shall cause the animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the
remains. The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this Section shall be liable to the City for the
cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations.
(C) Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased the animal shall be
released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
§ 94.10 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
(A) Attack by an animal. It shall be unlawful for any person's animal to inflict or attempt to inflict
bodily injury to any person or other animal whether or not the owner is present. This Section shall not
apply to an attack by a dog under the control of an on-duty law enforcement officer or to an attack upon
an uninvited intruder who has entered the owner’s home with criminal intent.
(B) Destruction of dangerous animal. The Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to
order the destruction of dangerous animals in accordance with the terms established by this Chapter.
(C) Definitions. For the purpose of this Division, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has:
(a) Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any person on public or private property;
§ 94.10 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 54
(b) Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances which would indicate danger
to personal safety;
(c) Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on another animal;
(d) Bitten one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
(e) Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the owner has personal knowledge of the
same, the animal aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
(2) POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has:
(a) Bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or private property;
(b) When unprovoked, chased, or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any
public property in an apparent attitude of attack; or
(c) Has engaged in unprovoked attacks causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety
of humans or domestic animals.
(3) PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely locked pen or
structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to provide protection for the animal from the
elements. A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other
structure that would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in which
windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only barriers which prevent the animal
from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow the egress of the animal in any manner without human
assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
(a) Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet;
(b) Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be constructed of 11-gauge or
heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches, support posts shall be 1¼-inch or larger
steel pipe buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the sidewalls
shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground;
(c) A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The cover shall be constructed
of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater
than two inches; and
(d) An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of the same material as the
sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches. The gate shall be equipped
with a device capable of being locked and shall be locked at all times when the animal is in the pen or
kennel.
55 Animals § 94.10
(4) UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the animal is not purposely excited, stimulated,
agitated, or disturbed.
(D) Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The Animal Control Officer shall designate any
animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon receiving evidence that the potentially dangerous animal
has, when unprovoked, then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or a domestic animal as
stated in Division (C)(2). When an animal is declared potentially dangerous, the Animal Control Officer
shall cause one owner of the potentially dangerous animal to be notified in writing that the animal is
potentially dangerous.
(E) Evidence justifying designation. The Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to
designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving evidence of the following:
(1) That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a
person or domestic animal as stated in Division (C)(1); or
(2) That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous and the animal has then bitten,
attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal as stated in Division (C)(1).
(F) Authority to order destruction. The Animal Control Officer, upon finding that an animal is
dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order, as part of the disposition of the case, that the animal be
destroyed based on a written order containing one or more of the following findings of fact:
(1) The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an unprovoked attack, an
attack without warning, or multiple attacks; or
(2) The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to control the
animal in order to prevent injury to persons or other animals.
(G) Procedure. The Animal Control Officer, after having determined that an animal is dangerous,
may proceed in the following manner: The Animal Control Officer shall cause one owner of the animal
to be notified in writing or in person that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal seized or
make orders as deemed proper. This owner shall be notified as to dates, times, places and parties bitten,
and shall be given 14 days to appeal this order by requesting a hearing before the City Council for a
review of this determination.
(1) If no appeal is filed, the orders issued will stand or the Animal Control Officer may order
the animal destroyed.
(2) If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to the dangerous nature of the animal,
the hearing shall be held before the City Council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three
weeks after demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control or City Administrator’s office
shall be admissible for consideration by the Animal Control Officer without further foundation. After
considering all evidence pertaining to the temperament of the animal, the City Council shall make an
§ 94.10 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 56
order as it deems proper. The City Council may order that the Animal Control Officer take the animal
into custody for destruction, if the animal is not currently in custody. If the animal is ordered into
custody for destruction, the owner shall immediately make the animal available to the Animal Control
Officer.
(3) No person shall harbor an animal after it has been found by to be dangerous and ordered
into custody for destruction.
(H) Stopping an attack. If any peace officer or Animal Control Officer is witness to an attack by an
animal upon a person or another animal, the officer may take whatever means the officer deems
appropriate to bring the attack to an end and prevent further injury to the victim.
(I) Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has been identified as dangerous or
potentially dangerous shall notify the Animal Control Officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated
from its current address or given or sold to another person. The notification shall be given in writing at
least 14 days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership. The notification shall include the current
owner's name and address, the relocation address, and the name of the new owner, if any.
§ 94.11 DANGEROUS ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Requirements. If the City Council does not order the destruction of an animal that has been
declared dangerous, the City Council may, as an alternative, order any or all of the following:
(1) That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure for the dangerous animal as
specified in § 94.10(C)(3);
(2) Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly visible warning signs, including a
warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous animal on the property as specified in M.S.
§ 347.51 as may be amended from time to time;
(3) Provide and show proof annually of public liability insurance in the minimum amount of
$300,000;
(4) If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and
restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to exceed six feet in length) and under the physical
restraint of a person 16 years of age or older. The muzzle must be of a design as to prevent the dog from
biting any person or animal, but will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or
respiration;
(5) If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable, standardized tag identifying the
dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all times as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as it may be amended
from time to time;
57 Animals § 94.13
(6) All animals deemed dangerous by the Animal Control Officer shall be registered with
Pennington County, Minnesota within 14 days after the date the animal was so deemed and provide
satisfactory proof thereof to the Animal Control Officer.
(7) If the animal is a dog, the dog must be licensed and up to date on rabies vaccination. If the
animal is a cat or ferret, it must be up to date with rabies vaccination.
(B) Seizure. The Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize any dangerous animal if the owner
does not meet each of the above requirements within 14 days after the date notice is sent to the owner
that the animal is dangerous. Seizure may be appealed to district court by serving a summons and
petition upon the City and filing it with the district court.
(C) Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under § 94.11(B), may be reclaimed by the
owner of the animal upon payment of impounding and boarding fees and presenting proof to animal
control that each of the requirements under § 94.11(B), is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed under this
Section within 14 days may be disposed of as provided under § 94.10(F), and the owner is liable to the
City for costs incurred in confining and impounding the animal.
(D) Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently violated the provisions under §
94.10 with the same animal, the animal must be seized by animal control. The owner may request a
hearing as defined in § 94.10(F). If the owner is found to have violated the provisions for which the
animal was seized, the Animal Control Officer shall order the animal destroyed in a proper and humane
manner and the owner shall pay the costs of confining the animal. If the person is found not to have
violated the provisions for which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal under the
provisions of § 94.11(C). If the animal is not yet reclaimed by the owner within 14 days after the date
the owner is notified that the animal may be reclaimed, the animal may be disposed of as provided under
§ 94.10(F) and the owner is liable to the animal control for the costs incurred in confining, impounding,
and disposing of the animal.
§ 94.12 BASIC CARE.
All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment, housing in the winter, and
sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any person not treating their pet in a humane manner will be
subject to the penalties provided in this Section.
§ 94.13 ENFORCING OFFICER.
The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control officer(s) to enforce the provisions of
this Section. In the officer's duty of enforcing the provisions of this Section, the officer may from time
to time, with the consent of the City Council, designate assistants.
§ 94.14 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 58
§ 94.14 POUND.
The Council shall designate an official pound to which animals found in violation of this Chapter
shall be taken for safe treatment, and if necessary, for destruction.
§ 94.15 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.
No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any person authorized by the City
Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and convey them to the pound while engaged in that
operation. Nor shall any unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or
attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by the Animal Control Officer or designee in
compliance with this Chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or hinder the officer in the
discharge of their duties under this Chapter.
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
(A) Separate offenses. Each day a violation of this Chapter is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable under this Section.
(B) Misdemeanor. Unless otherwise provided, violation of this Chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99.
(C) Petty misdemeanor. Violations of §§ 94.02, 94.06, 94.12 are petty misdemeanors punishable
as provided in § 10.99.
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
95. HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
CHAPTER 95: HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
Section
Anhydrous Ammonia
95.01 Application
95.02 Streets for transportation
95.03 Transporting
95.04 Parking
95.05 Lighting
95.06 Personnel
95.07 Equipment
95.08 Inspection
95.09 Spills or leaks
95.10 Tampering
95.11 Storage
95.12 Moratorium
ANHYDROUS AMMONIA
§ 95.01 APPLICATION.
Any individual, partnership, corporation or other form of business that sells, delivers, or transports
anhydrous ammonia within the City shall be subject to the provisions set forth in this Subchapter.
§ 95.02 STREETS FOR TRANSPORTATION.
The Council shall designate certain streets within the City over which anhydrous ammonia can be
transported. It is illegal to transport anhydrous ammonia over other streets within the City.
§ 95.03 TRANSPORTING.
(A) Nurse tanks shall not be loaded beyond 90% of their capacity.
59
§ 95.03 Thief River Falls - General Regulations 60
(B) Only one nurse tank may be pulled by a vehicle at any one time, except two empty nurse tanks
may be pulled by a vehicle. An empty nurse tank is defined as having five percent or less of capacity.
§ 95.04 PARKING.
(A) Anhydrous ammonia tanks shall not be parked in areas zoned as Flood Plain, Parks and
Recreation, all Residential, Neighborhood Business, Central Business, and Downtown Fringe.
(B) Anhydrous ammonia tanks shall not be parked on allowable streets unless attached to a vehicle
as permitted in § 95.03 and shall not be parked on allowable streets for more than two hours.
§ 95.05 LIGHTING.
All areas that are used to store anhydrous ammonia shall have sufficient lighting to meet the
requirements prescribed by the Building Official.
§ 95.06 PERSONNEL.
Transfer of anhydrous ammonia from storage tank to nurse tank shall only be completed by
employees of the distributor or dealer who are trained in the handling and distribution of anhydrous
ammonia.
§ 95.07 EQUIPMENT.
All anhydrous ammonia tanks and tank storage areas shall have the safety equipment required by
Minnesota law, by the office of Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and as
prescribed by the Building Official.
§ 95.08 INSPECTION.
The Building Official and others designated shall be allowed to semi-annually inspect all anhydrous
ammonia tank storage areas and tanks for violations of this Subchapter.
§ 95.09 SPILLS OR LEAKS.
A liquid spill or visible leak of anhydrous ammonia shall be immediately reported to the Police
Division who shall then investigate the matter.
61 Hazardous Substances § 95.12
§ 95.10 TAMPERING.
It is unlawful for any person to tamper with anhydrous tanks or safety equipment for the tanks
without the permission of the owner.
§ 95.11 STORAGE.
It is unlawful to store anhydrous ammonia except by special permit from the Council. For the
purpose of this Section, the words "store" and "storage" shall mean confining in any type of container
except such as is then in transit upon a vehicle or other means of transportation.
§ 95.12 MORATORIUM.
Storage of anhydrous ammonia shall not be allowed within the City except at locations that are
storing anhydrous ammonia as of August 13, 1996. Existing anhydrous ammonia locations shall not
expand their present storage capacity. Should an existing anhydrous ammonia storage location find it
necessary to replace an anhydrous ammonia storage container, it shall not replace an anhydrous ammonia
storage container with a container located within the City. Should an existing anhydrous ammonia
storage location find it necessary to repair an anhydrous ammonia storage container at a cost in excess of
50% of the container’s estimated market value, that container shall be removed from the City and that
storage capacity shall not be replaced at the location within the City from which the container was
removed. The container shall include the tank itself and all attached valves and hoses.
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
110.01 Definitions
110.02 Applications
110.03 Action on application
110.04 Carrying or posting
110.05 Responsibility of licensee
110.06 Conviction of crime; denial of license
110.07 Conditional licenses
110.08 Insurance requirements
110.09 Penalty for property owners
Regulations
110.25 Junk dealers
110.26 Sewage haulers
110.27 Shows
110.28 Dances
110.29 Plumbers
110.30 Lodging tax
110.31 Pawn brokers
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this Chapter.
(B) APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon to be filled in and completed by the
applicant at the applicant’s request for a license, furnished by the City and uniformly required as a
prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance of a license for a business.
3
§ 110.01 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 4
(C) BOND. A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions acceptable and
specifically approved by the City Attorney.
(D) BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either
licensed or regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the terms and conditions of this Chapter.
(E) LICENSE. A document issued by the City to an applicant permitting the licensee to carry on and
transact a business.
(F) LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to the applicant’s application, holds a valid, current,
unexpired, and unrevoked license from the City for carrying on a business.
(G) LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the City pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a
license to transact and carry on a business.
(H) SALE, SELL and SOLD. All forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise
to persons.
§ 110.02 APPLICATIONS.
All applications shall be made as follows.
(A) All applications shall be made at the office of the City Administrator upon forms that have been
formulated by the City for such purposes.
(B) All such applications must be signed, and where necessary subscribed, and includes, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Applicant’s full name, middle initial, former names and aliases and citizenship;
(2) Applicant’s present address and length of time the applicant has lived at that address;
(3) Applicant’s occupation and length of time so engaged;
(4) Applicant’s addresses and occupations for the three years next preceding the date of
application;
(5) Names and addresses of applicant’s employers, if any, for the three years next preceding the
date of application;
(6) Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal ordinance but excluding minor traffic violations, and if
so, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense;
5 General Licensing and Regulations § 110.03
(7) Type of license and location of premises for which application is made;
(8) At least two character references if applicant has not resided in the City for two years next
preceding the date of application; and
(9) Such other information as the Council shall deem necessary considering the nature of the
business for which license application is made.
(C) It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any
application form. Any false statement in such application, or any willful omission to state any information
called for on the application form, shall, upon discovery of the falsehood, work an automatic refusal of
license, or if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto void and of no
effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this Chapter or any part hereof.
(D) The City Administrator shall, upon receipt of each application completed in accordance herewith,
forthwith investigate the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business reputation
of each applicant for license to such extent as the City Administrator deems necessary. For such
investigation, the City Administrator may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police. The Council shall not
consider an application before the investigation has been completed. Unless otherwise required by
provisions of this Chapter, the Council may authorize the City Administrator to issue licenses hereunder.
(E) Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such abbreviated form as the Council may by
resolution adopt.
§ 110.03 ACTION ON APPLICATION.
(A) Granting. A license may be granted for the period of the remainder of the then current calendar
year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications including proposed license periods must be
consistent with this Chapter.
(B) Issuing. If an application is granted, the City Administrator shall forthwith issue a license
pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the Council upon proof of ownership, payment of the
appropriate license fee and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required.
All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis beginning January l and ending December 31. Unless
otherwise herein specified, license fees shall be prorated on the basis of 1/12 for each calendar month, or
part thereof remaining in the then current license year. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on
the premises therein described. In order to effectuate the change in license year, the City Administrator is
authorized to credit the applicant for any unearned portion of a license fee or charge a prorated amount
only.
(C) Transfer. A license shall be transferable between persons upon consent of the Council. No
license shall be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the Council and upon
§ 110.03 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 6
payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this Division.
(D) Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
(E) Refusal and revocation. The Council, or in certain cases the City Administrator, may, for any
reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to a
person of questionable moral character or business reputation. Before revocation of any license, the
Council shall give notice to the licensee and grant the licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given
and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling for the hearing.
(F) Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City Administrator,
without action by the Council, upon licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment
of a fee established by Council resolution for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be
clearly marked DUPLICATE.
§ 110.04 CARRYING OR POSTING.
All licensees shall post their licenses in their place of business near the licensed activity. However, in
the case of machine or other device licensing, the City may provide a sticker for the current license year
which shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring the sticker. All licensees shall display their
licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen.
§ 110.05 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or permit is issued shall be
deemed the conduct of the licensee.
§ 110.06 CONVICTION OF CRIME; DENIAL OF LICENSE.
A license may be denied to an applicant by the Council solely or in part due to a prior conviction of a
crime by an applicant only upon a finding that the conviction directly relates to the occupation for which
the license is sought, and then only after considering evidence of rehabilitation and such other evidence as
may be presented, all in accordance with Minnesota Statutes. However, an applicant must show the
applicant’s present fitness to perform the occupation for which the license is sought.
§ 110.07 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon a finding of the
necessity therefore, place such conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem
reasonable and justified.
7 General Licensing and Regulations § 110.26
§ 110.08 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
Whenever insurance is required by a Section of this Chapter, after approval by the Council, but
before the license shall issue, the applicant shall file with the City Administrator a policy or certificate of
public liability insurance showing:
(A) That the limits are at least as high as required;
(B) That coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and
(C) That the insurance will not be canceled or terminated without 30 days written notice served upon
the City Administrator. Cancellation or termination of the coverage shall be grounds for license
revocation.
§ 110.09 PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNERS.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or controlled by that
person to be used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this Chapter.
REGULATIONS
§ 110.25 JUNK DEALERS.
(A) Definition. The term JUNK, as used in this Section, means and includes, but is not limited to,
scrap of all kinds such as metal, paper, rags, and wood.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to deal in junk without having a license therefore
from the City.
(C) Application. Application for a license shall be made to the City Administrator on an application
provided by the City Administrator. The license may be approved by the City Council and issued by the
City Administrator upon payment of required fee and completion of other requirements.
(D) License fee. The annual license fee for junk dealers shall be established by the Council by
resolution and may be changed from time to time.
§ 110.26 SEWAGE HAULERS.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into any
public sewer of the City any septic tank or cesspool wastes without first having obtained a license for such
purposes.
§ 110.26 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 8
(B) Application. Application for a license shall be made to the City Administrator on an application
provided by the City Administrator. The license may be approved by the City Council and issued by the
City Administrator upon payment of required fee and completion of other requirements.
(C) License fee. The annual license fee for sewage haulers shall be established by the Council by
resolution and changed from time to time. In addition thereto, there shall be paid a discharge fee which
shall be established by the Council by resolution and may be changed from time to time.
(D) License restriction. Licensees shall dump only at places designated from time to time by the
Public Utilities Director and shall be dumped in accordance with the regulations established by the Public
Utilities Director.
§ 110.27 SHOWS.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to present any public show, movie, caravan,
circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance, or exhibition without first having obtained a license
therefor from the City.
(B) Application. Application for a license shall be made to the City Administrator on an application
provided by the City Administrator. The license may be approved by the City Council and issued by the
City Administrator upon payment of required fee and completion of other requirements.
(C) License fees.
(1) The annual license fee for each local theater presenting only films shall be established by the
Council by resolution and may be changed from time to time.
(2) The license fee for any circus, menagerie, carnival, or like exhibition shall be established by
the Council by resolution and may be changed from time to time.
(D) Exceptions. No license shall be required in the following instances:
(1) Performances presented in the local schools and colleges, under the sponsorship of such
schools and colleges, and primarily for the students thereof only;
(2) Performance of athletic, musical, or theatrical events sponsored by local schools or colleges
using student talent only; or,
(3) Any performance or event in, or sponsored by, bona fide local church and nonprofit
organizations, provided that the organization shall be incorporated.
(E) Obscenity prohibited.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this Division (E), the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
9 General Licensing and Regulations § 110.27
(a) NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals,
pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola
or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female
breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are covered.
(b) OBSCENE PERFORMANCE. A performance which in whole or in part depicts or
reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse or which includes obscenities
or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct.
(c) OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular use in
mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conductor excretory functions or
products, either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual, or
excretory meaning.
(d) PERFORMANCE. Any play, motion picture film, dance, or other exhibition pictured,
animated or live performed before an audience.
(e) SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is
nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered,
bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
(f) SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any touching of the
genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female or the breasts of the female, whether alone
or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.
(g) SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals or the
breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation or the sensual experiences of humans engaging
in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
(2) Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any licensee, for a monetary consideration or other valuable
commodity or service, to knowingly or recklessly:
(a) Exhibit an obscene performance;
(b) Directly or indirectly sell an admission ticket or other means to gain entrance to an
obscene performance; or
(c) Directly or indirectly permit admission of a person to premises whereon there is
exhibited an obscene performance.
(3) Defense to prosecution. In any prosecution under this Section it is an affirmative defense and
for the defendant to prove:
(a) That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum, or public library or was acting in
the course of their employment as an employee of such organization or of a retail outlet affiliated with and
serving the educational purpose of such organization; or
§ 110.27 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 10
(b) That the defendant was charged with exhibiting or selling an admission ticket, or
permitting admission to a performance, those portions of which might otherwise be contraband forming
merely an incidental part of an otherwise non-offending whole and serving some legitimate purpose
therein other than titillation.
§ 110.28 DANCES.
(A) Regulation of public dances. All public dances held in this City shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of this Section.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance where the general public may participate, whether or not a
charge for admission for dancing is made.
(2) DANCING PLACE. Any room or space or other area, whether indoors or outside, which is
open to the general public for the purpose of participating in public dancing.
(C) No person shall conduct a public dance in this City unless a permit has been obtained from
the City Administrator prior to the holding of the dance. The fees for a permit shall be as established by
resolution, which resolution may be amended from time to time. In addition to this fee, the applicant shall
pay the cost to the City of providing a police officer or officers to be present at the dance. The City
Council shall establish criteria for determining the number of police officers required to be present at any
dance. No permit shall be issued until the fee and the cost of for providing the police officer or officers
has been paid.
(D) Application. Any person desiring a permit to hold a public dance in this City shall submit an
application for a permit on the form provided by the City Administrator submitted to the City
Administrator at least 14 days before the date of the proposed dance. The application shall set forth the
name and address of the applicant who shall be the person responsible for conducting the public dance and
any business, committee, or organization sponsoring the dance, the place where the dance is to be
held, the date of the dance, and the time of its beginning and end. A request for any use of a City building
or other City property shall be included with the permit application and no permit shall be issued until the
fees for the use of the City building or other City property have also been paid.
(E) Location. The applicant shall make sure that adequate parking is available for the persons
wishing to attend the dance and make sure that the location is safe and accessible. This information shall
also be provided to the City Administrator before a permit shall be issued.
(F) Permit to be posted. When a permit is issued, the holder of the permit shall post the permit in a
prominent location on the premises on which the dance is to be held during the time the dance is
occurring. The applicant shall be present at all times while the dance is occurring.
(G) Liquor license required. No person shall give, hold, conduct, or permit any public dance where
liquor will be served, as defined in M.S. Ch. 340A, without obtaining a license from the City.
11 General Licensing and Regulations § 110.30
(H) Police officer presence. No public dance shall occur without at least one police officer, or more
if more are required under the criteria established by the City Council, present at the public dancing place
during the duration of the dance and after the dance, until all of the participants have left the public
dancing place.
(I) Hours. No public dance shall occur between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(J) Minors denied admission. No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed to be present by the
permit holder or any police officer at a public dance where alcohol is sold or consumed, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(K) Certain behavior prohibited. No person present at any public dance shall engage in any
disorderly conduct as defined by M.S. § 609.72 as it may be amended from time to time, and any
disorderly person shall be immediately removed from the dance by the police officer present at the public
dancing place. Should a substantial number of persons at the public dance engage in disorderly conduct,
the police officer present shall terminate the dance and remove all persons from the public dancing place.
(L) Lighting. In order to protect the safety of persons attending a public dance, public dancing places
shall be adequately illuminated and dancing therein while lights are extinguished, dimmed, or turned low
so as to give inadequate or imperfect illumination is hereby prohibited. All exit areas shall be illuminated
at all times during the public dance with light having intensity of not less than one footcandle at floor
level. Illumination of less than 0.5 footcandles in any area where dancing is occurring, permitted, or
encouraged is prohibited.
(M)All public dances shall be subject to the provisions of this Code regulating noise.
(N) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any dance sponsored by a local school, incorporated
church, youth center, or non-profit organization where the dance is held on the premises of the local
school, incorporated church, youth center, or non-profit organization.
§ 110.29 PLUMBERS.
No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in or work at the business of a master plumber or
journeyman plumber unless licensed to do so by the State Commissioner of Health.
§ 110.30 LODGING TAX.
(A) The City imposes a tax of three percent on the gross receipts from the furnishing for
consideration of lodging at a motel, hotel, tourist court, or other use of space by a transient within the
City other than the renting or leasing of the space for a continuous period of 30 days or more.
(B)The tax authorized herewith shall be the personal obligation of the operator of any such motel, hotel,
or other space used by a transient and shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the operator
extinguishable only by payment to the City. The operator is defined to be the person who is the proprietor
of
§ 110.30 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 12
the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other capacity.
(C) The tax shall be collected by the operator at the time the payment for the lodging is made and
shall be remitted to the City on or before the twenty-fifth day of the month following the month within
which the tax is collected.
(D) The City Administrator is authorized to establish administrative regulations to effect the collection
of the tax and any interest and penalties thereon.
(E) Any operator failing to make payment by the twenty-fifth day of the month as specified in
Division (C) of this Section shall be required to pay a late fee of 5% of the tax amount remaining unpaid,
and thereafter, an additional late fee of 10% if the tax is not paid within 30 days thereafter; in addition,
interest at the rate of 7% per annum shall be paid in addition to the late fees on the amount of tax
remaining unpaid until the tax shall have been paid in full. The City Attorney is authorized to commence
such legal action as is necessary to collect all taxes, interest, and late fees due hereunder.
(F) At least 95% of the gross proceeds derived from the tax imposed by this Section shall be used
by the City to fund its local convention and tourist bureau for the purposes of marketing and promoting
the City as a tourist and convention center, with the balance of the gross proceeds to be used to provide
reimbursement for administrative costs of collection and administration of the tax by the City.
§ 110.31 PAWN BROKERS.
(A) Definition. As used in this Section, the term PAWN BROKER means a person who loans money
on deposit or pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price or who
loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any
part thereof so mortgaged.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate as a pawn broker without a license
therefor from the City.
(C) Application. Application for a license shall be made to the City Administrator on an application
provided by the City Administrator. The license may be approved by the City Council and issued by the
City Administrator upon payment of required fee and completion of other requirements.
(D) License fee. The license fee shall be established by the Council by resolution and may be changed
from time to time.
(E) Records required. Every person who shall be engaged in the business of pawn broker shall keep
a book in which shall be clearly written in ink or typewritten, in the English language, at the time of each
loan or purchase, an accurate account or description of the goods, articles, or other thing pawned, pledged
or purchased, the amount of money loaned or paid therefor; the time of the receipt of the same; the full
name, residence, driver’s license number and state of issuance; description; and such other information as
required by the Police Division of the person pawning, pledging, or selling the same. For each article
pawned, pledged, or purchased, the person engaged in the business of pawn broker shall record all serial
numbers and
13 General Licensing and Regulations § 110.31
"operation identification" numbers of each article in the book required hereunder. The book, as well as the
article pawned or purchased, shall at all reasonable times be opened to the inspection by the members of
the Police Division.
(F) Reports to police. Every pawn broker shall make out and deliver to the Chief of Police, Deputy
Chief of Police or their designee, every Monday before noon, a legible and correct copy, from the book
required in Division (E) of this Section, all of the personal property or other valuable things received or
deposited or purchased during the preceding week, together with the time when received or purchased and
a description of the person by whom left in pledge or from whom the same was purchased.
(G) Redemption period. Any person pledging an article shall have 30 days to redeem the same before
the pledge becomes forfeitable.
(H) Required holding period. No personal property received on deposit by any pawn broker shall be
redeemed from the place of business of the pawn broker for the space of 48 hours next after the delivery
to the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police or their designee, of the copy and statement relating thereto
as required by Division (G) of this Section, and no personal property purchased by any pawn broker shall
be sold or disposed of in any way within the period of 48 hours next after the delivery to the Chief of
Police, Deputy Chief of Police, or their designee of the copy and statement relating thereto as required in
Division (G) of this Section.
(I) Police order to hold property. Whenever the Chief of Police or any member of the Police
Division designated by the Chief of Police shall notify a pawn broker not to sell any property so received
on deposit or purchased by them, permit the same to be purchased by them or permit the same to be
redeemed, the property shall not be sold or permitted to be redeemed until such time as may be
determined by the Chief of Police or member of the police force designated by the Chief of Police so
requiring them to be held.
(J) Dealing with minors. No pawn broker shall purchase or receive on deposit or pledge anything of
value as security for a loan of money from any person under the age of 18 years or from persons of
unsound mind or intoxicated persons.
CHAPTER lll: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
111.015
111.016
111.017
111.018
111.019
111.020
111.021
ttt.022
111.023
7ll-o24
111.025
111.026
ttt.027
111.028
ttt.029
111.030
111.031
111.032
111.033
111.034
1t 1.045
111.046
ttt.047
1l1.048
General Provisions
1l1.001 Definitions
Licenses
Application
False statements
Application and investigation fees
Action
Renewal of licenses
Duplicate licenses
Posting
Persons disqualified
Limitation on ownership
Conditional licenses
Financial responsibilities of licenses
Insurance certificate requirements
Delinquent taxes and charges
Conduct on licensed premises
License condition and unlawful act
On-sale wine license
On-sale intoxicating malt liquor in conjunction with wine license
Brew Pubs
Brewer Taprooms
Off-sale malt liquor
General Regulalions
111.049
I I1.050
111.051
111.052
1r 1.053
Minors; unlawful acts
Gambling prohibited
Sale by employee
Consumption and possession on streetsl public property and private parking lots to
which the public has access
Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds
Municipal liquor store
Clubs
Consumption and display
Nudity or obscenity prohibited
l,l
Section
15 Alcoholic Beverages
Malt Liquor Regulations
Malt liquor license required
Fees
Restrictions, regulations and unlawful acts
Hours of sale
Closing
Temporary license permitted; terms and fees
$ il1.001
I t 1.065
t I1.066
I l1.067
1t 1.068
l l l.069
I I1.070
Intoxic aling Liquo r Reg ulatio ns
lll.080 Intoxicating liquor license required
I11.081 Fees
I I1.082 Restrictions, regulations and unlawful acts
111.083 Hours and days ofsales
I I 1.084 Closing regulations
I I 1.085 Sale of intoxicating liquor at sports or convention facilities
I I1.086 Temporary intoxicating liquor license
I I 1.100 Compliance
11l.ll9 Violations and penalty related to compliance checks and inspections
GENERAL PROVISIONS
$ 1ll.00l DEFINTTToNS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A\ 3.2% MALT LIQaOR. Malt liquor containing not less than I l2oh alcohol by volume nor more
than 3.2Yo alcohol by weight. (This definition includes so-called "malt coolers" with the alcoholic
content limits stated herein).
(B) ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than ll2%o alcohol by volume
(C) APPLICANL Any person making an application for a license under this Chapter
(D) APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the
applicant as their request for a license, fumished by the City Administrator's office and uniformly
required as a prerequisite to the consideration ofthe issuance of a license for a business.
(E) BREWER. A person who manufactures malt liquor for sale.
$) CHaRCH. A building which is principally used as a place where persons of the same faith
regularly assemble for the public worship of God.
s 111.001 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations t6
(G) CLUB. An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic, fratemal,
social, or business purposes for intellectual improvement or for the promotion of sports or a
congressionally chartered veterans' organization, which:
(l) Has more than 50 members;
(2) Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is
suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members; and
(3) Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by
the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive
any profit from the distribution or sale ofbeverages to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond a
reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the goveming body.
(H) COMMISSIONER. The Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.
() DISTILLED SPIRIIS. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum,
brandy, gin and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof for nonindustrial use.
g) HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly fumished to transients and
which has:
(l) A dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for seating at least
30 guests at one time; and
(2) At least 50 guest rooms.
(K) INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol, distilted, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt
beverages containing more than 3.2Yo of alcohol by weight.
(L) LICENSE. A document, issued by the City, to an applicant permitting them to carry on and
transact the business stated therein.
(M) LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to their approved application, holds a valid, current,
unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor is then under suspension, from the City for
carrying on the business stated therein.
(N) LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the City pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of
a license to transact and carry on the business stated therein.
(O) LICENSED PREMISES. The premiscs described in the issued license.
g) MALT L|QUOR. Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and
containing not less than I l2Yo alcohol by volume.
s 1r1.00r
(Q) MANaEACTURER. Every person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting, brewing,
distilling, refining, rectifring, blending or by the combination of different materials, prepares or
produces alcoholic beverages for sale.
(R) MINOR. Any natural person who has not attained the age ol21 years.
(S) OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the
licensed premises only.
(T) ON-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only.
(U) PACKAGE and. ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding alcoholic
beverages, which container, or receptacle holding alcoholic beverages is corked, capped, or sealed by a
manufacturer or wholesaler.
(V) RESTAURANL Any establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor
or manager having appropriate facilities for the serving of meals and where, in consideration ofpayment
therefor, meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at tables to the general public, which
employs an adequate staff to provide the usual and suitable service to its guests, and which shall have
seating facilities as follows: for 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses seating for not less than 25 guests at one
time; for wine licenses seating for not less than 25 guests at one time; and for on-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses seating for not less than 40 guests at one time.
(X) WHOLESALER. Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to a
licensee from a stock maintained in a warehouse in Minnesota.
(Y) WINE. The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including still
wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made lrom other
agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider,
perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than 112%o nor more than 24o/o alcohol by volume for
nonindustrial use. l/1NE does not include distilled spirits.
Ordinance No. 16, 3'd Series adopted May 10, 2005
Ordinance No. 36, 3'd Series adopted February, 2008
LICENSES
li lll.015 APPLTCATTON.
All applications lor licenses required by this Chapter shall be made at the office of the City
Administrator upon forms prescribed by the City and by the Commissioner, if required, together with
such additional information as the Council may desire. Information required may vary with the type of
l7 Alcoholic Beverages
(W)SALE, SELL, and SOLD. All barters and all manners or means of fumishing malt liquor,
wine, or liquor to persons, including such fumishing in violation or evasion of law.
s 1l1.0rs Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 18
business organization making application. All questions asked or information required by the application
shall be answered lully and completely by the applicant. Every application for the issuance or renewal of
an alcoholic beverage license must include a copy ofeach summons received by the applicant during the
preceding year under M.S. $ 340A.802.
s 111.016 FALSE STATEMENTS.
It is unlawfi-rl for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any
application. Any false statement in the application or any willful omission to state any information
called for on the application form shall, upon discovery of the falsehood, work an automatic refusal of
license or, ifalready issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void.
s r1l.0l7 APPLTCATION AND INVESTIGATTON FEES.
s 111.018 ACTTON.
(A) Granting. The Council may approve any application for the period of the remainder of the then
current license year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications including proposed license
periods must be consistent with this Chapter.
(C) License Refundment in Certain Cases. ln the event that, during the license year, the licensed
premises shall be destroyed or so damaged by fire, or otherwise, that the licensee shall cease to carry on
the licensed business, or in case the business of the licensee shall cease by reason of illness or death, or
if it shall become unlaw{ul for the licensee to carry on the licensed business under their license, except
when the license is revoked, the City shall, upon the happening ofany such event, refund to the licensee,
or to their estate, such part of the license fee paid by them as corresponds to the time the
At the time of the initial application, an applicant for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or 3.2o/o
malt liquor license shall pay to the City a fee to be established by the Council by resolution, which fee
may be changed from time to time. The fee shall be considered an application and investigation fee, not
refundable to applicant, to cover the costs ofthe City in processing the application and the investigation
thereof. However, in the case of a new application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license caused by
change in ownership or control of a corporation or due to enlargement, altemation, or extension of
premises previously licensed, an additional investigation fee to be established by the Council by
resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time, shall be paid by the applicant.
(B) lssaizg. If an application is approved, the City Administrator shall forthwith issue a license
pusuant thereto in the form prescribed by the City or the proper agency ofthe state, as the case may be,
and upon payment ol the license fee. All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis unless otherwise
specified herein. For licenses issued and which are to become effective other than on the first day ofthe
calendar year, the fee to be paid with the application shall be a pro-rata share of the annual license fee.
Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described.
l9 Alcoholic Beverages s 1r 1.018
license had yet to run. In the event ofdeath of the licensee, their personal representative is authorized to
continue operation ofthe business for not more than 90 days after the death of the licensee.
(D) Transfer. No license shall be translerable between persons or to a different location without
prior consent ofthe Council and the filing of a new application with required fee. It is unlawful to make
any transfer in violation of this Section.
(E) Refusal and Termination. The Council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable
cause, refuse to grant any application. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
(F) Revocation or Suspension. The Council shall revoke or suspend, for a period not to exceed 60
days, a license granted under the provisions of this Chapter or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000
for each violation on a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with a statute, regulation, or
provision of the City Code relating to alcoholic beverages. The Councit shall revoke the license upon
conviction of the licensee or agent or employee ofa licensee for violating any law relating to the sale or
possession of 3.2%o malt liquor, wine, or intoxicating liquor upon premises of the licensee or if the
revocation is mandatory by statute. If it shall be made to appear at the hearing thereon that the violation
was not willful, the Council may order suspension, provided that revocation shall be ordered upon the
third such violation or offense. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been
aflorded an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a Committee of the Council or a hearing under
the Administrative Procedures Act, as may be determined by the Council in action calling the hearing.
The hearing shall be called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served in person or by
certified mail not less than l5 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing date, stating the time, place,
and the purpose thereof. As additional restrictions or regulations on licensees under this Chapter, and in
addition to grounds for revocation or suspension stated in the City Code or statute, the following shall
also be grounds for such action:
(1) That the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon licensed premises unrelated to the
sale of 3.2o/o malt liquor, wine, or intoxicating liquor;
(2) That the licensee had knowledge ofsuch illegal acts upon licensed premises, but failed to
report the same to police;
(3) That the licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in investigating the
alleged illegal acts upon licensed premises; or
(4) That the activities of the licensee created a serious danger to public health, safety, or
welfare.
$ 111.019 RENEWAL OF LTCENSES.
Applications and payment of fees ofan existing intoxicating liquor license shall be made at least 60
days prior to the date ofthe expiration ofthe license and shall contain such inlormation as is required by
the City. This time requirement may be waived by the Council for good and sulficient cause.
s l r 1.020 20
s 1 l 1.020 DUPLICATE LICENSES.
Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City Administrator, without action by the
Council, upon the payment of a fee of $20 for issuance of this duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be
clearly marked DUPLICATE.
$ 111.021 POSTING.
All licensees shall post their licenses in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used.
S III.O22 PERSONS DISQUALIFIED.
(A) No license under this Chapter may be issued to:
(2) A person who within five years of the license application has been convicted ofa willful
violation of a federal or state law or local ordinance goveming the manufacture, sale, distribution, or
possession for sale or distribution ofalcoholic beverages;
(3) A person who has had an alcoholic beverage license revoked within five years of the
license application or to any person who at the time of the violation owrls any interest, whether as a
holder of more than five percent ofthe capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in
the premises or in the business conducted thereon or to a corporation, partnership, association,
enterprise, business, or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested;
(4) A person not ofgood moral character and repute; or
(5) A person under the age of2l.
(B) No person holding a license from the Commissioner as a manufacturer, brewer, or wholesaler
may have any ownership, in whole or in part, in a business holding an alcoholic beverage license from
the City.
s 111.023 LIMITATION ON OWNERSHIP.
The City may not issue more than one off-sale intoxicating liquor license to any one person or for
any one place.
Thief River Falls - Business Regulations
(1) A person not a citizen ofthe United States or a resident alien;
21 Alcoholic Beverages s 11r.024
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon a finding of the
necessity therefor, place such conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem
reasonable and justifi ed.
s lll.025 FTNANCIAL RESPONSIBILITTES OF LICENSES.
(A) Proof. No 3.2% malt liquor, wine, or intoxicating liquor license shall be issued or renewed
unless and until the applicant has provided proofoffinancial responsibility, imposed by statute, by filing
with the City a certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverage
ofat least $50,000 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, $100,000 because
of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence, $10,000 because of injury to or
destruction of property olothers in any one occurrence, 550,000 lor loss ofmeans of support of any one
person in any one occurrence and $100,000 lor loss of means of support of two or more persons in any
one occurrence; an aggregate of$300,000 may be included in the insurance coverage.
(B) Documents submitted lo Commissioner. All proofs of financial responsibility filed with the
City under this Section shall be submitted by the City to the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.
s I I 1.026 INSURANCE CERTTFTCATE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this Chapter, the applicant shall file with the
City Administrator a certificate of insurance showing:
(1) That the limits are at least as high as required;
(2) That coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and
(3) That the insurance will not be canceled or terminated without 30 days written notice served
upon the City Administrator.
(B) Cancellation or termination ofthe coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.
$ 111.027 DELINQUENT TAXES AND CHARGES.
No license under this Chapter shall be granted for operation on any premises upon which taxes,
assessments or installments thereof, or other financial claims of the City, are owed and are delinquent
and unpaid.
s 11t.024 CONDITTONAL LTCENSES.
s l l1.028 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 22
s lll.028 coNDUCT oN LICENSED PREMTSES.
Except as herein provided, every licensee under this Chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of
the licensee's place ofbusiness and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order therein.
s 111.029 LICENSE CONDITION AND UNLAWFUL ACT.
(A) All premises licensed under this Chapter shall at all times be open to inspection by any peace
officer to determine whether or not this Chapter and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a
condition to being issued the license, consent to the inspection by the officers and without a warrant for
searches or seizures.
(B) It is unlawful for any licensee, agent, or employee ofa licensee to hinder or prevent a peace
officer from making the inspection.
$ I I 1.030 oN-sALE WINE LICENSE.
(A) License required It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any wine, which shall
not exceed 14% alcohol by volume, without a license therelor from the City and with the approval from
the Commissioner.
(B) Applicant. No on-sale wine license shall be issued to an applicant other than a restaurant, as
defined in this Code.
(C) Application Application for an on-sale wine license shall be made to the City Administrator on
an application provided by the City Administrator. The license may be approved by the City Council
and issued by the City Administrator upon payment of required fee and completion ol other
requirements.
(D) License fee. The fee for an on-sale wine license shall be established by the Council by
resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
(E) Restrictions.
(l) No on-sale of wine shall be made between l:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday, nor
between l2:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on Monday, nor between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
Tuesday through Saturday.
(2) It is unla*4ul to consume or display or allow consumption or display of wine on any
premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.
(3) It is unla*{ul to sell wine to persons to whom intoxicating liquor sales are not permitted by
this Code.
Alcoholic Beverages s 111.030
(4) It is unlawful for any licensee to make any sale of wine except for consumption on
the licensed premises and in conjunction with the sale offood.
(5) No person under l8 years ofage may sell or serve wine on licensed premises.
S 11I.O3I ON.SALE INTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR IN CONJUNCTION WITH
WINE LICENSE.
(A) Aulhorizalion. The holder ofan on-sale wine license issued by the City pursuant to
Section lll.030 who is also licensed by the city to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor at on-sale
pursuant to Section 1l1.065, and whose gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of
food, may sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license from the City.
(B) Restrictions.
(1) No on-sale of intoxicating malt liquors shall be made between 1:00 a.m.
and 12:00 Noon on Sunday, nor between the 12:00 Midnight and 8:00 a.m. on Monday, nor
between the hours of l:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Tuesday through Saturday.
(2) It is unlawfirl to consume or display or allow consumption or display of
intoxicating malt liquors on any premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the
days of Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 Noon on
Sunday.
(3) It is unlautrrl to sell intoxicating malt liquors to persons to whom
intoxicating liquor sales are not permitted by the Code.
(4) It is unlawful for any licensee to make any sale of intoxicating malt
liquors pursuant to this Section except for consumption on the licensed premises and in
conjunction with the sale olfood.
(5) No person under 18 years of age may sell or serve intoxicating malt
liquors on licenses premises.
(Ord. No. 13, 3'd Series - Adopted 09/28/01)
s 111.032 - BREW PUBS
SECTION I.
(a) License Authorized. Notwithstanding any provision ofthe City Code to the
contrary, the Council may issue a brew pub license for the on-sale ofintoxicating liquor or 3.2
percent malt liquor to a restaurant operated in the place of manufacture.
23
$ r11.032 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations
(b) A brew pub that holds an on-sale license issued pursuant to this section may, with
the approval of the commissioner, be issued a license by the municipality for off-sale of malt
liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises.
(c) Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at the City of
Thief River Falls municipal liquor store(s). Malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the
licensed premises before the applicable closing time of the City of Thief River Falls municipal
liquor store(s).
(d) Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale must comply with Minnesota Statute
340A.285, as it now exists or may be amended from time to time.
(") A brew pub's total retail sales at on- or off-sale under this section 111.032 may
not exceed 3,500 banels per year, provided that retail off-sales may not total more than 500
banels.
(a) License Authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of the City Code to the
contrary, the Council may issue a brewer taproom license for the on-sale
consumption of malt liquor produced on the licensed premises or adjacent to one
brewery location owned by the brewer.
(b) Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must be a brewer licensed
under Minnesota Statute Section 340A.301, Subd. 6(c), (i), or O.
(c) Terms and conditions ollicense.
(2) The on-sale of malt liquor, permitted by this Sec. I I1.033, may only be made
during the days and hours that on-sale of liquor may be made by holders ofonsale
intoxicating liquor licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter I I I .
(3) A brewer may only hold one (l) brewer taproom license under this Sec.
111.033 and may not have an ownership interest in a brewery licensed under
Minnesota Statutes $3404.301, Subd. 6, clause (d).
24
$ Sec. 111.033. - BREWER TAPROOMS
SECTION 1.
(l ) No license is valid until approved by the Commissioner.
(4) The only alcoholic beverage that may be sold or consumed on the licensed
premises of the holder of a brewer taproom license will be the malt liquor
produced by the brewer upon the brewery premises.
$ r11.033
(6) Nothing in this Sec. I I1.033 precludes the holder of a brewer taproom license
from also holding a license to operate a restaurant on the premises of the
brewery.
(d) Fees. The annual license fee for a license issued pursuant to this Sec. 111.033 shall
be as established from time to time by a resolution/fee ordinance amendment of the
City Council.
$ Sec. I I 1.034 OFF-SALE MALT LIQUOR
SL,CTION I.
(a) License authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of the City Code to the contrary,
the Council may issue a license for the off-sale of malt liquor produced and
packaged on the licensed premises.
(b) Applicant. The applicant fbr a license under this section must be a brewer licensed
under Minnesota Statute $340.4.301, Subd. 6, clause (c), (i) or O, as it now exists or
may be amended from time to time. in order to be licensed lor the off-sale of malt
liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises.
(c) Terms and conditions of license.
(2) The off-sale of malt liquor, permitted by this Sec. 111.034, may only be made
during the days and hours that off-sale ol liquor may be made at the municipal
liquor store.
(3) The malt liquor shall be packaged in sixty-four-ounce containers commonly
known as "growlers" or in seven hundred fifty (750) milliliter bottles and bear a
twist-type closure, cork, stopper or plug.
(4) The malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the licensed premise before
the applicable closing time of the City of Thief River Falls municipal liquor
store(s).
(5) At the time ol sale, all sealing, labeling and packaging shall comply with the
requirements of Minnesota Statute Section 340.4.285, as it now exists or may be
amended from time to lime.
,< Alcoholic Beverages
(5) All other provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable laws, statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations shall be applicable to licenses issued pursuant
to this Sec. 111.033 and the licensees ofsuch licenses, unless inconsistent with
the provisions ofthis section.
(1) No license is valid until approved by the Commissioner.
s r 11.034 Thief River Falls - llusiness Regulations
(6) A brewer's total retail off-sales under this Sec. 111.034 may not exceed 500
barrels per year.
(7) All other provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable laws, statutes,
ordinances. rules and regulations shall be applicable to licenses issued pursuant
to this Sec. 111.034 and the licensees of such licenses unless inconsistent with
the provisions of this section.
(d) Fees. The annual license fee for a license to be issued pursuant to this Sec. 111.034
shall be as established from time to time bv a resolution ofthe Ciw Council.
(e) Other licenses. A brewer licensed under this section may hold or have an interest
in a retail on-sale license issued pursuant to Chapter 'l | 1, unless the brewer licensed
under this section was licensed as a brewer under Minnesota Statutes $3404.301,
Subd. 6, clause (d).
(Ord. No.89,3'd Series Adopted 01/05/ 16)
26
s 111.045 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations
GENER-AL REGULATIONS
S 111.045 MINORS; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) Consumptioz. [t is unlawfrrl for any:
(1) Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic beverages on licensed
premises; or
(2) Minor to consume alcoholic beverages except in the household of the minor's
parent or guardian and then only with the consent ofthe parent or guardian.
(2) Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage; or
(3) To induce a minor to purchase or procure any alcoholic beverage.
(C) Possession.lt is unla*ful for a minor to possess any alcoholic beverage with the intent
to consume it at a place other than the household ofthe minor's parent or guardian. Possession of
an alcoholic beverage by a minor at a place other than the household of the parent or guardian
creates a rebuttable presumption of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of
their parent or guardian. This presumption may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence.
(D) Entering Licensed Premises. It is unlawful for any minor to enter the municipal liquor
store unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or to enter licensed premises for the
purpose of purchasing or consuming any alcoholic beverage. It is not unlawful for any person
who has attained the age of l8 years to enter licensed premises for the lollowing purposes:
(1) To perform work for the establishment, including the serving of alcoholic
beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute;
(2) To consume meals; and
(3) To attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where
liquor is not sold. It is not unla*trl for a licensee to employ as a musician a person under 18
years of age to perform on licensed premises. It is unlawfirl for a licensee to permit a person
under the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises unless as permitted herein or attending a
social event at which alcoholic beverages are not served or in the company of a parent or
guardian.
27
(B) Purchasing. It is unlawful for any person:
(1) To sell, barter, fumish, or give alcoholic beverages to a minor unless the person is
the parent or guardian ofthe minor and then only for consumption in the household of the parent
or guardian;
28 s l1l.04s
(E) Mkrepresentation of Age. It is unlawful for a minor to misrepresent their age for the
purpose ofpurchasing or consuming alcoholic beverage.
(F)Proof of Age. Proof ol age for purchasing or consuming alcoholic beverages may be
established only by a valid driver's license issued by Minnesota, another state or a province of
Canada and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; by a valid
Minnesota identification card; by a valid Canadian identification card with the photograph and
date of birth of the person, issued by a Canadian province; in the case of a foreign national, from
a nation other than Canada, by a valid passport; or a valid military identification card issued by
the United States Department of Defense.
s lll.046 GAMBLTNG PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any licensee to keep, possess, or operate, or permit the keeping, possession
or operation on licensed premises of dice or any other gambling device or permit raffles to be
conducted, except as are licensed by the Charitable Gambling Control Board and then only
except as it complies with the established policy of the City.
s 111.047 SALE BY EMPLOYEE.
Any sale of an alcoholic beverage in or from any premises licensed under this Chapter by
any employee authorized to make the sale in or from the place is the act ofthe employer as well
as of the person actually making the sale; and every employer is liable to all of the penalties,
except criminal penalties, provided by law for the sale, equally with the person actually making
the sale.
s 1il.048 CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION ON STREETS, PUBLIC pROpERTy
AND PRIVATE PARKING LOTS TO WHICH THE PUBLIC HAS ACCESS.
(A) It is unla*firl for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed container, any
alcoholic beverage as that term is defined in $ 1 1 1 .001 , on any:
(1) City park, except where permission has specifically been granted or licensed by the
Council;
(4) Private parking lot to which the public has access, except on such premises when
and where permission has been specifically granted, or licensed by the Council.
Alcoholic Beverages
(2) Street;
(3) Public property; or
s llr.048 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations
(B) This Section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a motor
vehicle when the container is kept in the trunk of the vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk or kept
in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the diver or passengers, if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this Section, a utility or glove
compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers.
29
$ l l 1.019 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations
It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon, or have in their possession upon, or in, any
public elementary or secondary school ground, or any public elementary or secondary school
building, any alcoholic beverage, except lor experiments in laboratories and except for those
organizations who have been issued temporary licenses to sell alcoholic beverages and for any
person to possess alcoholic beverages as a result of a purchase from those organizations holding
temporary licenses.
s 111.050 MUNTCTPAL LTQUOR STORE.
(B) Liquor Fund A Liquor Fund is created into which all revenues received from the
operation of the municipal liquor store shatl be paid and from which all operating expenses shall
be paid. Any surplus accumulating in this Fund may, from time to time, be transferred to the
General Fund by resolution ofthe Council and expended lor any municipal purpose.
s l1t.05l cLUBs.
(A) License required. lt is unlawful for any club to sell or keep or olfer lor sale any liquor
without a license therefor from the City.
(B) Applicant. The applicant for a license under this Section must be a club, as defined in
$ 111.001.
(C\ Application Application for a club liquor license shall be made to the City
Administrator on an application provided by the City Administrator. The license may be
approved by the City Council and issued by the City Administrator upon payment ofrequired fee
and completion of other requirements.
(D) License fee. The fee for a club liquor license shall be established by the Council by
resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
(E) Club license restrictions and regulations.
(l) No club shall sell intoxicating liquor to persons other than its members and their
bona fide guests.
30
s 111.049 ALCOHOLTC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
(A\ Establishmezl. A municipal liquor store is established to be operated within the City for
the sale ofliquorpotable as a beverage and containing more than 3.2% ofalcohol by weight. The
municipal liquor store shall be at such place or places as the Council shall determine and may be
either leased or owned by the City. The municipal liquor store shall be in the charge ofa person
known as the Liquor Store Director who shall have such assistants as may be necessary. All
employees, including the Director, shalt hold their positions at the pleasure ofthe Council.
3l Alcoholic Beverages Q lll.05l
(2) All intoxicating liquor license restrictions, intoxicating liquor sale regulations and
hours and days of intoxicating sales, as stated in this Chapter and relating to the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor, shall be binding upon all club liquor licenses.
(3) It is unlawful for any club liquor licensee to fail to strictly comply with the
provisions of this Section.
s 111.052 coNsuMPTIoN AND DISPLAY.
(A) General.
(1) License required. No business establishment or club which does not hold an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license may directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display of
alcoholic beverages or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating
liquor without first having obtained a permit from the Commissioner and a license from the
Council.
(2) Application Application for a consumption and display permit shall be made to the
City Administrator on an application provided by the City Administrator. The license may be
approved by the City Council and issued by the City Administrator upon payment ofrequired fee
and completion of other requirements.
(3) License fee. The lee for a consumption and display license shall be established by
the Council by resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
(a) Every bottle, container, or other receptacle containing liquor stored by a
member of a bottle club shall have attached to it a label signed by the member of the club, shall
be kept in a locker assigned to the use of such member, and no other liquor shall be on bottle
club premises.
(b) It is unlawful for any minor to be assigned a locker for the storage of liquor or
to consume or display liquor on any premises under the control ofsuch club.
(c) It is unlawfiil to consume or allow consumption or display of liquor in any
bottle club or business establishment during days and hours other than those permitted for onsale
liquor by any other liquor license.
(d) Any bottle club or business establishment allowing the consumption or display
of liquor shall be open for inspection at all times by the Commissioner and the Commissioner's
representatives and by authorized peace officers and it is unlawful to refuse to permit such peace
olficers to inspect such premises.
(4\ Regulalions and reslrictions.
$ l1l.0s2 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations
(B) One-day license.
(l) License required. Any nonprofit organization desiring to serve liquids for the
purpose of mixing with liquor and permit the consumption and display of liquor in conjunction
with a social activity sponsored by it shall first obtain a license from the Commissioner and a
license from the Council. lt is unlawfi,rl for any such organization to fail to obtain the license.
(2) Applicalion Application for a one-day consumption and display license shall be
made to the City Administrator on an application provided by the City Administrator. The
license may be approved by the City Council and issued by the City Administrator upon payment
of required fee and completion of other requirements.
(4) Regulalions and restrictions.
(a) The term ofthe license shall be one day only.
(b) The City may not issue more than ten consumption and display permits in any
calendar year.
s 111.053 NUDITY OR OBSCENTTY PROHIBITED.
(A) The City Council finds it be in the best interests ofthe public health, safety, and general
welfare ofthe people of this City that certain types of activities are prohibited as provided in this
Section upon the premises of licensed liquor, wine, and 3.2%o malt liquor establishments so as to
best protect and assist the owners and operators and employees of these premises, as well as
patrons and the public in general. The Council also finds that the standard set forth in this
Section reflect the prevailing community standards ofthe City. The provisions ofthis Section are
intended to prevent harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol,
nudity and sex. The Council also intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual
harassment or activities likety to lead to the possibility ol various criminal conduct, including
prostitution, sexual assault and disorderly conduct.
(B) It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed
premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breast, and genitals covered
with a nontransparent material.
(C) A violation of this Section is a misdemeanor and is justification for revocation or
suspension ofany liquor, wine or 3.2o/o mall beverage license.
1'
(3) License fee. The fee for a one-day consumption and display license shall be
established by the Council by resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
Alcoholic Beverages
MALT LIQAOR REG ALATIONS
s 111.06s MALT LIQUOR LICENSE REQUTRED.
It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, to sell,
barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of 3.2%o malt liquor, as part of a commercial
transaction, without a license therefor from the City. This Section shall not apply to sales by
manufacturers to wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to persons holdirrg 3.2%o malt liquor
licenses from the City. Annual on-sale 3.2%o malt liquor licenses may be issued only to
restaurants, hotels, bowling centers, clubs, and establishments used exclusively lor the sale of
3.2%o malt liquor with the incidental sale ol tobacco and soft drinks. Any person licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor at on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale 3.2%o malt liquor license
and may sell3.2o/o malt liquor on-sale without an additional license.
s 111.066 FEES.
(A) The annual on-sale 3.2Y:o malt liquor license fee shall be established by the Council by
resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
(B) The annual off-sale 3.2%o malt liquor license fee shall be established by the Council by
resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
s 111.067 RESTRICTTONS, REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) No person under the age of l8 years shall be employed to sell or serve 3.2Vo malt liquor
in any on-sale establishment. However, a person who has attained the age of 17 years may be
employed in any restaurant licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquor in which the principal part of the
business
is the serving of food.
(B) No person under the age ol I 8 years shall be employed to sell 3.2%o malt liquor in any
off-sale establishment except in the capacity ofa cashier at a check-out counter.
(C) It is unlawlul for any:
(2) Licensee to sell 3.2o/o malt liquor on any day, or during any hour, when such sales
are not permitted by this Code;
(3) Licensee to allow consumption of 3.2%o malt liquor on licensed premises on any
day, or during any hour, when sales of 3 .2Yo malt liquor are not permitted by this Code;
-33 $ lll.06s
(1) Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of 3.2%o
malt liquor;
s r r 1.067 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations
(4) Person to purchase or consume 3.2oh malt liquor on licensed premises on any day,
or during any hour, w'hen sales of 3.2%o malt liquor are not permitted by this Code; or
(5) Licensee, or employee of a licensee, to sell or serve 3.2Yo malt liquor to any person
who is obviously intoxicated.
No sale of 3.2% malt liquor shall be made between the hours ol I :00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of l:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on
Sunday.
s lll.069 cLosING.
(A) Consumption, It is unlawful to consume or display or allow consumption or display of
3.2Yo malt liquor on any premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of
Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of I :00 a.m. and l2:00 noon on Sunday.
$ 111.070 TEMPORARY LICENSE PERMITTED; TERMS AND FEES.
(A) Applicant. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization, duly incorporated
as a nonprofit or religious corporation under the laws ofthe state and having its registered oflice
and principal place of activity within the City may qualifu for a temporary on-sale 3.270 malt
liquor license.
(B) Application Application for a license shall be made to the City Administrator on an
application provided by the City Administrator. The license may be approved by the City
Council and issued by the City Administrator upon payment of required fee and completion of
other requirements.
(C) Fees. The fee for a temporary on-sale 3.2%o malt liquor license shall be established by
the Council by resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
(D) Restrictions. (1) An application for a temporary on-sale 3.2Yo malt liquor license
shall state the exact dates and place of temporary sale. Sales may be in any school or school
buildings.
s 111.068 HOURS OF SALE.
(B) Closing.It is unlawful for any person, other than a licensee or their bona fide employee
actually engaged in the performance of their duties, to be on the premises licensed under this
Chapter more than 30 minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales, unless the licensed
establishment is open to the public for serving food.
34
35 Alcoholic Beverages $ l r r.070
(2) No applicant shall qualifu for a temporary 3.2%o malt liquor license for more than a
total of seven days in any calendar year.
(3) The applicant shall comply with all other restrictions, limitations, and regulations
for the sale of 3.2y'o malt liquor under the City Code and Statutes.
INTOXICATING L I QUOR R E GUI.,ATI ONS
S 1T1.O8O INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, to
sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of intoxicating liquor, as part of a commercial
transaction, without a license therefor from the City. This Section shall not apply:
(1) To such potable liquors as are intended for therapeutic purposes and not as a
beverage;
(2) To industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for beverage
(3) To wine in the possession of a person duly licensed under this Chapter as an
on-sale wine licensee;
(4) To sale
Commissioner;
by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the
(5) To sales by wholesalers to persons holding intoxicating liquor licenses from the
City; or,
(6) To the municipal liquor store.
(B) The City may issue on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses to:
(1) Hotels;
(2) Restaurants;
(3) Bowling centers; and
(4) Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, provided that liquor
sales will be made only to members and bona fide guests.
(C) Any person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at on-sale shall not be required to obtain
purposes;
s l l l.080 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations
an on-sale 3.2%o malt liquor license and may sell 3.2%o malt liquor on-sale without an additional
license.
s lrr.08r FEES.
(A) The fees for an intoxicating liquor license and a Sunday intoxicating liquor license shall
be established by the Council by resolution, which fees may be changed from time to time by
resolution. One-fourth of the lee shall be paid with the application and the balance upon issuance
of the license. Upon rejection of any application for a license, or upon withdrawal of an
application before approval of the issuance by the Council, the license lee shall be refunded to
the applicant except where rejection is for a willful misstatement in the license application.
(B) When the license is lor premises where the building is not ready lor occupancy, the time
fixed lor computation of the license fee for the initial license period shall be 90 days after
approval of the license by the Council or upon the date the building is ready for occupancy,
whichever is sooner.
(C) Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing licensee and
the ownership, control, and interest in the license are unchanged, no additional license fee shall
be required.
S III.O82 RESTRICTIONS, REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTS,
(A) Licenses; places ineligible.
(1) No license shall be granted for any place which operates a "drive-in" facility for the
service of food or beverages.
(2) No license shall be granted for any place which has a common entrance or exit
between any two establishments, except that a public concourse or public lobby shall not be
construed as a common enlrance or exil.
(3) No license shall be granted lor any place which does not have an investment in
land, buildings, and building fixtures in excess of $100,000 for a restaurant, $500,000 for a
hotel/motel and for an intoxicating liquor-only establishment $100,000. For the purposes of this
Section, an applicant lessee may include the reasonable market value of the premises in
determining their investment in land, buildings, and building fixtures.
(B) Reslriction of number of licenses. The Council may issue the number of intoxicating
liquor licenses authorized by statute or restrict the number from time to time as it may, in its
discretion, deem proper.
36
Alcoholic Beverages $ 11r.082
(l) The business records ofthe licensee, including federal and state tax retums, shall be
available lor inspection by the City Administrator or any duly authorized representative of the
City or the Council at all reasonable times.
(2) Changes in the corporate or association officers, corporate charter, articles of
incorporation, by-laws or partnership agreement, as the case may be, shall be submitted to the
City Administrator within 30 days after such changes are made.
(3) Outdoor Patios and Decks. Service and consumption of alcohol in outdoor patios
and decks in conjunction with an intoxicating liquor on-sale license, an on-sale wine license, a
special club license, a special license for Sunday sales, or a 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale
license, is allowed under the following conditions:
(a) The outdoor patio or deck must be compact and contiguous to the licensed
premises with a visibly defined boundary;
(b) The outdoor patio or deck area must be included within the area defined in
the license holder's license area and included in the required liquor liabitity insurance for the
premises;
(c) Music, televisions, bands, or any activity that would disturb the peace ofthe
sunounding area and not be in compliance with $91 . I 8, Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and
Safety, is prohibited on or near outdoor patios or decks;
(d) Appropriate receptacles for rubbish, garbage, cigarette paraphemalia, and any
other type ofrefuse must be provided and the outdoor patio or deck, and surrounding area, must
be kept free ol such refuse;
(e) Lighting must be sufficient to promote public safety, shall be downward
directional, and shall be compatible with the surrounding area;
(f) The licensee may allow smoking on the outdoor patio or deck, provided that
the outdoor patio or deck is in compliance with M.S.A. $ 144.411, et. seq., the Minnesota
Freedom to Breathe Act of2007: and
(g) Signs shall be posted in accordance with Minnesota Rule 4620.0500 to advise
persons ofthe existence ofacceptable nonsmoking and smoking-permitted areas.
Ord. No. 37, 3'd Series Adopted 01/01/08
(D) Licenses in conneclion with premises of another. An intoxicating liquor license may
not be issued to a person in connection with the premises of another to whom a license could not
be issued under the provisions of this Chapter. This Division does not prevent the granting of a
license to a property lessee because the person has leased the premises of a minor, a non-citizen
(C) Conditions of license.
s l l1.082 Thicf River Falls - Business Regulations
who is not a resident alien, or a person who has been convicted ofa crime other than a violation
of this Chapter.
(E) Unlawful acfs. It is unlawful for any:
(1) Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of
intoxicating liquor;
(2) Licensee, or any employee ofa licensee, or employee ofa City-owned dispensary,
to sell intoxicating liquor on any day or during any hour when the sales are not permitted by this
Code;
(3) Person to purchase or consume intoxicating liquor on licensed premises on any day,
or during any hour, when sales of intoxicating liquors are not permitted by this Code; or,
(F) Employment of minors. lt is unlawful for any person under the age of I 8 years to sell or
serve intoxicating liquor.
(A'S Non-Sunday liquor sales. No on-sale shall be made after l:00 a.m. on Sunday, nor
until 8:00 a.m. on Monday, except as permitted in Division (B), nor between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Tuesday through Saturday. No off-sale shall be made on Sunday nor
before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, nor on Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day, December 25, nor after 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
(B) Sunday liquor sales. A restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel with a seating capacity
for at least 30 persons and which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may sell
intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale offood between
the hours of 8:00 A.M. on Sundays and I :00 a.m. on Mondays.
(B'1 Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than a licensee or their bona fide employee
actually engaged in the performance of their duties, to be on the premises licensed under this
Chapter more than 30 minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales, unless the licensed
establishment is open to the public for serving food.
(4) Licensee, or employee of a licensee, or employee ol a City-owned dispensary, to
sell or serve intoxicating liquor to any person who is obviously intoxicated.
li I I1.08-1 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
S lll.08,l CLOSING REGULATIONS.
(A) Consumptioz. It is unlawful to consume or display or allow consumption or display of
intoxicating liquor on any premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of
Monday through Saturday, and on Sundays, except as provided herein.
38
39 Alcoholic Beverages
S 111.085 SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR AT SPORTS OR CONVENTION
FACILITIES.
(A) Special license. Any holder (except a club) ol an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
issued by the City may apply to the Council for a special license to dispense intoxicating liquor
at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a
sports or convention facility owned by the City and located within the City.
(C) License Fee. The fee for a license to sell liquor at a sports or convention facility shall
be established by the Council by resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
(D) Insurance. Prior to receiving the special license the applicant shall fumish proof in such
form as required by the City Administrator that the insurance required by the provisions of this
Chapter covers operations on the premises of the sports or convention facility for which
application is made.
$ r11.086 TEMPORARY TNTOXTCATTNG LTQUOR LICENSE.
(A) License Authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the
Council may issue a license for the temporary on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a
social event sponsored by the licensee. The license may provide that the licensee may contract
with the holder, except a club, ol a full-year on-sale intoxicating liquor license, issued by the
Ci ty lor intoxicating liquor-catering services.
(B) Applicant. The applicant for a license under this Section must be a club, a charitable,
religious or other nonprofit organization in existence for at least three years or a political
committee registered under M.S. $ 10A.14.
(C) Applicalion Application for a temporary intoxicating liquor license shall be made to
the City Administrator on an application provided by the City Administrator. The license may be
approved by the City Council and issued by the City Administrator upon payment olrequired fee
and completion of other requirements.
$ r l 1.08s
(B) Conditions to Granting Special License. Applicants for the special license must make
application for each such convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair on forms to
be prepared and fumished by the City Administrator. The licensee must be engaged to dispense
intoxicating liquor at such an event held by a person or organization permitted to use the
premises and may dispense intoxicating liquor only to the persons attending the event. The
licensee shall not dispense intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in any
amateur athletic event held on the premises. The dispensing of intoxicating liquor shall be
subject to all laws and Code provisions goveming the dispensing of intoxicating liquor as are not
inconsistent herewith. The Council may adopt additional uniform terms and conditions for the
special licenses and such terms and conditions may include limitations upon the areas within
such facility where intoxicating liquor may be dispensed.
$ rlr.086 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 40
(D) License fee. The fee for a temporary intoxicating liquor license shall be established by
the Council by resolution, which fee may be changed from time to time.
(E) Terms and conditions of license.
(l) No license is valid until approved by the Commissioner
(2) No license shall be issued for more than three four-day, four three-day, six two-day
or l2 one-day temporary licenses, in any combination not to exceed l2 days per year, or for any
one location, within a l2-month period.
(3) The City shall not issue more than one temporary intoxicating liquor license to any
one organization or registered political committee, or for any one location, within any 30-day
period, unless the licenses are issued in connection with an event officially designated a
communiry festival by the City.
(4) All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions of statutes and this Code
relating to intoxicating liquor sale and licensing. The licensee shall provide proof of financial
responsibility coverage and, in the case of catering by a full-year on-sale intoxicating liquor
licensee, the caterer shall provide proofofthe extension ofthe coverage to the licensed premises.
(5) Licenses may authorize sales on premises other than those owned or permanently
occupied by the licensee.
s 111.100 CoMPLTANCE CHECKS AND TNSPECTTONS.
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by peace officers or other authorized City
officials during regular business hours. From time to time, the City shall conduct compliance
checks by engaging individuals over the age of l8 years but less than 21 years to enter the
licensed premises to attempt to purchase an alcoholic beverage. Individuals used lor the purpose
of compliance checks shall be supervised by City designated law enforcement officers or other
designated City personnel. Individuals used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of
unlaufirl possession of alcoholic beverages when those items are obtained as part of the
compliance check. No individuals used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting the individual's age, and all individuals lawfully engaged in a
compliance checks shall answer all questions about the individual's age asked by the licensee or
the licensee's employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which they are
asked. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by State or Federal
laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a
particular State or Federal lau.
1t Alcoholic Beverages
s 111.119 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY RELATED TO COMPLTANCE CHI,CKS
AND INSPECTIONS.
(A) Violations.
(l) Nolice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be
issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall
inform the alleged violator ofthe violator's right to be heard on the accusation.
(2) Hearing. If a person accused of violating this Chapter so requests, a hearing shall
be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be provided to the accused violator.
(3) Hearing Oljicer.
the hearing officer.
The City official designated by the City Council shall serve as
(4) Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this Chapter did
occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a violation and the
penalty to be imposed under Division (B) of this Section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of
which shall be provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no
violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, those findings, shall be
recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
(5) Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the
district court for the City in which the alleged violation occuned.
(6) Misdemeanor Prosecution. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City from
seeking prosecution as a criminal matter for any alleged violation of this Chapter.
(1) Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or
continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Administrative penalties.
(l) Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this Chapter, or whose employee
shall have violated this Chapter, shall be charged an administrative fine of $75 for a first
violation of this Chapter; $200 for a second violation at the same licensed premises within a 24-
month period; and $250 for a third or subsequent violation at the same location within a 24-
month period. ln addition, after the third violation in any 24-month period, the licensee's
license shall be suspended for not less than three days.
(2) Other individaals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated by Division (B)
(3) ofthis Section, found to be in violation of this Chapter shall be charged an administrative fee
of $75 for the first violation of this Chapter; $200 for a second violation within a 24-month
period; and $250 for a third or subsequent violation within a 24-month period.
$ 11r.119
$ 111.119 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations 12
(3) Minors. Individuals under the age of 21 years found in unlawful possession ofor
who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages, shall be subject to an
administrative fine or may be subject to alcohol related education classes, diversion programs,
community services, or another penalty that the City believes will be appropriate and effective.
The administrative fine or other penalty shall be established by the City Council resolution upon
the City Council's consultation with interested parties or the courts, educators, parents, and
children to determine an appropriate penalty for individuals under the age of 21 years in the City.
This administrative fine or other penalty may also be established from time to time by resolution,
which resolution may be amended from time to time.
Ord. 2, 3rd Series adopted 05/l 3/03
(4) Misdemeanor. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City from seeking
prosecution as a criminal offense for any violation of this Chapter.
(this page is intentionally blank)
,13 Alcoholic Bcverages $ lll.l19
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
112. TOBACCO REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 112: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
112.01 Purpose and intent
112.02 Definitions
112.03 License
112.04 Fees
112.05 Basis for denial of license
112.06 Prohibited sales
112.07 Vending machines
112.08 Self-service sales
112.09 Responsibility
112.10 Compliance checks and inspections
112.11 Other illegal acts
112.12 Exceptions and defenses
112.99 Violations and penalty
§ 112.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
Because the City recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years purchase or otherwise
obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices, and the sales, possession,
and use are violations of both state and federal laws; and because studies, which the City hereby accepts
and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of 18 years
and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without having started smoking are significantly less
likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health
problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this Chapter shall be
intended to regulate the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related
devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious
effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices, and to
further the official public policy of the state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke
as stated in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
38
39 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations § 112.02
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the City uses to investigate and ensure that those
authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices are following and complying
with the requirements of this Chapter. Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized
by this Chapter. Compliance Checks shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for educational, research, and training purposes as authorized
by state and federal laws. Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the
purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state, or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco related devices.
(B) INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped
individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include but not be limited
to single cigarette packs, single bags, or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or
other container as described in this definition shall not be considered individually packaged.
(C) LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.
(D) MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
(E) MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck, van,
automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other
permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
(F) RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general public. The phrase shall include but not be
limited to grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.
(G) SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
(H) SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco
related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices, without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee.
The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. The phrase shall not include
vending machines. Self-service sales are interpreted as being any sale where there is not an actual
physical exchange of the tobacco between the clerk and the customer.
§ 112.02 Tobacco Regulations 40
(I) TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf,
including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, fine cut or other chewing tobacco,
cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco,
snuff flowers, cavendish, shorts, plug and twist tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in a manner as to
be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking.
(J) TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, or
other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing,
sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
(K) VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which
dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product, or tobacco related device.
§ 112.03 LICENSE.
(A) License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco
related device without first having obtained a license to do so from the City.
(B) Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices shall be made on a form provided by the City. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the
business for which the license is sought, and any additional information the City deems necessary. Upon
receipt of a completed application, the City Administrator shall forward the application to the City Council
for action at its next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. If the City Administrator shall determine
that an application is incomplete, the City Administrator shall return the application to the applicant with
notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
(C) Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for a
reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it
deems necessary. If the City Council shall approve the license, the City Administrator shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the
applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the City Council's decision.
(D) Term. All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be valid to the end of the calendar year in
which it was issued.
(E) Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this Chapter may be revoked or suspended
as provided in § 112.99.
41 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations § 112.05
(F) Transfers. All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be valid only on the premises for which
the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license
to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.
(G) Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only
fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this Chapter.
(H) Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the
licensed premise.
(I) Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this Section shall be handled in the same
manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more
than 60 days before the expiration of the current license.
(J) Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license issued under this Chapter shall
be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an
automatic renewal of the license.
§ 112.04 FEES.
No license shall be issued under this Chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full.
The fee for a license under this Chapter shall be established by resolution, which resolution may be
amended from time to time.
§ 112.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
(A) Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this Chapter includes but is not
limited to the following:
(1) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
(2) The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a federal,
state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices;
(3) The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices
revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application;
(4) The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false
or misleading information; or
(5) The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance, or other
regulation from holding a license.
§ 112.05 Tobacco Regulations 42
(B) However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for
denial does not mean that the City must deny the license.
(C) If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery
that the person was ineligible for the license under this Chapter.
§ 112.06 PROHIBITED SALES.
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco
product, or tobacco related device:
(A) To any person under the age of 18 years;
(B) By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in § 112.07;
(C) By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to a make a verbal or
written request to an employee of the licensed premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device and whereby the there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product,
or tobacco related device between the licensee, or the licensee's employee, and the customer;
(D) By means of loosies as defined in § 112.02;
(E) Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other
deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found
naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the intention
of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes or other tobacco products; or
(F) By any other means, to any other person, on in any other manner or form prohibited by federal,
state or other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation.
§ 112.07 VENDING MACHINES.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this Chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all times
prohibited from entering the licensed establishment.
§ 112.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this Chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices by any means where by the customer may have access to those items without
having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a
43 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations § 112.11
physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the tobacco related device between the licensee or
the licensee’s clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall
either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other
storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public.
§ 112.09 RESPONSIBILITY.
All licensees under this Chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of an
item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this Section shall be
construed as prohibiting the City from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under
this Chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
§ 112.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by peace officers or other authorized City officials
during regular business hours. From time to time, the City shall conduct compliance checks by engaging,
with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 18
years to enter the licensed premise to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by City designated law
enforcement officers or other designated City personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be
guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices when those items
are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use
a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance
check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or the licensee’s employee
and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which they are asked. Nothing in this Section shall
prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training
purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
§ 112.11 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this Chapter:
(A) Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to sell or otherwise provide
any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device to any minor;
(B) Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any minor to have in the minor’s
possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This Division (B) shall not apply to
minors lawfully involved in a compliance check;
§ 112.11 Tobacco Regulations 44
(C) Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any minor to smoke, chew, snuff or
otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device;
(D) Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any minor to purchase or attempt
to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device, and it shall be a
violation of this Chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain those items on behalf of a minor.
It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This Division (D) shall
not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check; and
(E) Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any minor to attempt to
disguise the minor’s true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that
of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent
an age older than the actual age of the person.
§ 112.12 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be
an affirmative defense to the violation of this Chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of
age as described by state law.
§ 112.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
(A) Violations.
(1) Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged
violator of the violator’s right to be heard on the accusation.
(2) Hearings. If a person accused of violating this Chapter so requests, a hearing shall be
scheduled, the time and place of which shall be provided to the accused violator.
(3) Hearing Officer. The City official designated by the City Council shall serve as the hearing
officer.
(4) Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this Chapter did occur, that
decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed
under Division (B) of this Section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the
accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not
imposing any penalty, those findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused
violator.
45 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations § 112.99
(5) Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the district
court for the City in which the alleged violation occurred.
(6) Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this ordinance.
(7) Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues,
shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Administrative penalties.
(1) Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this Chapter, or whose employee shall have
violated this Chapter, shall be charged an administrative fine of $75 for a first violation of this Chapter;
$200 for a second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and $250 for a third or
subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-month period. In addition, after the third offense, the
license shall be suspended for not less than seven days.
(2) Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated by Division (B)(3) of this
Section, found to be in violation of this Chapter shall be charged an administrative fee of $50 for a first
violation of this Chapter; $100 for a second violation of this Chapter within a 24-month period; and $150
for a third violation of this Chapter within a 24-month period.
(3) Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to
purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, shall be subject to an administrative fine,
or may be subject to tobacco related education classes, diversion programs, community services, or
another penalty that the City believes will be appropriate and effective. The administrative fine or other
penalty shall be established by City Council resolution upon the City Council's consultation with interested
parties of the courts, educators, parents and children to determine an appropriate penalty for minors in the
City. This administrative fine or other penalty may also be established from time to time by resolution,
which resolution may be amended from time to time.
(4) Misdemeanor. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City from seeking prosecution as a
misdemeanor for any violation of this Chapter.
(5) Statutory penalties. If the administrative penalties authorized to be imposed by M.S.
§ 461.12, as it may be amended from time to time, differ from those established in this Section, then the
statutory penalties shall prevail.
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
113. TAXICABS
CHAPTER 113: TAXICABS
Section
113.01 Definitions
113.02 License required
113.03 Application
113.04 License fees
113.05 License issuance and display and vehicle marking
113.06 Insurance required
113.07 Rates
113.08 Mechanical condition
113.09 Nontransferability
113.10 Revocation or suspension
113.11 Radio requirements
113.12 Refusal to pay
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over a taxicab whether the driver is the
licensee or in the employ of the licensee.
(B) LICENSEE. A person owning or otherwise having control of one or more taxicabs.
(C) TAXICAB. Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or traversing a scheduled or
unscheduled route, for public use or hire upon payment of a fare or at regular fare rates, but not including
ambulances and such conveyances as are designed for mass transportation as buses, trains, or streetcars.
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab without a license therefor from the City.
46
47 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations § 113.07
§ 113.03 APPLICATION.
Licenses shall be issued by the City Administrator upon approval by the Council after the applicant
has filed an application and has shown that operation of the service will comply with all applicable laws
and ordinances.
§ 113.04 LICENSE FEES.
The annual license fee for the licensee’s first conveyance and the annual license fee for each additional
conveyance operated under the license shall be established by the Council by resolution which may be
changed from time to time. However, if a licensed vehicle is disabled through mechanical failure or for
needed repairs, the license may be temporarily transferred to another conveyance for a seven day period
upon approval by the City.
§ 113.05 LICENSE ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY AND VEHICLE MARKING.
All licenses shall be issued for specific conveyances, except as otherwise herein provided. License
tags, including number and year for which issued, shall be plainly visible from the front of the
conveyance. Both sides of every licensed taxicab, when in use, shall be plainly and permanently marked
as such with a painted sign or appurtenances showing the full or abbreviated name of the licensee.
Additionally, each driver shall have in force a valid driver’s license issued by the State of Minnesota.
§ 113.06 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Before a taxicab license is issued by the Council, and at all times effective during the licensed period,
the licensee shall have and maintain for each vehicle public liability and bodily injury insurance in the
amount of $100,000 for any one person and $300,000 for two or more persons injured in any one
accident, as well as $50,000 property damage insurance. The insurance shall cover all passengers carried
by the insured licensee and shall be for public taxicab purposes. All such policies shall contain a clause
providing for ten days written notice to the City Administrator before cancellation and a memorandum of
the insurance shall be furnished to the City before a license is issued.
§ 113.07 RATES.
Each applicant shall file with the City Administrator, before a taxicab license is issued or renewed, a
schedule of proposed maximum rates to be charged by licensee during the licensed period for which the
application is made. The schedule of proposed maximum rates, or a compromise schedule thereof, shall be
approved by the Council before granting the license. The schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in the taxicab in full view of passengers riding therein. Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee
from petitioning the Council for review of the rates during the licensed period, and
§ 113.07 Taxicabs 48
the Council may likewise consider the petition and make new rates effective at any time. No taxicab
licensee shall charge rates in excess of maximum rates approved by the Council.
§ 113.08 MECHANICAL CONDITION.
Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present to the Council a certificate signed by a
competent and experienced mechanic showing that the taxicab conveyance is in good mechanical
condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers and that it is in neat and clean
condition. Such similar certificate may be required from time to time during the license period. In lieu of
the certificate, the Council may accept the report of the Chief of Police relative thereof. Before putting on
any different or additional vehicles during the license year, the licensee shall submit a complete
description of the vehicle to the City Administrator, pay the additional fee and have the vehicle inspected
in accordance with this Section. The operation of any vehicle which fails to meet the standards of safety
established by law shall be discontinued until such time as the deficiency is eliminated.
§ 113.09 NONTRANSFERABILITY.
A license or any rights or privileges thereunder may not be sold, transferred, leased, or assigned.
§ 113.10 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
(A) The City Administrator is given authority to suspend the license issued under this Section for
cause for a period of not more than 30 days.
(B) The City Administrator is given authority to revoke any license issued under this Section for
cause after hearing upon five days notice to the licensee. The licensee may, within 30 days after mailing of
the notice, appeal the revocation through the City Council, which shall give the licensee an opportunity to
be heard at its next regular meeting following the appeal. The Council may, at such meeting, affirm,
modify, or revoke the decision of the City Administrator.
(C) Sufficient cause for suspension or revocation shall include, but not be limited to: violation of any
of the provisions of this Chapter by the licensee, licensee’s employees or any other person operating under
the licensee’s license; violation of any other ordinance of the City or any state or federal law, violation of
which reflects unfavorably upon the licensee’s fitness to offer public transportation by the licensee, the
licensee’s employees or any other person operating under the licensee’s license.
(D) Any licensee’s license may be revoked or suspended for the actions of any driver driving a
taxicab which is operated pursuant to the licensee’s license.
49 Thief River Falls - Business Regulations § 113.12
§ 113.11 RADIO REQUIREMENTS.
All taxicabs shall be controlled from a base station by means of a two-way radio equipment.
§ 113.12 REFUSAL TO PAY.
It is unlawful for any person hiring a taxicab to refuse to pay the fare for such service and no person
shall hire a taxicab with intent to defraud the licensee or the driver of the value of such service.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Regulations
130.01 Disorderly conduct
130.02 Regulations governing City swimming beaches and City-owned boat launching docks
130.03 Park regulations
130.04 Prohibited use of mobile homes and recreational camping vehicles
130.05 Open pits, basements and other excavations
130.06 Barbed wire fences
130.07 Aircraft control
130.08 Curfew for minors
Weapons
130.25 Acts prohibited; exception
130.26 Discharge of firearms and explosives; exception
130.27 Possession and sale of fireworks
130.28 Exposure of unused container
130.29 Use of bow and arrow
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing or having reasonable grounds to
know, that it will or will tend to alarm, anger, or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of the
peace, to do or permit upon premises owned or controlled by them the following:
(A) Engage in brawling or fighting;
(B) Disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character;
(C) Engage in offensive, obscene or abusive language or in boisterous and noisy conduct tending
reasonably to arouse alarm, anger, or resentment in others;
(D) Willfully and lewdly exposes their person or the private parts thereof or procures another to so
expose their self and any open or gross lewdness or lascivious behavior or any act of public indecency;
(E) Voluntarily enters the water of any lake, river, or City public swimming pool within the limits of
the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except with specific permission or enters the water
without being garbed in a bathing suit sufficient to cover their person and equal to the standards generally
adopted and accepted by the public;
(F) Races the motor of any motor vehicle;
(G) Causes the spinning or skidding of wheels or tires causing tire squeals or similar noise;
(H) Causes the making or production of an unnecessary noise by shouting or by any other means of
mechanism, including the blowing of any automobile or other vehicle horn;
(I) Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or endanger others;
(J) Drinks or displays any intoxicating liquor or 3.2 malt liquor in or about any premises where the
drinking or display is prohibited by law;
(K) Causes defacement, destruction, or otherwise damage to any premises or any property located
thereon;
(L) Strews, scatters, litters, throws, disposes of or deposits any refuse, garbage, or rubbish unto any
premises, except into receptacles provided for such purpose;
(M) Enters any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the owner or operator; or
(N) Fails or refuses to vacate or leave any premises after being requested or ordered, whether orally or
in writing, to do so, by the owner or person in charge thereof or by any law enforcement agent or official;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who is owner or tenant of the premises
involved nor to any law enforcement or other government official who may be present thereon at that time
as part of their official duty, nor shall it include the spouse, children, employee, or tenant of such owner or
occupier.
§ 130.02 REGULATIONS GOVERNING CITY SWIMMING BEACHES AND CITY-OWNED
BOAT LAUNCHING DOCKS.
(A) The following regulations are established for operating of the City swimming beach at Bill
LaFave Park and City-owned boat launching docks:
(1) All lifeguard commands shall be obeyed;
(2) No glass containers or bottles are allowed in Bill LaFave Park beach area or where posted;
(3) No animals are allowed in the Bill LaFave Park beach area;
(4) No floatation devices may be used in the Bill LaFave Park beach swimming area without
consent of lifeguard;
(5) Only on-duty lifeguards are allowed on the lifeguard stand;
(6) No swimming is permitted at Bill LaFave Park beach unless lifeguards are on duty; and
(7) No swimming is permitted at any time off City-owned docks.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the regulations established herein.
§ 130.03 PARK REGULATIONS.
(A) Speed limit in public parks. It is unlawful for any person to exceed the speed limit of ten miles
per hour in the following public parks: L.B. Hartz Park, Oakland Park, Bill LaFave Park, Tourist Park, and
Boy Scout Park.
(B) Closing hour for all public parks. It is unlawful for any person, except registered guests, to be
upon any park premises between the hours of 11:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the succeeding day
without the express consent of the Parks and Recreation Director, provided that the hours shall be
prominently sign-posted at certain public park entrances as reasonably established by the Parks and
Recreation Director.
§ 130.04 PROHIBITED USE OF MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL CAMPING
VEHICLES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The terms MOBILE HOME and
RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE shall mean and include the following definitions.
(1) CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel,
recreation, and vacation uses.
(2) MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and
vacation, constructed as a integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
(3) PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation.
(4) TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used
as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
(B) Unlawful action. It is unlawful for any person to park a mobile home or recreational camping
vehicle upon public or private property for human habitation except in an area zoned for that use.
§ 130.05 OPEN PITS, BASEMENTS AND OTHER EXCAVATIONS.
It is unlawful for any person owning or in control of real estate to have any pit, basement, well, septic
tank, cesspool, or other excavation on the premises open and without protection for the public.
§ 130.06 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
It is unlawful for anyone to erect or maintain a barbed wire fence upon their property, which fence
abuts upon any street or within ten feet of their property line with an abutting property owner.
§ 130.07 AIRCRAFT CONTROL.
No aircraft of any kind, type or description, except such aircraft as may be in imminent danger, may
use any public waters located within the City for any purpose whatsoever.
§ 130.08 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this Section is maintained for four primary
reasons:
(1) To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during the curfew hours;
(2) To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the curfew hours, including
involvement with gangs;
(3) To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the curfew hours; and
(4) To help parents control their minor children.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the health, safety,
or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household. The term shall include, but shall not be
limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or Fire
Division personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due
to a natural or human-made calamity.
(2) OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the master clock
used by the Police Division.
(3) PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT, OR REFRESHMENT. Those places
that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls, nightclubs catering to
minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
(4) PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing
food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor. The person providing primary care or
custody to the minor shall not be another minor.
(5) SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by public or
parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
(C) Hours; minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16 years shall be in or
upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, or public
buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant
lot, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. (subject to park regulations) the following day, official
City time.
(D) Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to
give a minor the right to stay out until the curfew hours designated in this Section if otherwise directed by
a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor; nor shall this
Section be construed to diminish or impair the control of the adult person having the primary care or
custody of the minor.
(E) Exceptions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) To a minor accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;
(2) To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of the minor’s parent, guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
(3) To a minor who is in any of the places described in this Section if in connection with or as
required by an employer engaged in a lawful business, trade, profession or occupation, or to a minor
traveling directly to or from the location of the business trade, profession, or occupation and the minor's
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry written proof of employment and
proof of the hours the employer requires the minor's presence at work;
(4) To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from an event which has been
officially designated as a school activity by public or parochial school authorities or who is participating in
or traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic
organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with
the permission of the minor’s parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor;
(5) To a minor who is passing through the City in the course of interstate travel during the hours
of curfew;
(6) To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise
of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;
(7) To minors on the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of a
next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the City's designated law enforcement provider
about the minor's presence; and
(8) To a minor who is married or has been married or is otherwise legally emancipated.
(F) Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian, or other adult having the
primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of this Section by the
minor.
(G) Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in the person’s place of business
during the hours prohibited by this Section unless the minor is accompanied by the minor’s parent,
guardian, or other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor or unless one of the exceptions
to this Section apply.
(H) Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this Section that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the City's designated law enforcement provider that a
minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
WEAPONS
§ 130.25 ACTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
(A) Acts prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to:
(1) Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the
safety of another;
(2) Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing a human being and
whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;
(3) Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a sling-shot or sand club;
(4) Manufacture, transfer, or possess metal knuckles or a switch blade knife opening
automatically;
(5) Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used unlawfully as
a weapon against another;
(6) Sell or have in possession any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm;
or
(7) Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, air gun, ammunition, or explosive
without the written consent of the minor's parent or guardian or of the Police Division.
(B) Exception. Nothing in Division (A) of this Section shall prohibit the possession of the articles
therein mentioned if the purpose of the possession is for public exhibition by museums or collectors of art.
§ 130.26 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES; EXCEPTION.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm,
firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, air gun, air rifle, or other similar device commonly referred to as
a BB gun.
(1) The term “fireworks” means any substance or combination of substances or article prepared
for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or
detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy cannons, and toy canes in which explosive are used, the type
of balloons which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman
Candles, daygo bombs, sparklers other than those specified in Subparagraph 3, or other fireworks of like
construction, and any fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable compound, or any tablets or
other device containing any explosive substance and commonly used as fireworks.
(2) The term “fireworks” shall not include toy pistols, toy guns, in which paper caps containing
25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are used and toy pistol caps which contain less than 20/100
grains of explosive mixture.
(3) The term “fireworks” also does not include wire or wood sparklers or not more than 100
grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75
grams or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes, and
glow works, streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of not more
than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture. The use of items listed in this subparagraph is
not permitted on public property. This subparagraph does not authorize the purchase of items listed in it by
persons younger than 18 years of age. The age of a purchaser of items listed in this subparagraph must be
verified by photographic identification.
(B) Nothing in Division (A) of this Section shall apply to a display of fireworks by an organization or
group of organizations after approval by the City Council and payment of a fee established by the City
Council by resolution, which resolution may be amended from time to time, to a City-appointed animal
control officer, a licensed peace officer in the discharge of duty, or to a person in the lawful defense of
their person or family. This Section shall not apply to the discharge of firearms in a range authorized in
writing by the Council.
§ 130.27 POSSESSION AND SALE OF FIREWORKS.
It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, or have in possession for the purpose of sale, except as
allowed in § 130.26, any firecrackers, sky rockets, or other fireworks.
§ 130.28 EXPOSURE OF UNUSED CONTAINER.
It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or in possession or control thereof, to permit an unused
refrigerator, freezer, or other container sufficiently large to retain any child with doors which fasten
automatically when closed to allow children access to the same without removing the doors, lids, hinges,
or latches.
§ 130.29 USE OF BOW AND ARROW.
It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except in the Physical Education Program in a
school supervised by a member of its faculty, a community-wide supervised class or event specifically
authorized by the City Council, or a bow and arrow range authorized by the Council.
Section
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Code Adopted
Building Permits Required
Permits and Special Requirements for Moving Buitdings
Mast and Antenna Construction
Amateur Radio Towers
Regulating and Controlling Towers
150.01
150.02
150.03
150.04
rs0.05
rs0.06
(A) Codes Adopted by Reference. The Minnesota state Building code, pursuant to
Minnesota statutes, 168.59 to 168.75, including all the referenced amendments, rules, and
regulations, is hereby adopted by reference, with the exception of the optional chapters, unless
specifically adopted in this ordinance. The Minnesota state Building code is hereby
incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out herein.
(B) Application Administrarion and Enforcement. The application, administration, and
enforcement of this Section shall be in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. This
Section shall be enforced within the extra territorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statutes,
168.62, Subd. l, when so established by this municipality is called the community Development
Division. This Section shall be enforced by a Minnesota Certified Building Official designated
by the City to administer this Section.
(C) Permits and Fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in Minnesota Statutes, 168.62, Subd. 1. permit fees shall be assessed for work
govemed by this Section in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. In addition, a
surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work govemed by this Section in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes. 168.70.
s ls0.0l BUTLDTNG CODE ADOPTED.
(C) Violations and Penalties. A violation of this Section is a misdemeanor.
(D) Building Code optional chapters. The following optional provisions identified in the
most current edition of the State Building code are hereby adopted and incorporated as
part of the Building Code of the City:
(l) Internarional Property Maintenance Code (Current Edition);
(2) Appendix Chapter (J Grading) of the 2002 supplement to the 2000 International
Building Code; Optional provisions identified in Section 4, Subp. B and C are hereby
adopted and incorporated as part olthe Building Code lor the City; and,
s ls0.0r Thief River Falls - Land Usage
(3) Chapter 1335, Flood ProoJing Regulatio,ns, parts 1335.0600 to 1j35.1200.
(4) Minnesota State Fire Code Appendk K:
(i) Open Flame Prohibited. In any structure containing three or more
dwelling units, no person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on
any balcony above ground level, or on any gound floor patio within 15 feet ofa
structure.
(ii) Fuel Storage Prohibited. No person shall store or use any fuel,
barbeque, torch, or other similar heating or lighting chemical or device in the
locations designated in Section l.l .
(iiD Exception. Listed electric or gas-fired barbeque grills that are
permanently mounted and wired or plumbed to the building's gas supply or
electrical system and that maintain a minimum clearance ol l8 inches on all sides.
unless listed for lesser clearances, may be instalted on balconies and patios when
approved by the fire chief.
Amended: Adinance 23, 3'd Series
Ordinance No. ll1, 3'd Series (09/01/2018)
s 150.02 BUTLDING PERMITS REQUTRED.
(A) Building Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, move, improve, remove! convert, or demolish any building or structure, or any part
or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the plumbing, electrical, ventilating, heating, or
air conditioning systems therein or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate
Building Permit for each such building, structure, or mechanical components from the city.
There shall be no permit required for the cost ofconstruction under $200.
(B) Application Application lor a Building Permit shall be made to the Building Official on
an application provided by the Building official. The permit may be issued by the Building
official upon payment of required fee and completion of other requirements. All such
applications shall contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and
specifications and standards consistent with the provisions ofthis Chapter.
(C) Building Permit Fee. The Building Permit fee shalt be established by the Council by
resolution, which may be changed lrom time to time by resolution.
(D) Manufactured Home Permit and Fea Application for a Manufactured Home Permit
shall be made to the Building Official on an application by the Building Officiat. The permit
may be issued by the Building Official upon payment of the required fee, which shatl be
established by resolution and may be amended from time to time by resolution.
4
(E) Demotion Permit and Fee. Application for a Demolition Permit shall be made to the
Building official on an application by the Building official. The permit may be issued by the
Building Official upon payment ofthe required fee, which shall be established by resolution and
may be amended lrom time to time by resolution.
(F) Completion of Roof and Exterior. The roofand all exterior surfaces olany residential
and accessory building must be completely finished with exterior building materials permitted by
the State Building Code and this Code within 12 months after the issuance of a Building Permit
for any new construction, altemation, remodeling, addition, or relocation; any commercial
building and accessory building must be similarly completed within 24 months of the issuance of
a Building Permit. If a building is damaged by fire or other casualty or cause and the roof or
exterior finishes are damaged or destroyed, they shall be completely restored or replaced with
exterior building materials permitted by the State Building code and this code as soon as
reasonably possible. and in any event within l2 months after they are damaged or destroyed.
5 Building Regulations $ 1s0.03
|i 150.03 pERMITS AND SpECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVTNG BUILDINGS.
(A) DeJinitions. For the purpose of this Section, the fotlowing definitions sha appty
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(l) MOWNG PERMIT. A document allowing the use of a street for the purpose of
moving a building.
(2) STREET. A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property and shall include avenue, highway, or street.
(B) Moving Permit Required. It is unlawf,,l for any person to move a building on a street
without first having obtained a Moving Permit for such purpose.
(C) Application Application for a Moving Permit shall be made to the Building Official on
an application provided by the Building O{ficial. The Building Official shall also refer the
application to the Chief ol Police. The Moving Permit shall be issued by the Building Official
upon payment ofthe required fee and completion of other requirements.
(D) Moving Permil Restrictions, The Moving Permit shalt state the date or dates of moving,
hours, routing, movement, and parking. The Moving Permit shall be issued only for moving
buildings by building movers licensed by the state.
(E) Moving Permit Fee. The Moving Permit fee shatl be established by the Council by
resolution, which may be changed from time to time by resolution.
(F) Building Permit and Code Compliance. Before any building is moved from one
location to another within the City, or lrom a point of origin without the City to a destination
within the City, regardless of the route of movement, it shall be inspected and a Building Permit
shall have been issued for at least the work necessary to bring it into full compliance with the
State Building Code.
s 150.04 MAST AND ANTENNA CONSTRUCTTON.
(A) Permit Required. ll is unlawful lor any person to install or erect any mast or antenna,
designed or intended to relate or be a part of any type of communications equipment and in any
way connected to, or supported by, a buitding, if such mast or antenna, or any part thereof, is
more than ten feet above the roof line at the highest point of attachment, without a permit
therefore from the City.
(B) Application and Permil Applications shall provide sut'ficient information to determine
whether or not there is compliance with the provisions of this Section. Upon granting any
application, construction shall be in strict compliance with the application and shall be inspected
to assure the compliance. The application shall also contain an agreement to indemnify and save
$ 1s0.03
the City harmless from any claim or expense incurred by reason ofthe negligent construction or
maintenance ofthe mast or anlenna.
(C) Technical Requirements. All masts and antennas shall meet or exceed the following
requlrements:
(1) Masts and antennas shall be of noncombustible and corrosive-resistant material:
(2) Every mast and antenna installed on a roof shall be mounted on its own platform or
plate covering two or more rafters ofthe roofand shall be securely anchored with guy wires;
(3) Masts and antennas shall be
noncombustible members or materials:
lastened directly to the roof or supported by
(4) Outdoor masts and antennas shall be ofan approved type and shall not exceed the
maximum height of 25 feet above a roof support or of 70 feet above a ground support. In areas
where reception is affected by obstructions, special permission may be granted by the council to
exceed the above specified height limitations;
(5) Every mast or antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct
stroke oflightening with an adequate ground wire No. 6 or larger;
(6) In no case shall a mast or antenna be installed nearer to the street or sidewalk than
the height of the mast or antenna plus ten feet unless approved by the council, and no wires,
cables, or guy wires shall cross or extend over any part of any street, sidewalk, or other public
property. No mast or antenna shall be installed closer to high voltage transmission lines than ten
feet, plus the length of the mast or antenna; and,
(7) Whenever it is necessary to install a mast or antenna near power lines, or where
damage would be caused by its falling, a separate safety wire must be attached to the crossarm of
the mast or antenna and secured in a direction awav from the hazard.
s 150.05 AMATEUR RADTO TOWERS.
Amateur radio suppo( structures (towers) shall be installed in accordance with the
instructions furnished by the manufacturer tower model. Because ofthe experimental nature of
the radio service antennas mounted on a tower may be modified and changed at any time so long
as the published allowable load on the tower is not exceeded and the structure of the tower
remains in accordance with the manufacturers specifications. No tower shall exceed 70 feet in
height unless a conditional use permit to exceed this height is granted by the City Council.
Thief River Falls - Land Usage 6
7 Building Regulations $ 1s0.06
$150.06 REGULATING AND CONTROLLING TOWERS
(A) Purpose. In order to accommodate the tower needs ofresidents and business while
protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the City finds that
these regulations are necessary in order to:
(1) Facititate the provision of telecommunication and other services to the residents
and businesses ofthe City;
(2) Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and sitting
standards;
(3) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
structural standards and setback requirements; and
(4) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings in order to reduce
the number of towers needed to serve the community.
(B) Dejinitions. The following words and terms when used in this Section shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly states otherwise:
(l) Anlenna. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels, microwave
dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
(2) Co-Localion. The placement of wireless telecommunication antenna by two or
more service providers on a tower, building, or structure.
(3) Comme rc ial ll/ireless Te lecommunicalion Semice. Licensed commercial
wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS),
specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and
similar services that are marketed to the general public.
(4) Guyed Tower. A tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by wires and ground
anchors
(5) Monopole. A type oftower mount that is self-supporting through a single shaft
usually constructed of wood, metal, or concrete.
(6) Public Utilillt. Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric,
transportation, water, sewer, or landline telephone service to the general public. For the purpose
of this ordinance, commercial wireless telecommunication service facilities shall not be
considered public utility uses, and are defined separately.
$ 1s0.06 Thief River Falls - Land Usage
(7) Tower. Any ground or roofmounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof
taller than I 5 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces. and masts.
(9) Tower, Single-Use. A tower to which is attached only the antennas or devices of a
single user, although the tower may be designed to accommodate the antennas and devices for
multiple users as required in this Section.
(C) Towers in Residenrial Zoning Districts. All towers erected, constructed, or located
within Residential Districts or commercial Districts shall comply with the fottowing
requirements:
8
(1) Towers supporting amateur radio antennas and conforming to all applicable
provisions of this Code shall be alloued only in the rear yard ofresidentially or commercialty
zoned parcels provided they shall not more exceed the maximum height of25 feet above a roof
support or of 70 feet above a ground support.
(2) Must comply with the provisions of $ I 50.04 and $ I 50.05, and other appropriate
sections ofthe Code.
(D) co-Location Requirements. All commercial towers erected, constructed, or located
within the City shalt comply with the following requirements:
(l) A proposal for a new commercial telecommunication service tower shall not be
approved unless the City Council finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a
one mile search radius (one half mile search radius for towers under 120 feet in height, one
quarter mile search radius for towers under 80 feet in height) of the proposed toweidue to one or
more ol the lollowing reasons:
(a) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or
approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified professional engineer licensed in
Minnesota, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
(b) The ptanned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the
usability ofother existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a
qualified professional engineer licensed in Minnesota and the interference cannot be prevented at
a reasonable cost.
(c) Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented
by a qualified professional engineer licensed in Minnesota.
(8) Tower, Multi-User. A tower to which is attached the antennas or devises of more
than one user or entity.
9 s 1s0.06
(d) Other unforeseen reasons which make it infeasible to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.
(e) Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall be
designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's
antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional user if the tower is over 60 feet in
height or for at least two additional users ifthe tower is over 100 feet in height. Towers must be
designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and !o accept antennas
mounted at varying heights.
(2) A letter of intent must be submitled to the City from the tower owner, and the
owner's successors and assigns, to allow the shared use ofthe tower if an applicant requests use
of the tower and is willing to pay a reasonable charge and will not interfere with otheiuses ofthe
tower.
(E). Tower Construclion Requirements. All towers erected, constructed. or located within
the City, and all wiring therefore, shall comply with the following requirements:
(l) Permits.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct in
place, place, or re-erect, replace, or repair any tower without first making application for a
conditional use permit and thereafter securing a building permit.
(b) The application shall provide at the time ofapplication sufficient information
to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance ofthe antenna and tower will not
create a safety hazard or damage to the property ofother persons.
(c) The City shall not issue a building permit until the applicant has received all
other required permits and licenses, including, but not limited to, those required by the Federal
Aviation Administration and Federal Communication Commission.
(d) Permits are not required for
1. Adjustment or replacement of the elements ofan antenna array affixed to a
tower or antenna, provided that replacement does not reduce the safety factor.
2. Antennas and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes, for
emergency communication, or lor broadcast remote pick-up operations, provided that all
requirements $150.06 (EX3) are met. Temporary antennas shall be removed within 72 hours
following installation.
(2) Fees. The fees to be paid are those prescribed for application for a conditional use
permit and building permit fees.
Building Regulations
s 1s0.06 Thief River Falls - Land Usage
(3) Conslruction Requiremenls. All antennas and towers erected, constructed. or
located within the City, and all wiring thereflore, shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) All applicable provisions of this Code.
(b) Towers shall be certified by a qualified prolessional engineer licensed in
Minnesota to conform to the latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the
Uniform Building Code and the Electronics Industry Association.
(c) With the exception ofnecessary electric and telephone service and connection
lines approved by the City, no part ofany antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment, or
wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the
right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
(d) Towers and associated antennas and devices shall be designed to conform
with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of
the National Electrical Code.
(I) Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to discourage climbing of
the tower by a security fence ofnot less than six feet in height.
(g) All towers shall be constructed to conform with the requirements ofthe
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
(h) Atl towers erected within the City must conform to the applicable
performance standards of this Code.
(i) The noise levels associated with any tower facility shall conform to the
Minnesota Pollution control Agency noise level requirements as listed in Minnesota Rules.
() Construction ofan approved tower, including all accessory structures,
including footings and foundations, must be completed within I 8 months following the date of
the issuance olthe building permit, extendable for an additional three months by the City Zoning
Administrator. A Conditional Use Permit shall expire if construction is not completed within
these time frames.
(4) Existing Antennas and Towers. Antennas and towers in existence as ofJanuary
l, 2006, which do not conform to or comply with this Section are subject to the following
provisions:
l0
(e) All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending
substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower or antenna and a structure. or
between towers, shall be at least l8 feet above the ground at all points, unless buried
underground.
l1 Building Regulations s 1s0.06
(a) Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now existing
but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in all respects with this
Section.
(b) Ifsuch towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause
whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical
dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefore, but without otherwise complying with
this Section, provided, however, that if the cost ol repairing the tower to the former use, physical
dimensions, and location would exceed 75 percent of the cost of a new tower of like kind and
quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this
Section.
(c) Non-conforming towers (with guy wires) exceeding 200 feet in height may
be rebuilt at their same height in their current location, provided the new construction does not
have guy wires and the capacity of the tower is increased to allow co-location ofadditional
antennas.
(5) Lights and Other Attachments. No antenna or tower shall have affixed or
attached to it in any way except during time ofrepair or installation any lights, reflectors,
flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal Aviation Agency or the
Federal Communications Commission, nor shall any tower have constructed thereon, or attached
thereto, in any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods
ofconstruction or repair. Should lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating devices be
required, they shall have shading devises designed and installed to mitigate ground-level
intrusion from the tower lighting, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating devices.
(6) Inspections' All towers may be inspected at least once each year by an official of
the Building Inspector's Olfice to determine compliance with original construction standards.
Deviation from original construction for which a building permit is obtained constitutes a
violation of this Section.
(7'S Notices. Notice ofviolations will be sent by certified mail, retum receipt
requested, to the owner and the owner will have 30 days lrom the date the notification is issued
to make repairs. The owner will notify the Building Inspector's Office that the repairs have been
made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another inspection will be made and the owner will be
notified of the results.
(8) Interpretation. Should this Section be in conflict with other Sections of this
Code, the provisions ofthis Section shall prevail.
(F) Tower and Antenna Design Requirements. Proposed or modified towers and antennas
shall meet the following design requirements:
(1) Towers and antennas and devices shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use ofcolor and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in
$ 1s0.06 Thief River Palls - Land Usage
instances where the color is dictated by lederal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(2) commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a monopole
design unless the City determines that an altemative design would accommodate co-location of
additional antennas or would better blend into the surrounding environment.
(G) Tower setbacfts. Towers shall conform with each of the lollowing minimum setback
requirements:
(1) Towers shall be setback lrom all property lines by a minimum distance equal to the
height of the tower, plus 10 feet, including all antennas, and attachments. Towers may 6e
located closer to a property line ifthe tower is designed and engineered to collapse progressively
within the distance between the tower and property line, which design must be do"r-ented by
and signed by a qualified professional engineer licensed in Minnesota. In all cases. the tower
shall meet the setbacks of the underlining zoning district.
t2
(2) Towers shall be set back from existing public rights-of-way and lrom the planned
public rights-of-way, as shown on the most recently adopted comprehensive plan of the city, by
a minimum distance equal to the height ofthe tower, plus 10 feet, including all antennas and
attachments. Towers may be located closer to public rights-of-way and to planned public rightsof-
way if the tower is designed and engineered to collapse progressively within the distance
b.etween the tower and the public rights-of-way, which design must be documented by and
signed by a qualified professional engineer licensed in Minnesota.
(3) A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street
varied, at the sole discretion ofthe city council, to allow the integration of a tower into an
existing or proposed structure such as a light standard, power line support device, or similar
structure.
(H) Tower Heighl. All proposed towers shall meet the height restrictions set forth in
Paragraph (O) of this Section.
(I) Tower Lighting. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular tower. Should strobe lights be
required, strobe lights shall be limited to daytight hours and shall switch to red lights du;ng
nighttime hours. Any such lighting shall be shaded as required by Section 150.06 (E)(5). when
incorporated into the approved design ofthe tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields,
parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower, subject to the approval of the city
Zoning Administrator.
(J) signs and Advertising. The use of any portion ofa tower or antenna for signs other
than waming or equipment information signs is prohibited.
(K) Accessory Utility Buildings. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tow.er
l3
shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shalt meet the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. Ground mounted towers and
equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design ofnonvegetative
screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of ihe
surrounding neighborhood.
(L\ Abandoned or unused rowers or Portions of rowers. Abandoned or unused towers
or portions of towers shall be removed as follows:
(l) Abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within l2
months of the cessation ofoperations at a site. In the event that a tower is not removed within l2
months ofthe cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be
removed by the City and the costs ofremoval assessed against the owner of the real property and
the owner ofthe tower and./or those costs may be assessed against the real property.
(M) Interference with Public Safety Telecommunicatlazs. No new or existing tele_
communications service shall interlere with public safety telecommunications. All applications
lor new service shall be accompanied by an intermodulation study, which provides a technical
evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference
problems. Belore the introduction ofnew service or changes in existing service,
telecommunication providers shall notify the City at least ten calendar days in advance ofsuch
changes and allow the City to monitor interference levels during the testing process.
(N\ Additional Submiltal Reqairements.ln addition to the information required elsewhere
in this code, development applications for towers shall include the following supplemental
information:
(l) A report from a qualified professional engineer licensed in Minnesota which:
(a) describes the tower height and design including a cross section and elevation;
(b) documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for colocated
antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennasl
(c) describes the towers capacity, including the number and type of antennas that
it can accommodate;
(d) documents what steps the applicant wilt take to avoid interference with
established public safety telecommunications;
(e) includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and
(f) includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.
Building Regulations $ 1s0.06
s 1s0.06 Thief River Falls - Land Usage
(2) For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a letter of intent
committing the tower owner and the tower owner's successors or assigns to allow the shared use
ofthe tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for
shared use.
(3) Before the issuance of a building permit, the fotlowing supplemental information
shall be submitted:
(a) proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by
Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and others; and
(b) a report from a qualified professional engineer licensed in Minnesota which
demonstrates the tower's compliance with the aforementioned structural and electrical standards.
(l) Structure Height. The height of towers shall be determined by measuring the
vertical distance from the lowest point ofcontact q'ith the ground to the highest point ofthe
tower, including all antennas or other devices or attachments. When towers are mounted on roofs
or other structures. the combined height of the structure and tower must meet the height
restrictions ol this Section.
(2) Height Limitations, The maximum height of towers shall be 200 feet.
(3) Additional Restrictions.
(a) Towers shall be set back from overhead electrical power lines by a minimum
distance equal to the height of the tow€r, plus I 0 feet, including all antennas and attachments.
(b) Airport Zoning Ordinances for the Thiel River Falls Regional Airport.
(P\ Factors Considered in Granting Conditional IJse Permitsfor Towerc. The City
Council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use
permit for towers. The City Council may evaluate each ofthese factors on a site-by-site basis
with varying levels olpreference in determining how the goals of this Section are best served:
(l) Height ofthe proposed tower facility
(2) Capacity of the tower structure lor additional antenna equipment to accommodate
expansion, or to allow lor colocation of other provider's equipment.
(3) Proximity ofthe tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries
l4
(4) Nature ofuses on adjacent and nearby properties.
(O) Height Limitations.
l5 Building Regulations $ 1s0.06
(5) Surroundingtopography.
(6) Present and surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
(7) Design and sighting ofthe tower, with particular reference to design characteristics
and location that have the effect ofreducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
(8) Proposed ingress and egress.
(9) Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in other
Paragraphs of this Section.
(10) Such other factors as the Planning Commission or City Council deem appropriate.
(Q) Revocation of Condilional Use Permit. The grounds for revocation of a conditional
use permit shall be based on a finding that:
(1) The permitee has failed to comply with conditions of approval imposed;
(2) The tower facility has not been properly constructed or maintained;
(3) The tower facility is no longer in use and has not been in use for the previous 12
months; or
(4) Such other findings as the Planning Commission or City Council deem significant.
(5) In the event of revocation of a conditional use permit, the tower and all accessgry
structures must be removed and the site restored to its original condition within 6 months.
Failure to do so will result in the City completing the removal and site restoration and the owner
of the real property and owner ofthe tower shall pay for city costs and/or those costs may be
assessed against the real property.
Amended: Ordinance No. 20, 3'd Series
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
151.01 Purpose
151.02 Geographic jurisdiction
151.03 Land suitability
151.04 Definitions
151.05 Public land dedication
151.06 Conveyance by metes and bounds
Plat Presentation
151.20 General procedures
151.21 Pre-application meeting
151.22 Preliminary Plat approval
151.23 Final Plat approval
151.24 General requirements
151.25 Preliminary Plat data
151.26 Final Plat data
Design Standards; Required Improvements
151.40 General design standards
151.41 Circulation
151.42 Easements
151.43 Blocks
151.44 Lots
151.45 General required improvements
151.46 Making of improvements
151.47 Monuments
151.48 Streets
151.49 Utilities
151.50 Drainage facilities
151.51 Sidewalks
151.52 Electrical service
151.53 Financing
151.54 Review and inspection
16
17 Subdivisions § 151.03
Administration and Enforcement
151.65 Building permit
151.66 Variances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the subdividing of land within the City and
immediate areas so that new additions will be integrated with the Comprehensive Plan, will
promote orderly growth and will contribute to an attractive, stable, and wholesome community
environment.
§ 151.02 GEOGRAPHIC JURISDICTION.
The area within the corporate limits of the City and the area extending two miles beyond its
corporate limits, except within a township which has adopted subdivision regulations.
§ 151.03 LAND SUITABILITY.
(A) If the Council finds that the land to be subdivided is unsuitable for the proposed
development due to high agricultural productivity, flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock
formations, or other conditions that may adversely affect the public, the Council may refuse to
approve subdivision of the land unless adequate methods are found by the subdivider to alleviate
the problem.
(B) The Council may refuse to approve what it considers scattered or premature subdivision
of land by reason of a lack of adequate water supply, sewerage treatment, schools, roads, proper
drainage, or other public services which would necessitate an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
(C) If the proposed subdivision is outside the corporate boundaries of the City and the
County, Township or subdivider have not certified in writing that they will assume all
responsibility for repair and maintenance of dedicated streets until annexed to the City; or the
County or Township have not certified in writing that it has the capacity for and will provide
police and fire protection and on-site sewer system inspections to insure proper installation, the
Council may refuse to approve the subdivision.
§ 151.04 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 18
§ 151.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) ALLEY. A public right-of-way usually 20 feet or less in width which normally affords a
secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.
(B) ARTERIAL STREET. A street which serves or is designed to serve heavy flows of
traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between heavy traffic generating areas.
(C) COLLECTOR STREET. A street designed to distribute traffic between local and
arterial street systems.
(D) CUL-DE-SAC. A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end
culminating into a vehicular turn around.
(E) COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The general plan for land use, housing and transportation,
including the series of maps, reports, statement of goals, objectives and criteria adopted by the
Council to designate longrange orderly growth and development of the City.
(F) HALF STREET. A street having only one-half of its intended street width within the
platted area.
(G) LOCAL STREET. A street intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting
properties.
(H) LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey,
auditor’s plat or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by the
description and which is of sufficient size to meet zoning requirements.
(I) PLAT. A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plan of subdivision is
presented to the Planning Commission and Council for approval.
(J) SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or building development or, if a new street is involved, any
division of a parcel of land, provided that:
(1) A division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more
and 300 feet of width or more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision;
(2) The parcel is co-extensive with a separate parcel of record at the effective date of
this Chapter;
19 Subdivisions § 151.06
(3) An agreement to convey such a parcel has been entered into prior to the effective
date of this Chapter and the instrument showing the agreement to convey is recorded in the office
of the Pennington County Recorder within one year thereafter; and
(4) The parcel is co-extensive with a lot unit or units described with reference to a plat
or auditor’s subdivision duly filed and of record in the office of the Pennington County Recorder
prior to the effective date of this Chapter.
(K) SUBDIVISION. This term includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context,
shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
§ 151.05 PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION.
All new subdivisions or subdivisions that are rezoned to Residential shall dedicate for public
use as playgrounds at least five percent of the gross area of all land in the subdivision which is
zoned Residential. The five percent is in addition to the land dedicated for streets or other public
ways. In the event the location or size of the land to be dedicated does not conform to the
Comprehensive Plan or to other development objectives for the subject area, the Council may
require a cash payment to be used for other park or playground purposes. This Section shall not
apply to subdivisions during such time that the subdivisions are subject to § 152.028(D).
§ 151.06 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.
(A) No conveyance of land shall be filed or recorded if the land is described in the
conveyance by metes and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made
after April 21, 1961 or to an unapproved plat unless the parcel described in the conveyance:
(1) Was a separate parcel of record on June 15, 1977;
(2) Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to June 15,
1977;
(3) Was a separate parcel of not less than two and one-half acres in area and 150 feet in
width on January 1, 1966;
(4) Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and 300 feet in width on
July 1, 1980;
(5) Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than five acres and
having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of the
parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet
in width; or
§ 151.06 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 20
(6) Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less than 20 acres and
having a width of not less than 500 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of the
parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet
in width.
(B) Building Permits shall be withheld for structures on parcels which have been subdivided
and conveyed in violation of this Section, and the City may refuse to accept title or jurisdiction to
streets within the parcels or to improve, repair, or maintain any such parcels.
(C) A waiver of the restrictions in this Section may be sought from the City.
PLAT PRESENTATION
§ 151.20 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
The following procedures shall be followed in the administration of this Chapter, and no land
within the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall be subdivided and offered for sale or a plat recorded
until a pre-application meeting has been held and a Preliminary Plat and a Final Plat of the
proposed subdivision have been reviewed by the Planning Commission and its technical assistants
and until the Final Plat has been approved by the Council as set forth in the procedures provided
herein. Plans of group developments for housing, commercial, industrial, or other uses or for any
combination of uses designed for sale or rental purposes shall be presented in the same manner as
other plats for the review of the Planning Commission and the approval of the Council.
§ 151.21 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
Prior to the submission of any plat for consideration by the Planning Commission, the
subdivider shall meet with the Commission, or any individual to whom the Commission may
delegate this responsibility, to introduce the subdivider as a potential subdivider and learn what
shall be expected of the subdivider in such capacity and to determine the relationship of
subdivider’s proposed subdivision with the Comprehensive Plan for the affected area.
§ 151.22 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
(A) The subdivider shall engage a registered land surveyor to prepare a Preliminary Plat of
the land to be subdivided.
(B) The subdivider shall submit 12 copies of the Preliminary Plat, including one 11" x 17"
copy, to the Zoning Administrator with a filing fee at least 14 days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which the Preliminary Plat is to be considered. The filing fee shall be
$300.00.
21 Subdivisions § 151.22
(C) The Zoning Administrator shall submit two copies each of the Preliminary Plat to the
Public Works Director, Public Utilities Director, and Parks and Recreation Director no later than
five days after its receipt.
(D) The Zoning Administrator shall submit two copies of the Preliminary Plat for review to
the following when applicable:
(1) To the Pennington County Engineer and/or the Marshall County Engineer or the
District Engineer of the Minnesota Department of Transportation when the proposed plat is
adjacent to county or state streets.
(2) To the Commissioner and Area or Regional Hydrologist of the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources when the proposed plat lies within shoreland or wetlands.
(E) The Public Works Director shall review the Preliminary Plat and shall, having
incorporated the comments from the Public Utilities Director and the Parks and Recreation
Director, transmit a report of the Public Works Director’s reaction, together with any supporting
material to the Zoning Administrator seven days prior to the hearing at which the Preliminary Plat
is to be considered by the Planning Commission.
(F) The Zoning Administrator shall submit one copy each of the Preliminary Plat and of the
review checklist to which shall be attached comments received from the Public Works Director,
county or state engineers, and the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources to each member of
the Planning Commission no later than five days prior to the hearing at which the Preliminary Plat
is to be considered.
(G) The Planning Commission may require qualified technical services, such as land planning
and legal, to review the Preliminary Plat and advise on its suitability regarding general planning,
conformity with plans of other private and public organizations and agencies, adequacy of
proposed water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and flood control, and other features. The
subdivider may be required to pay the cost of the services.
(H) The Planning Commission shall, following due public notice, conduct a hearing to
review the Preliminary Plat, considering the reports of the Public Works Director and others who
have reviewed the Preliminary Plat, technicians, if applicable, and shall either reject, approve
subject to revision or recommend that the City Council approve the Preliminary Plat. If
disapproved, the Planning Commission shall set forth the grounds for such refusal in its
proceedings and shall transmit them to the subdivider.
(I) The Zoning Administrator shall submit the recommendation of the Planning Commission
along with the Preliminary Plat and any reports to the Council within five days following the
Planning Commission’s hearing. The Council shall review the Preliminary Plat, considering the
reports of the Public Works Director and others, if applicable, and shall either reject, approve
subject to revision or approve the Preliminary Plat within 120 days of submittal of the complete
Preliminary Plat to the Zoning Administrator. If disapproved, the Council shall set forth the grounds
for such refusal in its proceedings and shall transmit them to the subdivider. If approved, the design
is thereby accepted as a basis for the preparation of the Final Plat.
§ 151.22 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 22
(J) Within five days of acceptance of the Preliminary Plat by the Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall submit the Preliminary Plat to Division Directors, Department Supervisors
and utilities companies for review and comments requesting that they be returned within 15 days.
(K) The Zoning Administrator shall transmit revisions requested by the Planning
Commission, Council, Division Directors, Department Supervisors, utilities companies, and
others to the subdivider requesting that they be incorporated into the Final Plat.
Amended: Ordinance No. 27, 3rd Series
§ 151.23 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
(A) The subdivider shall engage a registered land surveyor to prepare a Final Plat which shall
constitute that portion of the Preliminary Plat which the subdivider proposes to record and
develop at that time.
(B) The subdivider shall submit six copies of the Final Plat, including one 11" x 17" copy, to
the Zoning Administrator at least 14 days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the
Final Plat is to be considered. The Final Plat shall be submitted within one year of Preliminary
Plat approval; otherwise, the approval shall become null and void. In the event the Preliminary
Plat is not entirely platted in final form within five years of approval, the Preliminary Plat shall be
re-submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and action, otherwise the initial approval
shall be considered null and void.
(C) The Zoning Administrator shall submit two copies each of the Final Plat to the Public
Works Director, Director of Utilities, and Parks and Recreation Director no later than five days
after its receipt.
(D) The Public Works Director shall review the Final Plat and shall, having incorporated the
comments from the Director of Utilities and the Parks and Recreation Director, transmit a report
of the Public Works Director’s reaction, together with any supporting material, to the Zoning
Administrator seven days prior to the hearing at which the Final Plat is to be considered by the
Planning Commission.
(E) The Zoning Administrator shall submit one copy of the Final Plat to which shall be
attached comments received from the Public Works Director, City Division Directors,
Department Supervisors, and utilities companies and, if applicable, from county or state engineers
and the Department of Natural Resources, which have been incorporated into the Final Plat, to
each member of the Planning Commission no later than five days prior to the meeting at which
the Final Plat is to be considered.
(F) The Planning Commission shall study the Final Plat, considering the reports and
comments received from the Public Works Director, other City Divisions, utilities companies
and, if applicable, from county or state engineers and the Department of Natural Resources and
then shall transmit its action to the Council within 45 days of submittal of the Final Plat to the
Zoning Administrator.
23 Subdivisions § 151.25
(G) The Council shall act upon the Final Plat within 60 days submittal of the complete Final
Plat to the Zoning Administrator, whereupon the Zoning Administrator shall notify the subdivider
of the Council’s action.
(H) The subdivider shall deliver the approved Final Plat to Zoning Administrator for
execution by the City and the subdivider shall record the Final Plat with the Pennington County
Recorder within 60 days of Final Plat approval; otherwise, the approval shall be considered null
and void.
(I) The subdivider shall furnish a duplicate transparency, one paper print and a digital file
compatible with the City’s Geographic Information System of the Final Plat, as recorded, to the
Zoning Administrator.
§ 151.24 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
Information required to be shown in or submitted with Preliminary and Final Plats shall be as
set forth in §§ 151.25 and 151.26.
§ 151.25 PRELIMINARY PLAT DATA.
The Preliminary Plat shall contain, at a minimum, the following in order to be considered
complete.
(A) Identification and description.
(1) Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be similar in
pronunciation to the name of any plat heretofore recorded in Pennington or Marshall County.
(2) Location by Section, town, range, or by other legal description.
(3) A vicinity map.
(4) Total approximate acreage.
(5) Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor, and designer of the Plat.
(B) Existing conditions in the parcel and in surrounding land to a distance of 300 feet.
(1) Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated.
(2) Platted streets, county and state streets rights-of-way, railroads rights-of-way, and
utility easements.
(3) All easements of record, block and lot lines, and ownership of adjoining platted
lands.
§ 151.25 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 24
(4) All easements of record, boundary lines, and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided
land.
(5) Sewer lines, water lines, culverts, and other underground facilities.
(6) Permanent buildings and structures.
(7) 100 year flood contours and elevations shall be indicated, where applicable.
(8) Any channel, creek, lake, river, stream, or wetland abutting or lying wholly or
partially within the plat shall be labeled as such and shall have its edge delineated.
(9) Other information, such as soil tests and contours, if requested by the Planning
Commission or Council to aid in review.
(C) Subdivision design features.
(1) Layout and width of proposed streets and utility easements showing street names, lot
dimensions, parks, and other public areas. The street layout shall include all contiguous land
owned or controlled by the subdivider.
(2) Proposed use of all parcels, and, if zoning change is contemplated, proposed
rezoning.
(D) Plan of the Entire Area. Where a parcel of land is proposed for subdivision that is a part
of a larger logical subdivision unit, the Planning Commission may request preparation of a "Plan
of the Entire Area," the Plan to be used by the Planning Commission to aid in judging the
proposed plat.
(E) Additional information required in shoreland.
(1) The surface water features required in M.S. § 505.02, Subd. 1.
(2) Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building and on-site sewage
treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current existing sources or from field
investigations such as soil borings, percolation tests, or other methods.
(3) Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply, extent of anticipated
vegetation and topographic alterations, and proposed methods for controlling construction
activities.
(4) Location of 100-year flood plain areas.
(5) Lines or contours representing the ordinary high water level, the "toe" and the "top"
of bluffs and the minimum building setback distances from the river, tributary, streams, and the
top of the bluff.

25 Subdivisions § 151.40
§ 151.26 FINAL PLAT DATA.
The Final Plat shall contain, at a minimum, the following in order to be considered complete:
(A) Identification and description data;
(B) Boundaries of the subdivision, street and alley lines, names of all streets and alleys, with
their widths, and boundaries of any other areas intended for public use;
(C) All lot lines and easements, with figures showing their dimensions;
(D) An identification system for all lots and blocks;
(E) Block and lot lines and utility easements on adjoining platted lands;
(F) Lines of adjoining streets and alleys, with their widths and names;
(G) Data required by Minnesota Statutes, including, but not limited to, accurate angular and
linear dimensions for all lines, angles, and curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, alleys,
easements, and other important features;
(H) Certification by the Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning Commission of City;
(I) Certification by the Mayor and City Administrator for the City of Thief River Falls,
Minnesota; and,
(J) Such other information as requested by the City resulting from the review of the
Preliminary and Final Plats.
DESIGN STANDARDS; REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 151.40 GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
Generally, design standards shall assure that the layout of the subdivision harmonizes with
existing plans affecting the development and its surroundings and shall be in conformity with the
City's development objectives for the entire area and with the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 151.41 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 26
§ 151.41 CIRCULATION.
(A) General street design.
(1) The design of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of storm water,
and to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
(2) Where new streets extend existing adjoining streets, their projections shall be at the
same or greater width, but in no case less than the minimum required width.
(3) Where adjoining lands are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of streets. When a new subdivision
adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible to being subdivided, then the new streets shall be carried to
the boundaries of the unsubdivided land.
(B) Street width and grades.
(1) The following standards of street design shall be observed by the subdivider.
Street Category
Minimum Width Rightof-
Way
Minimum Width of
Improved Surface
Longitudinal Grade
Arterial
70 feet
44 feet
0.2%
Collector
60 feet
40 feet
0.2%
Local
50 feet
36 feet
0.2%
(2) If the street is to be improved with ditches parallel to the street and/or without curb
and gutter, the minimum width of the right-of-way shall be 70 feet and the minimum width of the
improved surface shall be 24 feet.
(C) Cul-de-sacs. Each cul-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a turn around
having a minimum outside street diameter of 100 feet and a minimum street property line
diameter of 120 feet.
(D) Local streets. Local streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
(E) Street jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
(F) Street intersections. Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at right angles and no
intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. It must be evidenced that safe and
efficient traffic flow is encouraged. No more than four streets shall enter any intersection.
27 Subdivisions § 151.42
(G) Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where the Council finds it to be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining land is subdivided.
(H) Street names. Proposed streets obviously in alignment with existing and named streets
shall bear the names of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of the proposed street
duplicate existing street names, including phonetic similarities.
(I) Private streets. Public improvements shall not be approved for any private street.
(J) Access to arterial and collector streets.
(1) Where a proposed plat is adjacent to a major street, the Council may require the
subdivider to provide frontage streets along the right-of-way of such facilities or they may require
that lots should back on streets, in which case, vehicular and pedestrian access between the lots
and streets shall be prohibited.
(2) Where a proposed plat is adjacent to an arterial or collector street, as designated by
the Comprehensive Plan or as indicated by the City’s Municipal State Aid Street System, spacing
between access points to the streets of less than 660 feet for collectors and 1,320 feet for arterials
shall be avoided except where impractical or impossible due to existing land divisions or
topography.
(K) Corners. Curb lines at street intersections shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 12
feet.
(L) Residential alleys. Alleys shall be prohibited unless special permission is granted by the
Council for their provision.
(M) Hardship to owners of adjoining property. The street arrangement shall not be such as to
cause hardship to owners of adjoining land in platting their own land and providing convenient
access to it.
§ 151.42 EASEMENTS.
(A) Utilities. Easements at least ten feet wide centered, overlapping, or adjacent to lot lines
shall be provided for utilities where necessary. Easements for water lines or storm or sanitary
sewer lines shall be at least 20 feet wide. Easements containing or proposed for more than one
utility over six feet in depth shall be at least 30 feet wide. Wider permanent easements or
temporary construction easements may be required where installation depths are greater than ten
feet. Easements shall have continuity of alignment from block to block. Utility easements shall be
kept free of any vegetation and structures which would interfere with the free movement of utility
service vehicles.
(B) Water courses. When a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such water courses and with such further width or
construction as may be determined to be necessary by the Public Works Director.
§ 151.43 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 28
§ 151.43 BLOCKS.
(A) Length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet.
(B) Pedestrian walkways. In blocks longer than 600 feet, a pedestrian crossway with a
minimum right-of-way of 20 feet shall be required near the center of the block. Additional access
ways to schools, parks, and other destinations shall be provided if requested by the Planning
Commission at the time of Preliminary Plat review.
§ 151.44 LOTS.
(A) Layout. Where possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
radial to curved street lines. Lots with frontage on two parallel local streets shall be prohibited.
(B) Size and dimension. Minimum lot area and lateral dimensions shall be as set forth in
Chapter 152.
(C) Corner lots. Corner lots shall be platted at least ten percent wider than the minimum lot
width required.
(D) Natural features. In the subdivision of land, due regard shall be shown for all natural
features which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development and
which may alter normal lot platting.
(E) Lot access to streets. The City shall determine the location of access from lots to streets.
There shall be no direct vehicular access from residential lots to arterial streets and such access to
collector streets shall be avoided where possible. Residential lots shall be separated from
highways, arterial streets and railroads rights-of-way by a 25-foot buffer strip, which may be in
the form of added depth or width of lots backing on or siding on the streets or railroads
rights-of-way.
(F) Lot remnants. Lot remnants which are below the minimum lot size must be added to
adjacent or surrounding lots rather than be allowed to remain as an unusable outlot or parcel
unless the owner can show plans for the future use of such remnant.
§ 151.45 GENERAL REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
Improvements shall be made in all subdivisions according to the requirements set forth in §§
151.46 through 151.54.
29 Subdivisions § 151.49
§ 151.46 MAKING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
Unless otherwise stated below or in a written agreement between the subdivider or developer
and City, all of the required improvements shall be made by City forces or under specifications
and construction contracts entered into by the City.
§ 151.47 MONUMENTS.
Steel monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets,
and at intermediate points as shown on the Final Plat. The installation shall be done by a
registered land surveyor and shall be the subdivider’s expense and responsibility. Subdividers are
encouraged to have steel guard posts placed next to all monuments for their protection and future
relocation. All federal, state, county or other official benchmarks, monuments, or triangulation
stations in or adjacent to the land shall be preserved in precise position.
§ 151.48 STREETS.
(A) Grading. Streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way in accordance with
street grades as established by the Public Works Director. Grading will be complete prior to
installation of applicable underground utilities, either private or public. Gravel base construction
shall not be undertaken until underground utilities have been installed.
(B) Curb and gutter and surfacing. Following street grading, utilities installations, and
gravel base construction and at such time as directed by the Public Works Director and approved
by the Council, concrete curbs and gutters and bituminous or concrete surfaced streets shall be
constructed.
§ 151.49 UTILITIES.
All utilities, whether private or public, shall be installed underground so as to enhance the
visual appearance of the area, unless special permission is otherwise granted by the Council.
Where utilities are to be installed in street or alley rights-of-way, the installations shall take place
prior to street surfacing. Water and sanitary sewer service lines shall be laid from the lateral
mains to the property line ending at the curb stop and box.
(A) Sanitary sewer. Sanitary sewer facilities adequate to serve the subdivision shall be
installed and shall meet federal and state requirements and the requirements of the master plan for
the sanitary sewer collection system of the City.
(B) Water supply. Water distribution facilities adequate to serve the subdivision shall be
installed and shall meet the federal and state requirements and the requirements of the master plan
for the water distribution system of the City.
§ 151.49 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 30
(C) Other utilities. Installation of cable television, natural gas, telephone, and other utilities
not mentioned in this Section shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.
§ 151.50 DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
Storm sewer and/or other surface drainage facilities shall be installed for the proper drainage
of surface waters.
§ 151.51 SIDEWALKS.
Sidewalks, if required by the Council, shall be constructed in accordance with specifications
on file with the Public Works Director.
§ 151.52 ELECTRICAL SERVICE.
Electrical service for the subdivision shall be installed by the City as directed by the Director
of Utilities. Electrical service installation shall be in accordance with the City’s installation rules
and standards for electrical service.
§ 151.53 FINANCING.
The developer shall be required to pay for all or a portion of the above required
improvements on the following basis:
(A) Sanitary sewers. Benefit rates will be based on the total cost of constructing the sanitary
sewer necessary to serve the development site together with any area or district wide benefits for
prior construction for which the City may have paid. Any oversizing of sewers or depths greater
than that required to serve the site will be paid for by the City or will be assessed on an area
basis;
(B) Water mains. Benefit rates will be based on the total cost of constructing water mains to
serve the development site. In the case of residential developments, the benefit rate will be based
on the total cost of constructing a six-inch water main, including hydrant installation at normal
spacing, with the City paying the cost of gate valves and any pipe oversizing necessary to serve
additional areas beyond the proposed site;
(C) Storm drainage. Benefit rates will be based on the cost of constructing storm sewers
necessary to provide adequate drainage of the development site. City participation, if any, will be
considered on an individual basis;
31 Subdivisions § 151.66
(D) Streets. The costs of street improvements are to be paid by developer in accordance with
City policies existing at the time work is commenced; and
(E) Electrical service. The developer shall be required to pay for the construction of
electrical service in accordance with the City’s installation rules and standards for electric service.
§ 151.54 REVIEW AND INSPECTION.
The developer shall pay for all costs incurred by the City for subdivision review and
inspection. This includes preparation and review of plans and specifications by technical assistants
and costs incurred by the City Attorney, as well as other costs.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.65 BUILDING PERMIT.
No Building Permit shall be issued by any governing official for the construction of any
buildings, structures or improvement on any land henceforth subdivided until all requirements of
this Chapter have been fully complied with.
§ 151.66 VARIANCES.
(A) Criteria for granting Variances. The Council shall have the power to vary from the
requirements of this Chapter when supporting evidence indicates that:
(1) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographic conditions of
the land involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
(2) The conditions upon which the petition for a Variance are based are unique to the
parcel of land for which the Variance is sought and are not applicable, generally, to other land
with the same zoning classification;
(3) The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the
value or income potential of the parcel of land;
(4) The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by the provisions of this Chapter and has
not been created by any persons presently or formerly having an interest in the parcel of land;
151.66 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 32
(5) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to other land or improvements in the vicinity in which the parcel of land is located; and
(6) The proposed variance will not substantially increase congestion of the public
streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the vicinity.
(B) Conditions. Conditions may be imposed to protect the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the City to any new or amended Variance. The conditions shall be in addition to the
requirements specified in this Chapter.
(C) Procedure.
(1) Persons applying for a Variance shall fill out a variance application prepared by the
Zoning Administrator and submit it to the Zoning Administrator, together with a $50 fee. The
person shall also submit exhibits deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to evaluate the
application.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application for variance and exhibits to
the Planning Commission for public hearing.
(3) A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper of the City at least ten days prior to the day of hearing.
(4) A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten
days before the day of the hearing to property owners within 350 feet of the property to which the
variance relates. Notice shall be in writing, mailed by first class mail, to be effective on the date
of mailing. Failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this provision
has been made.
(5) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Variance.
(6) Persons requesting a Variance shall appear at the public hearing in order to answer
questions.
(7) The Planning Commission shall report its recommendation of approval, disapproval,
or conditional approval of the proposed variance to the Council.
(8) The Council shall take action on the application for variance within 60 days after
receipt of the application. The Council may extend the time limit before the end of the initial 60
day period by providing written notice of the extension to the application. The notification must
state the reasons for the extension and its anticipated length, which may not exceed 60 days unless
approved by the applicant. The Council may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve a
proposed Variance.
33 Subdivisions
(This page is intentionally blank)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
152.001 Intent and purpose
152.002 Interpretation and authority
152.003 Definitions
152.004 Zoning Districts Map
District Regulations
152.020 Flood Plain District (FP)
152.021 Agricultural District (AG)
152.022 Park and Recreation District (PR)
152.023 Residential generally
152.024 Suburban Residential District (R-1)
152.025 General Residential District (R-2)
152.026 High Density Residential District (R-3)
152.027 Multi-Family Residential District (R-4)
152.028 Performance standards for all residential districts
152.029 Nonresidential districts
152.030 Neighborhood Business District (C-1)
152.031 General Business District (C-2)
152.032 Central Business District (C-3)
152.033 Downtown Fringe District (C-4)
152.034 Light Industrial District (I-1)
152.035 General Industrial District (I-2)
152.036 Performance standards for commercial and industrial zoning districts
General Regulations
152.050 Dwelling units prohibited
152.051 Explosives
152.052 Home occupations
152.053 Solid fuel burning device
152.054 Crematories
152.055 Opting-out of the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593
152.056 Solar Energy Systems
34
35 Thief River Falls - Land Usage
Parking
152.065 Surface and drainage
152.066 Location
152.067 Additional provisions
152.068 Design and maintenance of off-street parking areas
152.069 Off-street parking requirements
152.070 Parking Assessment District (PAD)
Signs
152.085 Purpose
152.086 Permitted signs; generally
152.087 Excluded signs
152.088 Measurement of sign surface area
152.089 Calculation of allowable sign surface area
152.090 Sign permits
152.091 Prohibited signs
152.092 Temporary signs
152.093 Nonconforming signs
152.094 Conforming sign removal
152.095 Performance standards in zoning districts
152.096 Maintenance of signs
152.097 Dynamic display signs
Shoreland Management
152.110 Statutory authorization and policy
152.111 Jurisdiction; compliance
152.112 Administration
152.113 Shoreland classification system and land use districts
152.114 Zoning and water supply/sanitary provisions
Wetland Conservation
152.125 Purpose
152.126 Incorporation by reference
152.127 Scope
152.128 Procedures
152.129 High priority areas
152.130 Delegation
152.134 Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Administration and Enforcement
152.145 Enforcing officer
152.146 Zoning of annexed land
152.147 Zoning amendments
§ 152.001 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 36
152.148 Conditional use permits
152.149 Variances
152.150 Appeals
152.151 Site Plan
152.152 Nonconforming lots, structures, and uses
152.153 Sales, Garage, Rummage, or Yard
152.998 Violation
Appendix A: Lots
Appendix B: Yards
Appendix C: Parking Dimensions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
This Chapter is adopted for the purpose of:
(A) Protecting the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare;
(B) Protecting and preserving agricultural land;
(C) Promoting orderly development of the agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial,
recreational, and public areas;
(D) Conserving the natural, scenic beauty, and attractiveness of the City;
(E) Conserving and developing natural resources;
(F) Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City; and
(G) Minimizing environmental pollution.
§ 152.002 INTERPRETATION AND AUTHORITY.
(A) Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Chapter are either more or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by another Statute, City Code provision, rule or
regulation of the City or the State, the Statute, City Code provision, rule or regulation which
imposes the more restrictive condition, standard, or requirement shall prevail.
(B) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
37 Zoning Code § 152.003
(C) Except as herein provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, or altered and no structure shall be used or occupied for any purpose nor in any
manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
(D) This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal Planning Act,
M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.363, as amended.
§ 152.003 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) ACCESSORY APARTMENT. Room within a single-family dwelling used for
lodging purposes of one or two people without cooking facilities.
(2) ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building on the same lot with and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
(3) ACCESSORY USE. A use subordinate to and exclusively for a purpose incidental
to the principal use on the lot.
(4) AGRICULTURE. The use of land for the growing or production of field crops,
livestock, and livestock products for the production of income.
(5) AIRPORT (LANDING STRIP, HELIPORT, or AIRCRAFT STOP). Any
premises or buildings which are used or intended for use, for the landing, take-off, and support of
aircraft.
(6) ALLEY. A public right-of-way usually 20 feet or less in width which normally
affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.
(7) ANTENNA (BROADCASTING, RADIO, and TELEVISION). Towers exceeding
35 feet district height limitations.
(8) APARTMENT. A part of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms which
is designed for or used as a residence and is equipped with cooking facilities.
(9) AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE. A place for the general repair of motor
vehicles.
(10) AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (GAS STATION). A place where gasoline,
kerosene, or other motor fuel, lubrication, oil, or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for
sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles.
(11) BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partially underground having more
than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of adjoining ground.
§ 152.003 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 38
(12) BED AND BREAKFAST INN FACILITIES. An owner-occupied single-family
dwelling where lodging in up to four guest rooms and breakfast are provided to the traveling public
by the resident owner for compensation.
(13) BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or
by streets and the exterior boundary of the subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or
lake.
(14) BLUFF. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the
following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance for 50 feet
or more shall not be considered part of the bluff):
(a) Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
(b) The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the
waterbody;
(c) The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more
above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater; and
(d) The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
(15) BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and the land located within 20 feet from the top
of a bluff.
(16) BLUFF, TOE OF THE. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed,
a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to steeper slope above. If no break in the slope
is apparent, the toe of the bluff shall be the lowest point on a bluff that is the lower end of the lowest
50 foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.
(17) BLUFF, TOP OF THE. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed,
a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. If no break in slope is
apparent, the top of the bluff shall be the highest point on a bluff that is the upper end of the highest
50 foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.
(18) BOARDING HOUSE (ROOMING OR LODGING HOUSE). A building other
than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or
lodgings are provided for three or more persons but not to exceed 20 persons.
(19) BOATHOUSE. A building designed and used solely for the storage of boats or
boating equipment.
(20) BUFFER. The use of land, elevation, fences, or landscaping to screen or partially
screen a use or premises from another use or premises.
39 Zoning Code § 152.003
(21) BUILDING. Any structure which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property of any kind. When the structures are divided by party walls or common walls,
each portion of the structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
(22) BUILDING AREA. The area remaining on a lot after the minimum setbacks and
open space requirements have been met (See Appendix B).
(23) BUILDING HEIGHT; NONSHORELAND. The vertical distance to be measured
from grade level to the uppermost part of the building.
(24) BUILDING HEIGHT; SHORELAND. The vertical distance between the highest
adjoining ground level at the building or ten feet above the lowest ground level, whichever is lower,
and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
(25) BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at
the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
(26) BUILDING SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a building and
a lot line.
(27) BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment, or enterprise where merchandise is
exhibited or sold or where services are offered for compensation.
(28) CAR WASH. A building, or portion thereof, containing for hire facilities for
washing motor vehicles.
(29) CHURCH. A building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship.
(30) CLUB or LODGE. A nonprofit association of persons with the use of the premises
being restricted to members and their guests.
(31) COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The general plan for land use, housing, and
transportation, including the series of maps, reports, statement of goals, objectives, and criteria
adopted by the Council to designate long range orderly growth and development of the City.
(32) COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
(33) CONCEPT PLAN. A report in map and text form submitted depicting the location,
general purpose, general type of land use and traffic pattern, primary relationships between site
elements and the proposed development and surrounding development, proposed general schedule
of development, and information on the proposed developer.
§ 152.003 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 40
(34) CONDOMINIUM. Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of
those portions. REAL ESTATE is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common
elements are vested in the unit owners.
(35) COOPERATIVE. A multi-unit building operated for and owned by its occupants.
Individual occupants do not own their specific housing unit outright as in a condominium, but they
own shares in the COOPERATIVE.
(36) DAY CARE FACILITY. Any facility licensed by the State Department of Public
Welfare or its successor, public or private, which regularly provides one or more persons with care
or training on a regular basis for periods of less than 24 hours per day.
(37) DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform, with or without attached railings, seats,
trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use and at any point
extending more than 30 inches above ground.
(38) DENSITY RESIDENTIAL. A number expressing the relationship of the number
of dwellings to an acre of land.
(39) DISTRICT, ZONING. Sections of the City for which the regulations governing the
height, area, and use of buildings and premises are the same.
(40) DORMITORY. A building with rooms that provide sleeping accommodations for
four or more students attending school.
(41) DRIVE-IN or DRIVE-THROUGH. Any use where products or services are
provided to the customer under conditions where the customer does not have to leave the
automobile regardless of whether service is also provided within a building.
(42) DUPLEX, TRIPLEX, and QUAD. A dwelling structure on a single lot, having
two, three, and four units, respectively, being attached by common walls which are designed for or
used as residences and each unit is equipped with sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation
facilities.
(43) DURABLE MATERIAL. A material used to create a hard surface impervious to
water, dust free, and requiring minimal maintenance.
(44) DWELLING UNIT. A residential building or portion thereof intended for
occupancy by a single family but not including hotels, motels, or boarding houses.
(45) DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED. A dwelling unit which is joined to another at
one or more sides by a party wall, common wall or adjoining outer walls.
(46) EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of an area of land by the
public or other party for any specific purpose.
41 Zoning Code § 152.003
(47) ENERGY SYSTEM. An assembly consisting of an energy collector, storage
facility, and components for the distribution of energy.
(48) ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Underground or overhead transmission, distribution,
collection, supply or disposal systems for communication, electrical, gas, sewage, steam, telephone,
television, or water.
(49) EXTRACTIVE USE. The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand,
gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not regulated under M.S. §§
93.44 to 93.51.
(50) FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group
of not more than five persons not so related maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit.
(51) FEEDLOT. A lot or building, or combination of lots and buildings, intended for
the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals and specifically designed as a
confinement area in which manure may accumulate or where the concentration of animals is such
that a vegetative cover cannot be maintained within the enclosure.
(52) FLOOD PLAIN. The areas adjoining a body of water which have been or
hereafter may be designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as flood plain on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(53) FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a building. A
basement shall not be used in calculating floor area.
(54) FOREST LAND CONVERSION. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare
for a new land use other than re-establishment of a subsequent forest stand.
(55) GARAGE, PRIVATE. An attached or detached accessory building or accessory
portion of the principal building which is under 1,500 square feet or less in floor area and is
intended for and used to store private motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, and similar items of the
family or families resident upon the premises. The gross floor area is subject to further restriction.
(56) HEALTH CLUB. A facility which provides athletic activities such as tennis,
handball, racquetball, track, aerobics, basketball, exercise devices and such incidental services as
whirlpool, sauna, or massage service.
(57) HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful occupation or profession conducted within
the dwelling unit or accessory building by a resident thereof.
(58) HOTEL/MOTEL. A building which provides a common entrance and lodging for
compensation, with or without meals.
§ 152.003 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 42
(59) HOUSE, EARTH SHELTERED. A dwelling unit constructed so that more than
50% of the exterior surface area of the building, excluding garages and other accessory buildings, is
covered with earth and the Building Code standards are satisfied. Partially completed buildings
shall not be considered earth sheltered.
(60) INDUSTRY. A business which involves the assembly, production, processing, or
storage of materials, goods, or products.
(61) INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or
shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
(62) KENNELS. Any lot or premises where three or more dogs or cats are boarded for
compensation or where dogs or cats are bred on a commercial scale.
(63) LIVESTOCK. Animals kept or raised for commercial use or pleasure, excluding
household family pets.
(64) LOADING AREA. An area or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous
to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means
of access.
(65) LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land
survey, auditor’s plat, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by the
description and which is of sufficient size to meet zoning requirements.
(66) LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.
(67) LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot
line.
(68) LOT LINE. A boundary line of any lot, except where any portion of the lot extends
into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way.
(69) LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street. In the case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest dimension on a public street. If the
dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the FRONT LOT LINE shall be designated by the owner and
shown on the site plan.
(70) LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If
the REAR LOT LINE is less than ten feet in length or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the REAR
LOT LINE shall be a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance
from the front lot line.
(71) LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
(72) LOT TYPES. This term includes the following:
43 Zoning Code § 152.003
(a) CORNER LOT. A lot at the intersection of two street lines, which
intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. (See Appendix A);
(b) DOUBLE FRONTAGE or THROUGH LOT. A lot, other than a corner lot,
with frontage or more than one street other than an alley. (See Appendix A); and
(c) INTERIOR LOT. A lot, other than a corner lot, with only one frontage on a
street other than an alley. (See Appendix A).
(73) LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines measured along the building
line.
(74) MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more Sections,
which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length
or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein.
(75) MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which two or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or for
compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for
use as part of the equipment of the MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
(76) MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land
purchased for two or more manufactured homes.
(77) MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by
truck is assembled or stored for routing by truck.
(78) NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been
recorded in the office of the Pennington County Recorder prior to September 26, 1967 and which
does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks, or other dimensional standards of this
Chapter.
(79) NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure which does not comply with
floor area, lot requirements, or height regulations.
(80) NONCONFORMING USE. Any lawfully established use of a building or lot
which on September 26, 1967 did not comply with the use regulations of the zoning district in
which such building or lot is located.
(81) OPEN SPACE, COMMON. A parcel of land or an area of water within a planned
unit development designated as private open space for the use of lot owners within the planned unit
development.
§ 152.003 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 44
(82) ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters and
wetlands and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for
a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the
natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For reservoirs
and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the operation elevation of the normal
summer pool.
(83) PARKING SPACE. An area of such shape and dimensions and so prepared as to
be usable for the parking of motor vehicles and so located as to be accessible to a public street or
alley.
(84) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Criterion established to control potential effects
to the physical and social environment such as, but not limited to, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious
matter, vibration, fire, explosive hazard, glare, run-off, density, traffic flow or generated by or
inherent in uses of land or buildings.
(85) PLAN, SITE. A map drawn to scale depicting the development of a tract of land,
including but not limited to, the location and relationship of structures, streets, driveways, recreation
areas, parking areas, utilities, landscaping, and walkways as related to a proposed development.
(86) PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land containing not less than two
acres and which contains or will contain two or more principal buildings or uses, developed or to be
developed under unified ownership or control, the development of which is unique and of a
substantially different character than that of the surrounding areas.
(87) PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City.
(88) PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A nonaccessory building in which the primary use of
the lot on which it is located is conducted.
(89) PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in M.S. § 103G.005.
(90) RECREATION, PUBLIC. Sites owned and operated by a unit of government or
leased from a unit of government for private operation for the purpose of providing recreation.
(91) RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. Sites privately owned and operated for the
purpose of providing recreation with the intention of earning a profit.
(92) RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLES. This term includes the following:
(a) A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation;
(b) Any structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation;
(c) Any portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and
vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; or
45 Zoning Code § 152.003
(d) Any folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation
and vacation use.
(93) RECREATIONAL CAMPING AREA. Any area, whether privately or publicly
owned, used on a daily, nightly, weekly, or longer basis for the accommodation of five or more
tents or recreational camping vehicles.
(94) REGISTERED LAND SURVEY. A survey map of land designed to simplify a
metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract or tracts of a registered land survey
number.
(95) RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A use where the nature of
residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development is not service-oriented.
For example, residential apartments, manufactured home parks, timeshare condominiums,
townhouses, cooperatives, and full fee ownership residences would be considered as residential
planned unit developments. To qualify as a RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, a
development must contain at least five dwelling units or sites.
(96) RESTAURANT. An eating and drinking establishment which serves food to be
consumed while seated at tables, booths, or counters.
(97) RETIREMENT HOME. A retirement facility for the elderly who are generally in
good health and able to care for themselves. The facilities are characterized as having separate
dwelling units or sleeping rooms with central eating facilities. The facilities do not contain health
facilities for the care of occupants.
(98) SALVAGE YARD. A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including auto wrecking yards,
house wrecking yards, used material yards, but not including pawn shops or the placing of used cars
in operable condition.
(99) SCHOOL. A building used for the purpose of preschool, elementary, secondary, or
post secondary education which meets all the requirements of the laws of the state and not
providing residential accommodations.
(100) SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management
of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils
over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to
flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special protection.
(101) SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between the roof overhang of a
structure, sewage treatment system or other facility, and a lot line, an ordinary high water level, or a
top of a bluff.
(102) SETBACK, SHORELAND. The yard extending between any building line and the
ordinary high water level.
§ 152.003 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 46
(103) SETBACK, YARD. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the
lot line, disregarding steps and upgraded platforms. The yard setback area shall be unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure.
(104) SETBACK, YARD FRONT. The line extending between the front building line
and the front lot line (See Appendix B).
(105) SETBACK, YARD REAR. The yard extending between the rear building line and
the rear lot line (See Appendix B).
(106) SETBACK, YARD SIDE. The yard extending between the side building line and
the side lot line (See Appendix B).
(107) SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A septic tank and soil absorption system or
other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system.
(108) SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations and
force mains, and all other construction devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting
sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
(109) SHOPPING CENTER. A retail center, 40,000 square feet or larger, designed for
the purpose of retailing and/or providing services, including value retailers such as category killers,
discount department stores, off-price retailers, outlet stores, and warehouse clubs. Such a center
may be comprised of several stores under one roof or joined by common walls or sharing a common
parking lot.
(110) SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water level of a
public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the building setback.
(111) SHORELAND. Land located within 300 feet from a river, stream, or floodplain.
The limits of SHORELANDS may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by
topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved
by the Commissioner.
(112) SIDEWALL HEIGHT. The vertical dimension from the top of the finished floor
to the bottom of the finished ceiling, or bottom of rafter if the ceiling is unfinished, at the
intersection of the exterior wall, per story.
(113) SIGN. Any billboard, notice, poster, display, or other device visible to and
primarily intended to advertise, inform or attract attention and shall include any structure erected
primarily for use in connection with the display of any such device and all lighting or other
attachments used in connection therewith.
(114) SIGN CLASSIFICATIONS AND TYPES. This term includes the following:
(a) ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign which directs attention to an activity,
business, commodity, product, or service not necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the
premises where the sign is located;
47 Zoning Code § 152.003
(b) AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT SIGN. A sign displayed on any
agricultural-zoned property by the owner or operator thereof for the purpose of identifying the farm
or advertising the products grown thereon;
(c) ATTACHED SIGN. Any sign posted, painted, or constructed, attached to the
canopy, facade, marquee, porch, roof, or wall of any structure, provided the sign does not extend
any higher than one foot below the roof line;
(d) BUSINESS SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
entertainment, profession, product, or service sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is
located or to which it is attached;
(e) DIRECTIONAL SIGNS. A sign directing traffic on private property but
bearing no advertising matter;
(f) FLASHING SIGN. An illuminated sign on which such illumination is not
kept stationary or is not kept constant in intensity or color at all times, including electronic
readerboard signs;
(g) FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign standing on the ground. The signs may be
supported from the ground by one or more poles or posts or similar uprights with or without braces;
(h) HOME OCCUPATION SIGN. An attached wall sign permitted in
association with an occupation conducted on the premises in conjunction with a home occupation
permit;
(i) IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A permanent, on-site sign announcing the name
of a church, City, group housing project, nursing home, park, planned industrial center, public or
quasi-public areas, school, shopping center, or subdivision;
(j) ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign which has character, designs, figures, letters,
or outlines illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes, or reflective materials;
(k) MESSAGE BOARD SIGN. A nonflashing, nonmotion sign which allows
characters, figures, or letters displayed thereon to be changed, which changes shall not be made
more often than every ten seconds, and which directs attention to a commodity, entertainment,
product, or service offered upon the premises where the sign is located or to which it is attached or
which advertises any bona fide bazaar, carnival, fair, festival, horse show, or similar event when
conducted by a public agency or for the benefit of any civic or charitable cause; all subject to
Section 152.097;
(l) MOTION SIGN. A sign which moves, revolves, rotates, or simulates motion
by the use of flashing or intermittent lighting or reflective materials;
(m) NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign which existed prior to September 26,
1967 and does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter;
§ 152.003 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 48
(n) PARASITIC SIGN. A sign placed on another sign or placed on the
supporting structure of another sign that does not advertise a business, commodity, entertainment,
profession, product, or service in that location;
(o) PUBLIC SERVICE SIGN. A banner, pennant, or sign advertising only the
name, time, and place of any bona fide bazaar, carnival, fair, festival, horse show, or similar event
when conducted by a public agency or for the benefit of any civic or charitable cause, provided that
the sign shall not be displayed for more than 21 days in any ten-month period;
(p) PROJECTING SIGN. An attached sign which is mounted substantially
parallel with a wall or is mounted to and substantially parallel with a canopy, facade, marquee,
porch, or roof of any structure;
(q) REAL ESTATE SIGN. An on-premises sign for the purpose of advertising
the sale or lease or the completion of the sale or lease of real estate when erected or displayed on the
real estate so advertised;
(r) SANDWICH SIGN. A freestanding inverted V-type portable sign;
(s) SIGN STRUCTURE. The bracing, framework, supports, or uprights of any
structure exhibiting a sign;
(t) SUSPENDED SIGN. An attached sign which is suspended by brackets,
chains, hooks, or other means and which is mounted substantially perpendicular to the main
building structure;
(u) TEMPORARY SIGN. A nonpermanent sign affixed, erected, or maintained
on a premises for a limited period of time, including mobile signs which are designed for and
capable of being moved from one location to another and including banners and pennants; and
(v) TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN. A sign erected, either permanently or
temporarily, by a governmental unit for the purpose of directing or regulating vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
(w) Dynamic Display: Any sign, portion of a sign, or characteristics of a sign
that appears to have movement or that appears to change and which is caused to change by any
method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the
apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of
the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to
change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its
components. This also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, waving, flashing, blinking, or
animated display or structural element, and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights
manipulated through digital input, “digital ink”, incandescent bulbs, or any other method or
technology that allows a sign face, or any other device, to present a series of images or displays.
1. Dynamic Display Programming: The hardware, software, and all
necessary equipment and operations associated with the control and programming of a dynamic
display.
Amended Ordinance 81, 3rd Series (10/6/2015)
49 Zoning Code § 152.003
(115) SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF. The entire area within a single, continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of characters, illustrations, lettering, ornamentations, or other
figures, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the display or to differentiate
the sign from the background to which it is placed. Sign structure bearing no sign copy shall not be
included in the sign surface area. The sign surface area shall be computed using only one side of a
double-face or V-type sign structure.
(116) SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing structure or
other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places, is
listed in the State Register of Historic Sites or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls
under the provisions of M.S. § 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on
either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the
Minnesota State Archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted
cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.
(117) SOLAR ACCESS. The space between a solar energy collector and the sun which
must remain unobstructed in order to assure the reasonable operation of the solar energy system.
(118) SOLAR EASEMENT. A right, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction,
easement, covenant, or condition in any deed, will or other instrument executed for the purpose of
insuring adequate access to solar energy.
(119) SOLID FUEL BURNING DEVICE. A device located outside of the principal
building and designed for solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the interior of a
building.
(120) STEEP SLOPE. Lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over
horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
(121) STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above.
(122) STREET. A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property and shall include avenue, highway, or road.
(123) STREET TYPES. This term includes the following:
(a) STREET, ARTERIAL. A street which serves or is designed to serve heavy
flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between heavy traffic generating
areas;
(b) STREET, COLLECTOR. A street designed to distribute traffic between local
and arterial street systems;
(c) STREET, FRONTAGE. A street constructed along the main traveled lanes
of a trunk highway or other major street, or at a reasonable distance out from the limits of the trunk
highway or other major street, which street provides access to the trunk highway or other major
street from the properties that are adjacent to the trunk highway or other major street; and
(d) STREET, LOCAL. A street intended to serve primarily as an access to
§ 152.003 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 50
abutting properties.
(124) STREET PAVEMENT. The wearing or exposed bituminous or concrete surface of
the street used by vehicular traffic.
(125) STREET WIDTH. The width of the right-of-way or easement measured at right
angles to the centerline of the street.
(126) STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change that will alter the shape, enlarge, or
require the altering of load bearing walls within a building.
(127) STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location
on the ground, or is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including all
antennas, weather earth station, satellite dishes, towers or other shapes. Satellite dishes shall have
same setback requirements as accessory buildings.
(128) STRUCTURE; WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY. A small, aboveground
building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because
of the direct relationship to a surface water feature or nature of its use reasonably needs to be
located closer to public waters then the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and
facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, pumphouses, and detached decks.
(129) SUBDIVISION. The division of any tract of land into two or more lots.
(130) SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for
commercial purposes where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the
business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such
use.
(131) TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling attached by party or common walls with
other single family dwellings and oriented so that all exits open to the outside.
(132) USE. The purpose or activity for which land or structures are occupied, utilized, or
maintained.
(133) USE, CONDITIONAL. A land use as defined in this Chapter that would not be
appropriate generally but may be allowed with appropriate conditions upon a finding that certain
criteria as detailed in this Chapter exist.
(134) USE, PERMITTED. A use which conforms with the purposes, objectives,
requirements, regulations, and performance standards of a particular zoning district.
(135) USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or structures.
(136) VARIANCE. A modification of certain provisions of this Chapter.
(137) WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United States
Fish and Wildlife Services Circular No. 39 (1971 Edition).
51 Zoning Code § 152.020
(138) ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter.
(139) ZONING AMENDMENT. A change authorized by the Council in the boundaries of
a zoning district or of certain provisions of this Chapter.
§ 152.004 ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Section are set forth on
the Zoning Districts Map, which is incorporated as part of this Section.
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 152.020 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT (FP).
(A) Purpose.
(1) Protect areas that have potential flood hazard.
(2) Provide those areas prone to flooding the legal designation necessary to receive
national flood insurance.
(3) Provide protection to areas adjacent to designated flood plains.
(B) Authority, interpretation and requirements.
(1) Authority. The legislature of the state has, in M.S. Chapter 103F and M.S. § 462.351,
delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize
flood losses.
(2) Official flood plain maps. The official zoning districts map of the City shall delineate
the 100 year flood hazard areas. The flood insurance study for Pennington County, Minnesota and
Incorporated Areas, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated May 3, 1990
and the Flood Insurance Rate Map dated May 3, 1990 (annotated by the Letter of Map Revision
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Case No. 14-05-0815P, with an effective
date of September 18, 2014, including all attached maps, tables, and flood profiles) are incorporated
into this Section. The official zoning map shall be on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Notification. The Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources a copy of any application for proposed variances or zoning amendments
affecting the Flood Plain District sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at
least ten days notice of the hearing. A copy of all decisions granting variances or zoning
amendments within the Flood Plain District shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources within ten days of such action.
(4) Structures. Structures shall not be permitted within the Flood Plain District other than
for public facilities which public facilities must receive prior approval of appropriate state agencies.
§ 152.021 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 52
(C) Permitted uses.
(1) Agriculture: forestry, general farming, pasture, and truck farming.
(2) Recreation: archery courses, golf courses, picnic grounds, public and private parks,
and wildlife preserves.
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Signs accessory to permitted agricultural and recreation uses.
(2) Business signs for surface water-oriented commercial uses.
§ 152.021 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (AG).
(A) Purpose.
(1) Establish areas of the City to be retained and utilized for open space or agricultural
uses.
(2) Prevent scattered nonfarm uses from improper or premature development.
(3) Secure economy in government expenditures for public utilities and services.
(4) Preserve and enhance the natural environment as land becomes urbanized.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Agricultural: forestry, forest management, general cultivation farming, pasture, and
truck farming.
(2) Other: home occupation, sensitive resource management, and single-family dwellings.
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) Commercial agricultural.
(2) Commercial recreation.
(3) Extractive uses to include only gravel, sand, and topsoil.
(4) Feedlots.
(5) Kennels and veterinary clinics.
(6) Public: cemeteries, essential services, parks, and historic sites.
(7) Seasonal produce stands and commercial nurseries.
53 Zoning Code § 152.021
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Boat docks and water-oriented accessory structures.
(2) Fences.
(3) Garages.
(4) Horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted on the site.
(5) Satellite dishes.
(6) Signs.
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
One Family Dwellings
Accessory Buildings
All Other Uses
Lot area, minimum
1 acre
1 acre
Lot frontage, minimum at
front yard setback
150 feet
150 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
35 feet
5 feet
35 feet
Side yard setback
Interior
Corner
15 feet
25 feet
15 feet
25 feet
15 feet
25 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered
Unsewered
Sewage treatment
system
50 feet
100 feet
30 feet
30 feet
50 feet
100 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply
except as follows:
(a) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall be not less than:
1. Boat docks: 0 feet.
2. Boathouse: 10 feet.
§ 152.021 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 54
3. Detached decks: 10 feet.
4. Fences: 0 feet.
5. Gazebos: 10 feet.
6. Pumphouses: 5 feet.
7. Recreational equipment: 10 feet.
8. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
9. Screen houses: 10 feet.
10. Signs: 5 feet.
(b) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks different
from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the adjacent structures.
If there is one adjacent structure, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average of the
adjacent structure and the required setback. In no case shall the front yard setback be less than 15
feet; and
(c) A water-oriented accessory structure may be located on the lot at less setback in
conformance with this Chapter.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.022 PARK AND RECREATION DISTRICT (PR.)
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this District is to:
(1) Provide the City with open space and natural areas for recreation;
(2) Provide for aesthetic quality within the City; and
(3) Provide areas for a public service to the City.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Flood prevention structures: dams, dikes, and spillways.
(2) Recreational: bandstands, game and sport areas, nature study areas, pavilions, picnic
shelters, recreational equipment, swimming pools, and trails.
(3) Sale of alcohol and food, auctions and sales, conventions, and trade shows at locations
authorized by the Council.
55 Zoning Code § 152.022
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) Boat and canoe rentals.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Fairgrounds.
(4) Temporary food stands.
(5) Publicly-owned marinas.
(6) Publicly-owned recreational camping areas.
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Bathhouses.
(2) Fences.
(3) Parking lots complimentary to the principal use.
(4) Signs.
(5) Temporary buildings for public use.
(6) Watercraft access ramps, boat docks, and water-oriented accessory structures.
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
Permitted and Conditional Uses
Accessory Uses
Lot area, minimum square feet
5,000
Lot frontage, minimum at front yard
setback
N.A.
Lot frontage for shoreland, minimum
at front yard setback
100 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
20 feet
20 feet
§ 152.022 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 56
Permitted and Conditional Uses
Accessory Uses
Side yard setback
Interior
Corner
15 feet
20 feet
15 feet
20 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered
Unsewered
Sewage treatment system
50 feet
100 feet
75 feet
50 feet
100 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply
except as follows:
(a) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall be not less than:
1. Ball diamonds: 50 feet.
2. Bathhouses: 10 feet.
3. Boat docks: 0 feet.
4. Boathouses: 10 feet.
5. Fences: 0 feet.
6. Playground equipment: 50 feet.
7. Signs: 5 feet.
8. Tennis courts: 50 feet.
9. Water craft access ramps: 0 feet.
(b) A water-oriented accessory structure may be located on the lot at less setback in
conformance with this Chapter.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.023 RESIDENTIAL GENERALLY.
The general purposes of the Residential Districts are the following:
57 Zoning Code § 152.024
(A) To preserve and enhance the existing living qualities of residential neighborhoods;
(B) To insure future high-quality neighborhoods;
(C) To increase convenience and comfort by providing usable open space and recreational
areas;
(D) To prevent alterations or additions to structures and uses which would damage the
character or living desirability of existing residential neighborhoods;
(E) To protect residential neighborhoods from abnormal traffic volumes; and
(F) To encourage a variety of dwelling types, subdivision design, and population densities
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 152.024 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this District is as follows:
(1) Low-density development as an extension of existing residential area; and,
(2) Allow low-density development of two to four dwelling units per acre.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Cultural and educational: nursery schools and day care facilities of up to 12 persons.
(2) Recreational: publicly-owned recreational uses and historic sites.
(3) Residential: single-family dwellings and home occupations.
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) Boat and canoe rental and temporary food stands on publicly-owned lots.
(2) Cultural and educational: colleges, day care facilities for 13 or more persons,
dormitories, libraries, public and private schools, and public museums.
(3) Health and social: hospitals, nursing homes, and retirement homes.
(4) Neighborhood businesses: permitted uses of a C-1 District, provided they are arranged
and designed to be a functional and harmonious part of a residential neighborhood and are located
on identified arterial or collector streets and are located at the corners of blocks, and bed and
breakfast inns.
§ 152.024 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 58
(5) Public: essential services, fire stations, and police stations.
(6) Recreational: accessory buildings, athletic fields, golf courses, and neighborhood
pools.
(7) Religious: cemeteries, churches, convents, monasteries, masques, nunneries,
seminaries, synagogues and temples.
(8) Residential: one accessory apartment per dwelling unit, two-family dwellings on
corner lots, and planned unit developments.
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Boat docks and water-oriented accessory structures.
(2) Fences.
(3) Parking lots complimentary to the principal use.
(4) Private garages.
(5) Recreational equipment.
(6) Satellite dishes.
(7) Signs.
(8) Storage buildings, complimentary to the principal use and not exceeding 150 square
feet.
59 Zoning Code § 152.024
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
One Family
Two Family
Accessory
Building
All Other
Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
9,000
12,000
14,000
Lot frontage, minimum at
front yard setback
75 feet
75 feet
75 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland,
minimum at front yard
setback line
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
75 feet
100 feet
115 feet
150 feet
75 feet
100 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
35 feet
35 feet
5 feet
35 feet
Side yard setback
Interior
Corner
10 feet
15 feet
10 feet
15 feet
10 feet Attached
5 feet Detached
15 feet
15 feet
20 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment
system
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
30 feet
30 feet
50 feet
100 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply
except as follows:
(a) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks different
from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the adjacent structures.
If there is one adjacent structure, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average of the
adjacent structure and the required setback. In no case shall the front yard setback be less than 15;
(b) Buffers and essential services shall have no setback requirements and parking lots
shall have no setback requirements except in shoreland;
(c) Additional yard requirements for signs are set forth in this Chapter.
§ 152.025 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 60
(d) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall be not less than:
1. Boat docks: 0 feet.
2. Boathouses: 10 feet.
3. Detached decks: 10 feet.
4. Fences: 0 feet.
5. Gazebos: 10 feet.
6. Parking lots: 30 feet.
7. Pumphouses: 5 feet.
8. Recreational equipment: 10 feet.
9. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
10. Screen houses: 10 feet.
11. Signs: 5 feet.
12. Storage buildings: 30 feet.
(e) A water-oriented accessory structure may be located on the lot at less setback in
conformance with this Chapter.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set
forth in this Chapter.
§ 152.025 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this District is to allow medium density development of five to
eight dwelling units per acre with a broad range of housing types.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) General. All permitted uses of the R-1 District.
(2) Residential. Accessory apartments and two-family dwellings.
61 Zoning Code § 152.025
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) General. All conditional uses of the R-1 District.
(2) Residential. Multi-family dwellings, including townhouses and condominiums,
provided that there are no more than four units in a row or in a single building and provided that
they are developed on an identified arterial or collector street.
(D) Accessory uses. All accessory uses of the R-1 District.
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
One
Family
Two
Family
Multi
Family
Accessory
Buildings
All
Other
Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
7,000
12,000
18,000
14,000
Lot frontage, minimum at front
yard setback
50 feet
75 feet
75 feet
75 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland,
minimum at front yard setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lot
75 feet
100 feet
115 feet
150 feet
175 feet
225 feet
75 feet
100 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
5 feet
35 feet
Side yard setback
Interior
Corner
7 feet
10 feet
10 feet
15 feet
10 feet
15 foot
7 feet Attached
5 feet Detached
10 feet
15 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment system
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
30 feet
30 feet
50 feet
100 feet
75 feet
(Ord. No. 107, 3rd Series – adopted 05/1/18)
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks different
from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the adjacent structures.
§ 152.025 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 62
If there is one adjacent structure, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average of the
adjacent structure and the required setback. In no case shall the front yard setback be less than 15
feet;
(b) Where a detached accessory building, with a sidewall height of 10 feet or less, is
located entirely within the rear one-half of a lot, the interior side yard setback for that accessory
building may be three feet;
(c) Buffers and essential services shall have no setback requirements, and parking lots
shall have no setback requirements except in shoreland;
(d) Additional yard requirements for signs are set forth in this Chapter;
(e) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall not be less than:
1. Boat docks: 0 feet.
2. Boathouses: 10 feet.
3. Detached decks: 10 feet.
4. Fences: 0 feet.
5. Gazebos: 10 feet.
6. Parking lots: 30 feet.
7. Pumphouses: 5 feet.
8. Recreational equipment: 10 feet.
9. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
10. Screen houses: 10 feet.
11. Signs: 5 feet.
12. Storage buildings: 30 feet.
(f) A water-oriented accessory structure may be located on the lot at less setback in
conformance with this Chapter; and
(g) The lot area shall not be less than 6,000 square feet for each dwelling unit in a
multiple family structure having four dwelling units or less and an additional 750 square feet for
each dwelling unit over four dwelling units.
63 Zoning Code § 152.026
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.026 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this District is to allow higher density residential areas with
smaller dwelling units and a broad range of housing types.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) General. All permitted uses of the R-2 District.
(2) Manufactured Home Parks.
(3) Manufactured Home Subdivisions.
(C) Conditional uses. All conditional uses of the R-2 District.
(D) Accessory uses. All accessory uses of the R-2 District.
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
One
Family
Two
Family
Multi
Family
Accessory
Buildings
All Other
Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
5,000
12,000
18,000
14,000
Lot frontage, minimum at
front yard setback
40 feet
75 feet
75 feet
75 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland,
minimum at front yard
setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
75 feet
100 feet
115 feet
150 feet
175 feet
225 feet
75 feet
100 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
25 feet
35 feet
35 feet
5 feet
35 feet
Side yard setback
Interior
Corner
7 feet
10 feet
10 feet
15 feet
10 feet
15 feet
7 feet Attached
3 feet Detached
10 feet
10 feet
15 feet
§ 152.026 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 64
One
Family
Two
Family
Multi
Family
Accessory
Buildings
All Other
Uses
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment
system
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
30 feet
30 feet
75 feet
50 feet
100 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks different
from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the adjacent structures.
If there is one adjacent structure, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average of the
adjacent structure and the required setback. In no case shall the front yard setback be less than 15;
(b) Buffers and essential services shall have no setback requirements, and parking lots
shall have no setback requirements except in shoreland;
(c) Additional yard requirements for signs are in this Chapter;
(d) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall not be less than:
1. Boat docks: 0 feet.
2. Boathouses: 10 feet.
3. Detached decks: 10 feet.
4. Fences: 0 feet.
5. Gazebos: 10 feet.
6. Parking lots: 30 feet.
7. Pumphouses: 5 feet.
8. Recreational equipment: 10 feet.
9. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
10. Screen houses: 10 feet.
65 Zoning Code § 152.027
11. Signs: 5 feet.
12. Storage buildings: 30 feet.
(e) A water-oriented accessory structure may be located on the lot at less setback in
conformance with this Chapter; and,
(f) Lot area: not less than 6,000 square feet for each dwelling unit in a multiplefamily
structure having four dwelling units or less and an additional 750 square feet for each
dwelling unit over four dwelling units.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.027 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-4).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this District is to allow areas of multi-family use at higher
densities of nine to 19 dwelling units per acre for both permanent and transient families. It is
appropriate only in areas served by adequate public utilities, immediate accessibility to arterial or
collector streets, and public services.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Health. Convalescent homes, nursing homes, orphanages and retirement homes.
(2) Residential. Apartments, condominiums, cooperatives, duplexes and townhouses.
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) General. All conditional uses of the R-2 District.
(2) Residential. Single-family and two-family dwellings.
(D) Accessory uses. All accessory uses of the R-2 District.
§ 152.027 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 66
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
One
Family
Two
Family
Multi
Family
Accessory
Buildings
All Other
Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
7,000
12,000
18,000
14,000
Lot frontage, minimum at
front yard setback
50 feet
75 feet
75 feet
75 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland,
minimum at front yard
setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
75 feet
100 feet
115 feet
150 feet
175 feet
225 feet
75 feet
100 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
5 feet
35 feet
Side yard setback
Interior
Corner
7 feet
10 feet
10 feet
15 feet
10 feet
15 feet
7 feet Attached
3 feet Detached
10 feet Attached
10 feet Detached
10 feet
15 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment
system
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
30 feet
30 feet
50 feet
100 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) Lot area: Not less than 3,000 square feet for each of the first four dwelling units
and 2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit thereafter in a multi-family structure. This is subject to
the minimum 18,000 square feet requirement set forth in paragraph (1) General Yard Requirements
above. All lots with multi-family dwelling units shall have a maximum impervious coverage of 40%
or up to 60% with a Conditional Use Permit.
(b) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks different
from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the adjacent structures.
If there is one adjacent structure, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average of the
adjacent structure and the required setback. In no case shall the front yard setback be less than 15;
Ordinance 83, 3rd Series (10/19/15)
67 Zoning Code § 152.028
(c) Buffers and essential services shall have no setback requirements, and parking lots
shall have no setback requirements except in shoreland;
(d) Signs: additional yard requirements for signs are in this Chapter;
(e) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall not be less than:
1. Boat docks: 0 feet.
2. Boathouses: 10 feet.
3. Detached decks: 10 feet.
4. Fences: 0 feet.
5. Gazebos: 10 feet.
6. Parking lots: 30 feet.
7. Pumphouses: 5 feet.
8. Recreational equipment: 10 feet.
9. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
10. Screen houses: 10 feet.
11. Signs: 5 feet.
12. Storage buildings: 30 feet.
(e) A water-oriented accessory structure may be located on the lot at less setback in
conformance with this Chapter.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.028 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ALL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
(A) Structure height. Structures within shoreland shall be limited to 30 feet in height. Structures
outside of shoreland shall be limited to 25 feet in height at the lowest point of egress for persons on
the top floor of the structure and in no case, more than 47 feet in height at the structure peak.
§ 152.028 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 68
A Conditional Use Permit may be requested to exceed the above height limitations provided
that:
(1) The Fire Chief and Building Official have approved;
(2) The height of the structure will not destroy the scenic view, will not shut off light or
air to surrounding properties, or otherwise be detrimental to the public; and
(3) Structures over the above 30 foot or 25 foot height limitations shall provide an
additional 5 feet of side yard for each 5 feet in height over the above 30 foot or 25 foot height
limitations, respectively.
(B) Minimum Dwelling Size.
(1) Single-family and two-family dwellings located in the R-1, R-2, and R-4 Districts
shall provide not less than 950 square feet of gross floor area per dwelling unit, shall be not less
than 20 feet wide at the narrowest point, and shall be affixed to a permanent foundation as defined
in the State Building Code. In addition to the requirements of the State Building Code, the
permanent foundation, whether masonry, concrete, or treated wood, shall be constructed as
continuous walls, which walls shall not have any openings except as required by the State Building
Code or for windows.
(2) Single-family and two-family dwellings located in R-3 District shall provide 720
square feet of gross floor area per dwelling unit and shall be 12 feet wide at the narrowest point.
(3) Multi-family dwellings having four or more units shall provide a minimum of 330
square feet of gross floor area per living unit.
(C) Accessory buildings.
(1) Maximum floor area. The combined maximum floor area of all accessory buildings
shall not exceed 1,500 square feet in R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts.
(2) Maximum side wall height. Maximum side wall height shall be 11 feet in height. It
shall be allowable to have one accessory building of up to a maximum of 775 square feet in floor
area which may have side walls of up to 12 feet in height. There shall be no home occupation or
commercial business in any accessory building with side walls in excess of 11 feet in height.
(D) Multiple-family standards (apartments, condominiums, cooperatives, and townhouses).
(1) Shall be located on arterial or collector streets or in areas specifically designed for
high density development.
(2) May be placed as buffers in appropriate zoning districts between less dense residential
uses and nonresidential uses.
Amended Ordinance 68, 3rd Series (9/16/2014) & Ordinance 78, 3rd Series (7/7/2015) & Ordinance
100, 3rd Series (7/5/17)
69 Zoning Code § 152.028
(3) Each multiple-family development containing four or more dwelling units shall have a
recreation area. The size and equipment provided shall be determined with the assistance of the
Parks and Recreation Division.
(4) Sidewalks shall be provided from parking areas, trash collection areas, and recreation
areas to a principal building.
(5) A multiple-family development shall have a front yard setback on any abutting street.
(E) Supplemental lot regulations.
(1) A single-family dwelling may be erected on a lot in the R-1 District having less than
the minimum required area and width, provided the lot existed by virtue of a recorded plat or deed
existing prior to September 26, 1967. In no event shall a single-family dwelling be erected on a lot
less than 7,000 square feet in area or less than 50 feet in width measured at front building line.
(2) A single-family dwelling may be erected on a lot in the R-2 District having less than
the minimum required area and width, provided the lot existed by virtue of a recorded plat or deed
existing prior to September 26, 1967. In no event shall a single-family dwelling be erected on a lot
less than 5,000 square feet in area or less than 40 feet in width measured at front building line.
(F) Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate a nonresidential use or sign shall be arranged so as to
deflect light away from adjoining residential property.
(G) Planned unit development (residential). The placing of residential dwelling units into
compact groupings may be permitted in any Residential District following the completion and
approval of a Preliminary and Final Plat for a planned unit development.
(1) Common open space may be preserved as open recreation space for recreational
facilities or for preservation of natural or scenic resources.
(2) Except for height limitations for the district in which the development is proposed,
altered dimensional standards may be allowed as exceptions to this Chapter for a planned unit
development, provided that:
(a) The planned unit development shall not increase the overall density as regulated
by the requirements of the district in which it is located;
(b) A minimum of 40% of the site shall be kept in its natural state or utilized for
recreation; and,
(c) Planned unit developments shall be two continuous acres or more in area.
§ 152.028 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 70
(H) Bed and breakfast inns.
(1) Prior to applying for a Conditional Use Permit for a bed and breakfast inn, an
applicant shall cause the Fire Marshal to inspect the premises and the Fire Marshal’s report shall
accompany the application for a Conditional Use Permit.
(2) The location and operation of the bed and breakfast inn shall comply with the
following:
(a) The inn shall be licensed for a specific number of guest rooms not to exceed four
in number;
(b) The inn shall be a owner occupied single-family dwelling having a minimum of
2,000 square feet of residential floor area. The owner must reside on the premises and be the
operator of the inn;
(c) No cooking facilities shall be permitted in any guest room and meals provided by
the operator shall be served only to registered overnight guests, subject to Subsection (i) below;
(d) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the parking requirements
of this Chapter; provided, that in no event shall there be less than one off-street parking space per
guest room, subject to Subsection (i) below;
(e) There shall be a minimum distance of 350 feet between each inn as measured
between the nearest lot lines;
(f) An on-premises sign advertising an inn located in any zoning district shall be
limited to three square feet in area, shall be located on the building, shall be consistent with the
character of the building, and shall be limited to identifying not more than the name and address of
the inn. There shall be only one such sign per inn which may not be illuminated;
(g) All inns shall comply with applicable State Health and Building Code
requirements;
(h) No other commercial enterprise, including a home occupation, shall be operated in
the inn, subject to Subsection (i) below; and,
(i) An inn shall be allowed to serve meals to other than registered overnight guests
upon the following conditions:
1. The Conditional Use Permit shall specifically allow this use and set
parameters consistent with this Subsection;
2. Meals are served only to those who have advanced reservations;
3. No more than ten persons may be seated for meals at any one time; and,
71 Zoning Code § 152.030
4. One parking stall for every two dining seats shall be provided on site, in
addition to the parking required by Subsection (d) above.
§ 152.029 NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
The purpose of the Nonresidential Districts is as follows:
(A) Group compatible commercial and industrial land uses;
(B) Promote quality commercial and industrial development that will minimize land use,
traffic, and environmental conflicts;
(C) Encourage the development of commercial and industrial sites that produce an attractive
image through architecture and landscaping; and,
(D) Encourage commercial and industrial developers to provide for the capital improvements
necessary to service the development.
§ 152.030 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-1).
(A) Purpose. The Neighborhood Business District is intended for business establishments for
use by persons residing in adjacent residential areas. Uses within the district shall not attract
community-wide consumer traffic.
(B) Permitted uses. Retail: barber or beauty shops, grocery stores without gas pumps. All uses
shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) Retail: barber or beauty shops, grocery stores with or without gasoline sales, and
office buildings. All uses shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in gross floor area.
Ordinance No. 19, 3rd Series
(2) Signs: freestanding business signs.
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings.
(2) Essential services.
(3) Fences.
(4) Parking lots.
§ 152.031 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 72
(5) Satellite dishes.
(6) Signs.
(E) Yard requirements.
Permitted and Conditional Uses
Accessory Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
9,000
Lot frontage, minimum at front yard
setback
75 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
20 feet
5 feet
Side yard setback, interior
10 feet
10 feet
Side yard setback, corner
15 feet
15 feet
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.031 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2).
(A) Purpose. The General Business District is intended for business establishments that offer a
wide variety of goods and services to customers from a large trade area.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Commercial service: buses, cabs, clinics, commercial trade or business schools, dry
cleaning, financial institutions, hospitals, medical laboratories, laundries, mortuaries, motels, hotels,
radio and television studios, and train stations.
(2) Entertainment: private clubs, restaurants, and theaters.
(3) Personal services: barbers, beauticians, and shoe repair.
(4) Professional services: accountants, attorneys, dentists, doctors, engineers, financial
consultants, insurance, realtors, and travel bureaus.
(5) Public services: armories, fire stations, government offices, libraries, parks, police
stations, public buildings, and publicly-owned parking lots.
73 Zoning Code § 152.031
(6) Wholesale and retail: apparel, appliances, video, automobile sales, automobile
service station and repair garage, bakeries, beverage, book, candy, carpet, hardware, jewelry,
lumber yards, motels, music, office supply, nursery stock, plumbing and heating wholesale
showrooms, and variety stores.
(7) Religious: churches, convents, monasteries, mosques, nunneries, seminaries,
synagogues, temples, and all other religious institutions or places of religious assembly.
(8) Storage Facilities.
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) Retail and wholesale: agricultural implement dealerships, beer and liquor
establishments (on and off sale), lumber yards, manufactured home sales lots, pet and animal shops
or clinics, shopping centers, and taxidermists.
(2) Commercial services: delivery and express businesses.
(3) Publicly-owned recreational camping areas and privately-owned recreational
camping areas.
(4) Surface water-oriented commercial uses.
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings and structures, including surface water-oriented structures
accessory to commercial uses.
(2) Buffers.
(3) Essential services.
(4) Fences.
(5) Loading areas.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Satellite dishes.
(8) Signs.
Ordinance 85, 3rd Series (1/5/2016)
§ 152.031 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 74
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
Permitted and Conditional Uses
Accessory Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
7,000
Lot frontage, minimum at front yard
setback
50 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland, minimum at
front yard setback
100 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
20 feet
5 feet
Side yard setback, interior
15 feet
15 feet
Side yard setback, corner
15 feet
15 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment system
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) Principal buildings in excess of 3,000 square feet of gross floor area shall have a
minimum lot area equal to 2.5 times the gross floor area of the principal buildings;
(b) General business uses adjacent to a frontage street shall have a front yard setback
of no less than 25 feet beginning at the interior edge of the frontage street;
(c) Buffers and essential services shall have no setback requirements, and parking lots
shall have no setback requirements except in shoreland;
(d) Signs: additional yard requirements for signs are set forth in this Chapter; and,
(e) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall not be less than:
1. Bait and fish houses: 10 feet.
2. Boat docks: 0 feet.
75 Zoning Code § 152.032
3. Detached decks: 10 feet.
4. Fences: 0 feet.
5. Gazebos and screen houses: 10 feet.
6. Recreational equipment: 10 feet.
7. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
8. Signs: 5 feet.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.032 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-3).
(A) Purpose. The Central Business District recognizes the existing downtown development
and the need for future expansion, rehabilitation, and redevelopment.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Commercial services: buses, cabs, clinics, commercial trade or business schools, dry
cleaning, financial institutions, hospitals, medical laboratories, laundries, mortuaries, motels, hotels,
radio and television studios, and train stations.
(2) Entertainment: private clubs, restaurants, and theaters.
(3) Personal services: barbers, beauticians, and shoe repair.
(4) Professional services: accountants, attorneys, dentists, doctors, engineers, financial
consultants, insurance, realtors, and travel bureaus.
(5) Public services: armories, fire stations, government offices, libraries, parks, police
stations, public buildings, and publicly-owned parking lots.
(6) Retail: apparel, appliance, video, automobile parts, bakeries, beverage, book, candy,
carpet, department, drugs, fabric, flower, furniture, grocery, hardware, jewelry, music, office
supply, and variety stores.
(7) Religious: churches, convents, monasteries, mosques, nunneries, seminaries,
synagogues, temples, and all other religious institutions or places of religious assembly.
§ 152.032 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 76
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) Educational: day care centers, nursery schools, and public and private schools.
(2) Residential: multi-family dwellings of at least three stories and not exceeding 60
feet in height nor less than four units per structure and apartments over commercial units.
(3) Retail: pet stores, excluding kennels.
(4) Services: automobile sales, automobile service station and repair garage, on/off
sale liquor establishments, printing, publishing, and wholesale outlets.
(5) Shopping centers.
(6) Surface water-oriented commercial uses.
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings and structures, including surface water-oriented structures
accessory to commercial uses.
(2) Buffers.
(3) Essential services.
(4) Fences.
(5) Loading areas.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Satellite dishes.
(8) Signs.
77 Zoning Code § 152.032
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
Permitted and Conditional Uses
Accessory Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
3,500
Lot frontage, minimum at front yard
setback
25 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland, minimum at
front yard setback
25 feet
Front yard setback
0 feet
20 feet
Rear yard setback
20 feet
20 feet
Side yard setback, interior and corner
0 feet
0 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment system
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) Multi-family units.
1. Lot area. Not less than 6,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit in
a multiple-family structure having four dwelling units or less and an additional 750 square feet for
each dwelling unit over four dwelling units, except this shall not apply to apartments over
commercial units.
2. Recreational area. Each multiple-family development containing four or
more dwelling units shall have a recreation area. The size and equipment provided shall be
determined with the assistance of the Parks and Recreation Division. This shall not apply to
apartments over commercial units.
(b) Buffers. Buffers and essential services shall have no setback requirements, and
parking lots shall have no setback requirements except in shoreland;
(c) Signs. Additional yard requirements for signs are set forth in this Chapter; and,
(d) Setbacks. Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall not be
less than:
§ 152.032 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 78
1. Bait and fish houses: 10 feet.
2. Boat docks: 0 feet.
3. Detached decks: 10 feet.
4. Fences: 0 feet.
5. Gazebos and screen houses: 10 feet.
6. Recreational equipment: 10 feet.
7. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
8. Signs: 5 feet.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.033 DOWNTOWN FRINGE DISTRICT (C-4).
(A) Purpose. The Downtown Fringe District is intended to establish a transition area between
the C-3 District and adjacent Residential Districts.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) General. All permitted uses of the C-3 District with commercial buildings not to
exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(2) Residential. Condominiums, cooperatives, duplexes, single-family dwellings,
townhouses, and multi-family dwellings not to exceed 35 feet in height.
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) All permitted uses of the C-3 District with commercial buildings not to exceed 5,000
square feet in gross floor area.
(2) Churches and philanthropic institutions.
(3) Educational: daycare centers, nursery schools, and public and private schools.
(4) Residential: multi-family dwellings not to exceed 60 feet in height, nor less than four
units per structure and apartments over commercial units.
79 Zoning Code § 152.033
(5) Services: automobile service stations and repair garages, printing, and wholesale
outlets.
(D) Accessory uses. All accessory uses permitted in the R-2 District and C-3 District.
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
One-
Family
Two-
Family
Multi-
Family
Permitted and
Conditional
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
7,000
12,000
18,000
7,000
Lot frontage, min. at front yard
setback
50 feet
75 feet
75 feet
50 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland, min.
at front yard setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
75 feet
100 feet
115 feet
150 feet
175 feet
225 feet
50 feet
100 feet
Front yard setback
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
Rear yard setback
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
20 feet
Side yard
Interior
Corner
7 feet
10 feet
10 feet
15 feet
10 feet
15 feet
7 feet
15 feet
5 feet
15 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment system
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
50 feet
100 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) The rear yard setback for private garages shall not be less than ten feet from the
rear lot line;
(b) Buffers and essential services shall have no setback requirements, and parking lots
shall have no setback requirements except in shoreland;
§ 152.033 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 80
(c) Multi-family:
1. Lot area. Not less than 6,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit in a
multiple-family structure having four dwelling units or less and an additional 750 square feet for
each dwelling unit over four dwelling units, except this shall not apply to apartments over
commercial units;
2. Recreational area. Each multiple-family development containing four or more
dwelling units shall have a recreation area. The size and equipment provided shall be determined
with the assistance of the Parks and Recreation Division. This shall not apply to apartments over
commercial units;
(d) Signs: additional yard requirements for signs are set forth in this Chapter; and,
(e) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall not be less than:
1. Bait and fish houses: 10 feet.
2. Boat docks: 0 feet.
3. Detached decks: 10 feet.
4. Fences: 0 feet.
5. Gazebos and screen houses: 10 feet.
6. Parking lots: 30 feet.
7. Pumphouses: 5 feet.
8. Recreational equipment: 10 feet.
9. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
10. Signs: 5 feet.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.034 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1).
(A) Purpose. The Light Industrial District is intended to permit uses that are free from
objectionable influence. The uses are limited to wholesaling, light manufacturing, and related uses
which can be carried on in an unobtrusive manner and which would not be considered detrimental
to an adjacent lower intensity district or to shoreland. Uses within this district shall be conducted
wholly
81 Zoning Code § 152.034
within buildings, except storage, which must be fully screened in a manner acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Light manufacture: fabrication and assembly of books, cameras and photographic
equipment, confectionary supplies, electronic equipment and supplies, footwear, luggage, medical
equipment and supplies, office furniture and supplies, sports equipment, and telephone/telegraph
equipment and supplies.
(2) Wholesaling: warehousing and wholesale business facilities.
(C) Conditional Uses.
(1) Engineering offices requiring storage for larger equipment.
(2) Motor freight terminals.
(3) Towers.
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings and structures.
(2) Buffers.
(3) Essential services.
(4) Fences.
(5) Loading areas.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Satellite dishes.
(8) Signs.
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
Permitted and Conditional Uses
Accessory Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
20,000
Lot frontage, minimum at front yard
setback
100 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland, minimum at
front yard setback
150 feet
§ 152.034 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 82
Permitted and Conditional Uses
Accessory Uses
Front yard setback
75 feet
75 feet
Rear yard setback
if abutting Residential or Agricultural
Districts
35 feet
75 feet
35 feet
75 feet
Side yard setback, interior
if abutting Residential or Agricultural
Districts
25 feet
75 feet
25 feet
75 feet
Side yard setback, corner
25 feet
25 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment system
75 feet
150 feet
75 feet
150 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) Buffers and essential services shall have no setback requirements, and parking lots
shall have no setback requirements except in shoreland;
(b) Signs: additional yard requirements for signs are set forth in this Chapter; and,
(c) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall not be less than:
1. Fences: 0 feet.
2. Parking lots: 30 feet.
3. Pumphouses: 5 feet.
4. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
5. Signs: 50 feet.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
Amended: Ordinance 21, 3rd Series
Amended: Ordinance 22, 3rd Series
83 Zoning Code § 152.035
§ 152.035 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2).
(A) Purpose. The General Industrial District is intended to provide for the establishment of a
heavy industrial and manufacturing district which because of the nature of the product or character
of activity requires isolation from residential, agricultural, or commercial uses.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) General: all fabricating, manufacturing, production, processing, or warehousing of
materials, goods, and products, except as provided in Division (C)(1) of this Section.
(2) Wholesale uses.
(3) Shoreland: no permitted uses in shoreland.
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) Uses which are objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise,
such as salvage yards, distillation operations, fertilizer manufacture, and food processing.
(2) Shoreland: no conditional uses in shoreland.
(3) Crematories.
(2) Towers.
(3) Engineering Offices requiring storage for larger equipment.
(D) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings and structures.
(2) Buffers.
(3) Essential services.
(4) Fences.
(5) Loading areas.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Satellite dishes.
(8) Signs.
§ 152.035 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 84
(E) Yard requirements.
(1) General yard requirements.
Permitted and Conditional Uses
Accessory Uses
Lot area, minimum sq. ft.
20,000
Lot frontage, minimum at front yard
setback
150 feet
Lot frontage for shoreland, minimum at
front yard setback
N.A.
Front yard setback
75 feet
75 feet
Rear yard setback
if abutting Residential or Agricultural
Districts
35 feet
75 feet
35 feet
75 feet
Side yard setback, interior
if abutting Residential or Agricultural
Districts
25 feet
75 feet
25 feet
75 feet
Side yard setback, corner
25 feet
25 feet
Shoreland setback
Sewered lots
Unsewered lots
Sewage treatment system
N.A.
N.A.
75 feet
150 feet
75 feet
(2) Nongeneral yard requirements. The above general yard requirements shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) Accessory buildings shall not be permitted in shoreland;
(b) Signs: additional yard requirements for signs are set forth in this Chapter; and,
(c) Setbacks for the following uses located within the shoreland shall not be less than:
1. Fences: 0 feet.
2. Parking lots: 30 feet.
3. Pumphouses: 5 feet.
85 Zoning Code § 152.036
4. Satellite dishes: 30 feet.
5. Signs: 50 feet.
(F) Additional restrictions. Performance standards and supplemental restrictions are set forth
in this Chapter.
§ 152.036 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
ZONING DISTRICTS.
(A) Buffers. All uses, excluding single and two-family dwellings where a structure or parking
lot is located adjacent to a Residential or Agricultural District shall provide a buffer strip 35 feet in
width.
(1) The buffer strip shall be landscaped and screened.
(2) The buffer strip shall be landscaped with vegetation.
(3) The buffer strip shall be screened with a sight-obscuring fence, six feet in height or
vegetation of sufficient type, density, and height so as to provide year-round screening acceptable to
the Zoning Administrator and City Forester.
(4) All landscaping and screening shall be maintained.
(5) Accessory buildings, parking lots, and storage shall not be permitted in the buffer
strip.
(6) All outdoor commercial or industrial storage shall be screened by an eight-foot, sightobscuring
fence from adjacent Residential or Agricultural Districts.
(B) Drive-in business.
(1) The entire area of any drive-in business shall have a drainage system approved by the
Public Works Director.
(2) The entire area, other than that occupied by structures, landscaped area, or the
required buffers, shall have a durable surface.
(3) Each drive-in business serving food shall place a trash receptacle at all entrances and
exits as well as one receptacle in the parking lot per 20 parking stalls.
(4) A drive-in business shall front on designated arterial or collector streets.
(5) A solid fence not less than eight feet in height shall be constructed around all drive-in
theaters.
§ 152.036 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 86
(C) Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area or sign shall be arranged so
as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential property.
(D) Shopping centers.
(1) Shopping centers shall be located adjacent to designated arterial or collector streets.
(2) An overall plan shall be submitted and approved, including architecture of all
structures, parking, driveways, lighting, sidewalks, including sidewalks connecting adjacent
neighborhoods, landscaping, and screening. This shall include Preliminary Plat of all lots, including
those for peripheral developments. Final Plat shall be approved before certificate of occupancy is
issued.
(3) Time limits for construction and completion shall be in accordance with this Chapter.
(4) The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(5) To avoid the undesirable monotony, heat, and wind associated with large parking lots,
landscaped islands shall be provided in parking lots containing more than 25 parking stalls. The
total area of islands shall be at least two percent of the parking lot area, except that no island shall
be less than the size of a standard parking stall. Islands shall be surrounded by concrete curb.
Islands shall be planted with a minimum two and one-half inch diameter tree at the rate of one tree
per 150 square feet of island area.
(6) Driving area and parking area on the front and sides of structures shall not be any
closer than ten feet to the structure, except for approved loading areas. The ten feet adjacent to
structures is intended to be used for pedestrian traffic.
(7) Required drainage, landscaping, screening, parking, islands, and driveways shall be in
place prior to issuance of an Occupancy Permit.
(E) Off-street loading areas.
(1) Any industrial structure which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or
merchandise by trucks shall provide an off-street loading area.
(2) Loading areas shall be located adjacent to the building or use being served.
(3) Loading areas shall not be located within 35 feet of a Residential District or the
intersection of two streets.
(4) Loading areas located in Industrial or General Business Districts shall be not less than
12 feet in width, 50 feet in length and 14 feet in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space.
(5) Loading areas shall be improved with a durable material.
87 Zoning Code § 152.036
(6) Any place designated as a loading area shall not be used for the storage of goods,
inoperable vehicles, or be included as part of the space requirements necessary to meet the off-street
parking area.
(F) Storage facilities in General Business Districts (C-2).
(1) All storage shall be conducted within buildings.
(2) Maximum height of sidewalls of any building used for storage shall be 16 feet.
(3) No hazardous materials as defined by federal law or state law shall be allowed on the
premises.
(Ord. No. 110, 3rd Series – adopted 06/5/18)
(G) Storage facilities in Central Business District (C-3).
(1) All storage shall be conducted within buildings.
(2) Storage shall only be for goods used or sold within the principal building on the
property.
Amended: Ordinance 21, 3rd Series
Amended: Ordinance 22, 3rd Series
Amended: Ordinance 85, 3rd Series (1/5/2016)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 152.050 DWELLING UNITS PROHIBITED.
No accessory building, basement, garage, recreational camping vehicle, or tent shall be used as
a dwelling. The basement portion of a finished home or apartment may be used for normal eating
and sleeping purposes, provided it is properly damp proofed, has suitable fire protection and exits,
and is otherwise approved by the Building Official.
§ 152.051 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 88
§ 152.051 EXPLOSIVES.
No activities involving the storage, utilization, or manufacturing of materials, goods, or
products which could detonate by decomposition shall be permitted except as specifically licensed
by the City.
§ 152.052 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
(A) Purpose. It shall be the purpose of this Section to provide homeowners and residential
renters with the opportunity to conduct a small scale commercial use within a home or accessory
building they occupy.
(B) General provisions.
(1) Permitted use. Single-family dwellings, apartments, and private residential garages
may be used for a home occupation. The use of a single-family dwelling, apartment, or private
residential garage for a home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the residential structure.
(2) Area requirements. The area to be used for the home occupation shall not exceed
one-third of the main floor area of a dwelling unit or apartment and shall not exceed one-half of the
main floor area of a private residential garage.
(3) Employees. Only members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in
the home occupation.
(4) Structural changes. Exterior changes to a structure to accommodate or promote a
home occupation are not permitted.
(5) Entrances and exits. The home occupation shall use existing entrances and exits.
(6) Lighting and advertising. There shall be only one nonilluminated wall sign with a
surface area not to exceed three square feet.
(7) Parking. On-street parking shall be limited to the property boundaries.
(8) Outside storage. There shall be no outside storage.
(9) Performance characteristics. Home occupations shall not adversely affect the
residential character of the dwelling or neighborhood by the emission of smoke, noise, odor, water,
dust, gases, refuse, heat, light, vibration, excess traffic, or electrical interference.
89 Zoning Code § 152.053
(C) Home Occupation Permit.
(1) Permit required. A Home Occupation Permit shall be obtained prior to starting a
home occupation.
(2) Application. Application for a Home Occupation Permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator on an application provided by the Zoning Administrator. The permit may be issued
by the Zoning Administrator upon payment of required fee and completion of other requirements.
(3) Permit fee. The fee for a home occupation permit shall be established by the City
Council by resolution and changed from time to time.
(D) Review and termination.
(1) Home Occupation Permits shall be reviewed annually to insure compliance with the
permit.
(2) A home occupation shall be terminated when either:
(a) The use has been discontinued for a period exceeding 60 consecutive days;
(b) When the Council finds violations of the conditions imposed by this Section; or
(c) When the Council finds the home occupation has become a danger to the public
health, safety, morals, or general welfare.
§ 152.053 SOLID FUEL BURNING DEVICE.
(A) Location. Any solid fuel burning device located outside of the principal building shall be
subject to the same setback requirements as the principal building.
(B) Number. Only one solid fuel burning device shall be allowed per residential structure. A
commercial unit located within a commercially zoned district shall be allowed one solid burning
device per 10,000 square feet of main floor area. An industrial unit located within an industrially
zoned district shall be allowed one solid fuel burning device per 10,000 square feet of main floor
area.
(C) Fuel. Only nontreated wood and wood products or products approved by the State for
burning in solid fuel burning devices shall be burned in a solid fuel burning device. All combustible
material for use in solid fuel burning devices shall be in a dry and burnable condition and safely
stored so as not to create a fire hazard or habitat for vermin.
(D) Chimney height and requirements. All solid fuel burning devices shall have a minimum
chimney height of 18 feet. All chimneys shall be constructed in compliance with the State Building
Code as adopted and as hereafter amended.
§ 152.054 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 90
§ 152.054 CREMATORIES.
(A) Location. Crematories shall only be permitted in the General Industrial District (I-2) as a
conditional use.
(B) Proximity to Residential Districts. Buildings housing crematories must be located at least
300 feet from any residential district.
(C) Licensure. The operator of a crematory shall be licensed by the State of Minnesota.
(Ordinance No. 17, 3rd Series – adopted May 24, 2005)
§ 152.055. OPTING-OUT OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF MINNESOTA STATUTES,
SECTION 462.3593. Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593,
subdivision 9, the City of Thief River Falls opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. §462.3593,
which defines and regulates Temporary Family Healthcare Dwellings.
(Ordinance No. 94, 3rd Series – adopted August 16, 2016)
§ 152.056 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
(A) Purpose. It shall be the purpose of this Section to permit, as an accessory use, solar energy
systems, while protecting the health, safety and welfare of city residents and the property interests of
adjacent and surrounding land uses through appropriate zoning and land use controls.
(B) Definitions.
(1) Building-integrated solar energy system. A solar energy system that is directly
integrated into the building by replacing typical building materials.
(2) Interconnection. When a customer-owned solar energy system is connected to or has
access to the electric grid.
(3) Ground-mounted solar energy systems. A solar energy system that is installed directly
onto the ground by means of brackets or poles.
(4) Roof-mounted solar energy systems. A solar energy system where the panels are
mounted to a house or other building.
(5) Solar energy system. A set of devices whose primary purpose is to provide for the
collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, electricity generation or
water heating.
(6) Solar thermal system. A system that includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that
heats or preheats water for building heating systems or other hot water needs of the building.
91 Zoning Code § 152.056
(C) Permitted accessory use. Solar energy systems are allowable as an accessory use in all
residential districts and as a conditional use in all other zoning districts, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Height. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not project beyond the peak
elevation of a pitched roof and shall not project more than 10 feet above the surface of a flat roof to which
they are attached. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 20 feet in height or the height of
the principal structure, whichever is less.
(2) Location. Ground-mounted solar energy systems must be located in the rear yard only.
(3) Setbacks. Ground-mounted solar energy systems, at minimum design tilt, setback
distance from property lines shall be equivalent to the setback requirements of the underlying district or as
otherwise needed so as not to impair sight distance for safe access to the property or other traffic or
properties in the vicinity. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with all building setbacks in the
applicable zoning district and shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the building on which the
system is mounted.
(4) Coverage. A roof-mounted solar energy systems surface shall not exceed the greater of
one-half the footprint of the principal structure or 600 square feet, whichever is greater. Solar energy
systems must have a 5 foot clearance around all edges (including the roof peak line), at minimum design tilt,
to facilitate emergency responder access.
(5) Feeder Lines. All power exterior electrical or other service lines must be buried below
the surface of the ground.
(6) Exemption. Building integrated solar energy systems are exempt for the requirements
of this section and shall be regulated as any other building element.
(7) Standards. Reflection angles from collector surfaces shall be oriented away from
neighboring windows. Where necessary, screening may be required to address glare.
(8) Abandonment. Any solar energy system that ceases to produce energy on a continuous
basis for 6 months will be considered abandoned, unless the property owner provides substantial evidence to
the Community Services Director of the intent to maintain and reinstate the operation of that solar energy
system within an acceptable designated time period. Upon abandonment of a solar energy system, the
property owner must remove all components of the solar energy system and restore the real property to its
condition prior to development and installation of the solar energy system. If the property owner does not
remove the abandoned solar energy system within 180 days of receiving written notice from the zoning
administrator, the City may remove the solar energy system, sell any removed materials and initiate judicial
proceedings or take any other steps legally authorized against the responsible parties to recover the costs
required to remove the solar energy system and restore the site to a non-hazardous condition. All end of life
disposal of solar products must comply with the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and any
state policies governing solar product waste. If an applicant has received a permit, but has not completed
construction of the solar energy system within 18 months from the date of issuance of the permit, the system
shall be deemed abandoned.
§ 152.056 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 92
(9) Restoration. Upon abandonment, the property owner must ensure the site is restored to
a useful, non-hazardous condition in a timely manner, including, but not limited to the following:
(a) Removal of aboveground and below ground equipment, structures and
foundations.
(b) Restoration of the surface grade and soil after removal of solar energy
equipment.
(c) Re-vegetation of restored soil areas with native seeds mixes, excluding any
invasive species.
(10) Design Plan. Any permit submittal shall include a site or design plan indicating the
adequacy, location, arrangement, size, design and general site compatibility of the proposed solar energy
system.
(D) Safety.
(1) Compliance with building code. All solar energy systems shall comply with all local
and state building codes.
(2) Compliance with electrical code. All solar energy systems shall comply with the
National Electrical Code.
(3) Compliance with state plumbing code. All solar energy systems shall comply with the
Minnesota State Plumbing Code requirements.
(4) Certifications. Solar energy system components shall be certified by Underwriters
Laboratories Inc. and the Solar Rating and Certification Corporation. The city reserves the right to deny a
building permit for proposed solar energy systems deemed to have inadequate certification.
(5) Batteries. When solar storage batteries are included as part of a solar energy system,
they must be placed in a secure container or enclosure meeting the requirements of the Minnesota State
Building Code.
(E) Approval.
(1) Permits. The erection, alteration, improvement, reconstruction, and movement of all
solar energy systems shall require a building permit from the city. Installer must be NABCEP Certified. The
City Council shall set the solar energy system permit fee by resolution.
(2) Utility Notification. All solar energy systems that will interconnect with the electric
grid shall have an agreement with the local utility prior to the issuance of a building permit. Any connection
with a local utility must be inspected by the local utility prior to use.
(3) Aviation. If the solar energy system is over ½ acre in size and located within 5 nautical
miles of an airport, or is located within the airport zoning district, airport or FAA notification shall be
provided and approval obtained.
(Ordinance No. 96, 3rd Series – adopted October 4, 2016)
93 Zoning Code § 152.065
PARKING
§ 152.065 SURFACE AND DRAINING.
Off-street parking areas shall be improved with a durable material. Parking areas shall be
graded and drained to dispose of all surface water without damage to adjoining property. These
requirements also apply to open sales lots.
§ 152.066 LOCATION.
Parking spaces shall be located as follows:
(A) Parking areas for single, two and multi-family dwellings shall be adjacent to the principal
use;
(B) Parking areas for commercial and industrial uses shall be within 300 feet of the principal
building; and,
(C) There shall be no off-street parking area within any street right-of-way.
§ 152.067 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Each parking stall shall, at a minimum, have 162 square feet, shall be nine feet in width
and shall be 18 feet in length. Parking area shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements set forth in
Appendix C which is made a part of this Section.
(B) Handicap parking stalls shall meet state requirements in effect at the time of construction
of the stall(s).
(C) Parking areas shall not be utilized for storage of goods.
(D) Where a commercial use establishes a reciprocating parking agreement with a commercial
or industrial use that is within 300 feet, only one-third of the required parking need be provided on
site. However, the parking area as a whole shall be equal to the requirements for each use.
(E) No motor vehicle over one ton capacity bearing a commercial license and no commercially
licensed trailer shall be parked or stored in a Residential District or a public street except when
loading, unloading, or rendering a service. Recreation vehicles and pickups are not restricted by the
terms of this Section.
(F) Any area designated as a parking area to meet off-street parking requirements shall not be
converted to another use or be used by another unless another eligible parking area is obtained to
meet off-street parking requirements.
§ 152.068 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 94
§ 152.068 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.
(A) Off-street parking areas shall be designed, laid out, and maintained as set forth in
Appendix C.
(B) The minimum curb cut for driveways at the right-of-way line shall be 16 feet.
(C) It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use
or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner the parking area, driveways, landscaping, and
screening.
(D) In order to be counted as a parking stall, the parking stall shall have direct accesss to a
driving lane.
§ 152.069 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Single-family. Two stalls per dwelling unit and one stall per accessory apartment, subject
to specific uses set forth in Divisions (J) through (T) of this Section.
(B) Duplex. Two stalls per dwelling unit, subject to specific uses set forth in Divisions (J)
through (T) of this Section.
(C) Townhouses and condominiums. Two stalls per dwelling unit, subject to specific uses set
forth in Divisions (J) through (T) of this Section.
(D) Multi-family. Two stalls per dwelling unit, subject to specific uses set forth in Divisions
(J) through (T) of this Section. A garage stall shall equal one half of a parking stall in determining
the number of parking stalls available.
(E) Neighborhood Business District. One stall per 200 square feet of sales floor area, plus one
stall per employee on maximum shift, subject to specific uses set forth in Divisions (J) through (T)
of this Section.
(F) General Business District. One stall per 400 square feet of sales floor area, plus one stall
per employee on maximum shift, subject to specific uses set forth in Divisions (J) through (T) of
this Section.
(G) Central Business District. One stall per 1,000 square feet of sales floor area, plus one stall
per employee on maximum shift, subject to specific uses set forth in Divisions (J) through (T) of
this Section.
(H) Downtown Fringe District. One stall per 200 square feet of sales floor area, plus one stall
per employee on maximum shift, subject to specific uses set forth in Divisions (J) through (T) of
this Section.
(I) Industrial District. One stall per two employees on maximum shift and one stall per
commercial vehicle, subject to specific uses set forth in Divisions (J) through (T) of this Section.
95 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.069
(J) Bar. One stall per three seats based on the design capacity of the establishment.
(K) Cafes, restaurants, and clubs. One stall per 30 square feet of dining area and one stall per
two employees on maximum shift.
(L) Theaters. For the first 100 stalls, one stall per three fixed seats, after the first 100 stalls,
one stall per six fixed seats.
(M) Professional offices. One stall per 400 square feet of gross floor area, and one stall per two
employees.
(N) Motels and hotels. One stall per rental unit and five stalls.
(O) Home occupation. One stall for every 300 square feet of home occupation area.
(P) Schools.
(1) College and high school. Three stalls per classroom and one stall per employee.
(2) Junior high and elementary. One stall per employee.
(Q) Federal, State, City and County buildings. Ten stalls and one stall per two employees.
(R) Elderly housing. One stall per three dwelling units.
(S) Hospitals, rest homes, and nursing homes. Two stalls per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
(T) Churches, auditoriums, and mortuaries. One stall per six seats.
(Ord. No. 11, 3rd Series – adopted 08/24/04)
(Ord. No. 60, 3rd Series – adopted 7/23/13)
§ 152.070 PARKING ASSESSMENT DISTRICT (PAD).
(A) In the Central Business District and the Downtown Fringe District, off-street parking
requirements may be satisfied if the commercial use is included within a PAD and has been
assessed pursuant to that PAD. Should the commercial use change, after the establishment and
assessment of the PAD requiring an increase in off-street parking requirements, the commercial use
shall be required to meet the additional off-street parking requirements or be assessed pursuant to
the PAD assessment formula for the additional off-street parking requirements.
(B) Should a participant within a PAD have received credit for providing a certain number of
off-street parking stalls, and should those parking stalls later be converted to another use or become
unavailable for use by that participant, that participant, or the participant’s successors or assigns,
shall reimburse the City for the credit received in the PAD for those parking stalls that become
unavailable for use. This shall not apply where parking stalls are lost due to establishment of a City
utility easement. Any reimbursement received by the City shall be held for those uses allowed
pursuant to M.S. § 459.14.
§ 152.085 Zoning Code 96
SIGNS
§ 152.085 PURPOSE.
(A) Purpose.
(1) The sign regulations contained herein are intended to control the use of publiclyvisible
displays or graphics in order to:
(a) Equitably distribute the privilege of using the public environs to communicate
information;
(b) Safeguard the public use and nature of the streets and sidewalks; and
(c) Enhance the visual environment of the City.
(2) As these or any regulations can only establish the mechanical limits of signage and
not enforce a level of visual quality in sign design, anyone planning a sign is strongly encouraged to
consider:
(a) The character of the proposed sign, not only in and of itself but also in terms of
the effects such a sign will have upon the character of the surrounding area;
(b) The way in which the sign will be read and whether its character, configuration,
location, and size are appropriate to its intended audience or whether a more appropriate sign could
better serve its intended purpose and, at the same time, be less visually disruptive; and
(c) The character of the sign structure and whether that structure could be made an
integral part of the sign rather than a separate and frequently distracting element.
§ 152.086 PERMITTED SIGNS; GENERALLY.
Signs are a permitted accessory use where allowed and where in compliance with:
(A) The general provisions of this Chapter and all amendments thereto;
(B) The performance standards of this Subchapter for the zoning districts in which the signs
are located; and
(C) All applicable provisions of the Building Code of the City, as adopted, and all amendments
thereto.
97 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.087
§ 152.087 EXCLUDED SIGNS.
The following shall be deemed to be excluded from the definition of "sign" as it applies to this
Subchapter:
(A) Signs on the inside of windows and doors, provided they are not flashing signs;
(B) Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic signs or similar regulatory
devices, legal devices, or warnings at railroad crossings;
(C) Publicly-owned memorial tablets or signs;
(D) Signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order rule or regulation, provided
that they do not exceed 48 square feet in sign surface area;
(E) Signs displayed for the direction or convenience of the public, including signs which
identify restrooms, location of public telephones, or public pedestrian entrances. The total sign
surface area shall not exceed six square feet per sign on any premises and shall not contain any
advertising or the name of the occupant or use;
(F) Signs, provided that they do not exceed 48 square feet in sign surface area, relating to
active construction projects;
(G) Rummage or yard sale signs, provided that no person shall attach the signs to street name
posts, traffic control signs posts, trees, or utility poles in or along any street right-of-way within the
City and that no person shall attach the sign to any building, fence or wall, or other property of
another person without having first obtained the consent of the owner of the property. The
maximum time limit for display of the signs is five days in any 30 day period. The signs shall not
exceed three square feet in sign surface area;
(H) Gasoline price signs, provided they are attached to sign structure for other permitted signs
or to pump island canopies and provided the total sign surface area of all such signs is equal to or
less than the following for the applicable zoning district.
Zoning District Total Maximum Sign Surface Area in Square Feet
C-1 Neighborhood Business District 6
C-2 General Business District 40
C-3 Central Business District 20
C-4 Downtown Fringe District 12
§ 152.087 Zoning Code 98
(I) Message board signs, provided they are attached to sign structure for other permitted
freestanding signs and provided the total sign surface area of such a sign is equal to or less than the
following for the applicable zoning district.
Zoning District Total Maximum Sign Surface Area in Square Feet
PR Park and Recreation District 40
C-2 General Business District 40
C-3 Central Business District 30
C-4 Downtown Fringe District 24
I-1 Light Industrial District 40
I-2 General Industrial District 40
(1) Message board signs may not be erected to circumvent the intent of this Subchapter or
the maximum sizes permitted for business and identification signs and may be used to advertise or
direct attention only to:
(a) A commodity, entertainment, product, or service sold or offered upon the
premises where the sign is located or to which it is attached; or
(b) Any bona fide bazaar, carnival, fair, festival, horse show, or similar event when
conducted by a public agency or for the benefit of any civic or charitable cause;
(2) Only one message board sign shall be permitted in accordance with this Division (I)
for a business, lot, or shopping center; or
(3) Businesses which elect to erect a message board sign as an excluded sign, in
accordance with this Division (I), shall be prohibited from displaying temporary mobile signs, in
accordance with § 152.092.
(J) Political campaign signs of any size may be posted from August 1 in a state general
election year until ten days following the state general election. In nonstate general election years,
political campaign signs may be posted from August 1 in an election year until ten days following
the election. Every campaign sign shall contain the name and address of persons responsible for the
sign and those persons shall be responsible for its removal. If the signs are not removed within ten
days following the election, the City shall have the right to remove and destroy the signs and assess
a fee of $1 per sign to the responsible persons.
(K) Static signs and banners adorning fences located in permitted outdoor recreational
facilities, provided that they are placed with the intent to be primarily viewed internal to the play
field area and are not placed so as to orient a direct commercial message toward an adjacent public
road right-of-way.
(Ord. No.118, 3rd Series – adopted 01/02/2019)
99 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.088
§ 152.088 MEASUREMENT OF SIGN SURFACE AREA.
Sign surface area shall be measured as follows:
(A) Attached, projecting, and suspended signs.
(1) The area of an attached sign where the sign consists of letters, numerals, or symbols
painted on or affixed to a wall shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the message delineated by the letters, numerals, or symbols.
(2) The area of an attached, projecting, or suspended sign where the letters, numerals, or
symbols are on a sign surface which is affixed or hung to a structure shall be the total area of the
affixed or hung surfaces.
(B) Freestanding signs. The area of a freestanding sign shall be the sum total of the areas of
all surfaces, excluding sign structures, unless the structures bear sign copy or are internally
illuminated, visible from the public right-of-way or other area from which the sign is intended to be
viewed. Only one display face, the largest, shall be measured in computing total sign area where the
sign faces are arranged to be viewed one at a time.
§ 152.089 CALCULATION OF ALLOWABLE SIGN SURFACE AREA.
(A) Calculation to determine the allowable sign surface area for buildings on interior lots shall
be based on the gross silhouette area of the front building wall as viewed from the front lot line.
(B) Calculation to determine the allowable sign surface area for buildings on corner lots or on
interior lots with a sidewall abutting a parking lot, which parking lot has a minimum frontage of 50
feet, shall be based on the gross silhouette area of the front building wall as viewed from the front
lot line. On corner lots, the front building wall shall be either:
(1) The building wall fronting on the street providing major access;
(2) The building wall on which the main structure entrance is located; or,
(3) In cases where the front building wall cannot be determined by either method, the
Zoning Administrator shall designate the front building wall.
(C) Calculation to determine the allowable sign surface area for buildings which provide a
secondary public entrance into the rear of the building and which rear entrance provides access to a
public alley, parking lot, or street on the rear of the building shall be based on the gross silhouette
area of the rear building wall as viewed from the rear lot line.
§ 152.089 Zoning Code 100
(D) A building which has more than two separately owned and operated businesses conducted
within its perimeter shall be allowed one sign for each such business. The total permitted sign
surface area for the building shall be increased by 20 square feet for each separately owned and
operated business in excess of two. The total permitted sign surface area for buildings with more
than one separately owned and operated business shall be calculated in accordance with Divisions
(A) through (C) of this Section and in accordance with § 152.095.
§ 152.090 SIGN PERMITS.
(A) Permit required. A Sign Permit shall be obtained prior to altering, erecting, or placing or
relocating any sign within the City.
(B) Application. Application for a Sign Permit shall be made to the Building Official on an
application provided by the Building Official. The permit may be issued by the Building Official
upon payment of the required fee and completion of other requirements.
(C) Permit fee. The fee for a Sign Permit shall be established by the City Council by resolution
and changed from time to time.
(D) Exemptions. A Sign Permit is not required for the following:
(1) Excluded signs as specified in § 152.087;
(2) Direction and real estate signs. Real estate signs must be removed within 14 days after
sale or rental of real estate;
(3) Home occupation signs or signs approved as part of a Building Permit or a
Conditional Use Permit for which payment of other fees are required;
(4) Identification and public service signs with a sign surface area of not more than 24
square feet;
(5) Nonconforming signs in place prior to the effective date of this Subchapter which may
be maintained or parts of the copy changed, provided that the maintenance or change of parts of the
copy does not alter the sign surface area, height, or number of items of information displayed,
subject to § 152.093; and
(6) Every sign which requires a permit to be erected or placed after the effective date of
this Subchapter shall have visibly displayed thereon an adhesive strip issued with the sign permit
showing the sign permit number and the date of the issuance of the permit.
101 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.091
§ 152.091 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
The following signs shall not be allowed:
(A) A sign which copies or imitates or in anyway approximates an official highway or traffic
control sign or carries the words "STOP" or "DANGER" or any sign which obscures a sign
displayed by public authority for the purpose of giving traffic instruction or direction or other public
information;
(C) A sign which obstructs any window or door opening used as a means of egress, free
passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof, or a sign which interferes with an opening
required for legal ventilation;
(D) A sign in a public right-of-way;
(E) A sign or illumination that causes any direct glare into or upon any building other than the
building to which the sign may be accessory;
(F) Motion signs, “A-frames,” balloons, string lights, strip lighting outlining structures, and
signs attached or mounted on abandoned, inoperative, or unlicensed vehicles;
(G) Suspended or projecting signs which swing or can be moved, rocked, or swayed by wind
or other physical means;
(H) Projecting signs which extend more than 18 inches from the building structure to which it
is mounted;
(I) Parasitic signs;
(J) Roof signs; and
(K) Pennants and streamers, except as provided in § 152.092(D).
§ 152.092 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
Regardless of the status or conformity of all other on-premise signs in zoning districts where
permitted, one temporary sign shall be allowed, provided:
(A) The sign surface area is less than 33 square feet and the sign is in compliance with
§ 152.095;
(B) The sign is displayed no more than 20 consecutive days with a minimum interval of 20
days between displays;
§ 152.092 Zoning Code 103
(C) Businesses which elect to erect a message board sign as an excluded sign, in accordance
with §152.087, shall be prohibited from displaying temporary mobile signs; and
(D) Pennants and streamers may be displayed no more than 60 consecutive days with a
minimum interval of 20 days between displays.
§ 152.093 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
(A) Except as specifically provided in this Chapter, any nonconforming sign lawfully existing
on the effective date of this Subchapter may be continued at the size and in the manner existing
upon such date. A nonconforming sign shall not be:
(1) Changed to another nonconforming sign;
(2) Structurally altered except to comply with the provisions of this Chapter;
(3) Expanded;
(4) Re-established after 60 days of non-use; and
(5) Re-established after damage of more than 50% of the sign’s replacement cost.
(B) Within 365 days of vacating the premises, the tenant or, in tenant’s absence, the owner,
shall remove all nonconforming signs and sign structure.
§ 152.094 CONFORMING SIGN REMOVAL.
All conforming signs and sign structures not used by a tenant or owner shall be removed by the
owner of the premises after 365 days of nonuse.
§ 152.095 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS IN ZONING DISTRICTS.
(A) Flood Plain (FP), Agriculture District (AG), and Park and Recreation District (PR). The
following shall apply in Flood Plain, Agricultural, and Park and Recreation Districts:
104 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.095
Permitted Signs
Permit Required
Maximum Sign Surface
Area in Square Feet
Agricultural product
Yes
20
Business
Yes
30
Directional
No
4
Home occupation
Yes
3
Identification
Yes
30
Public service
Yes
30
Real estate
No
20
(1) Yard requirements. All signs, except directional signs, shall be subject to the same
setback and yard requirements as all other permitted accessory uses. All directional signs, except
attached directional signs, shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the lot line.
(2) Height limitation. No sign shall exceed eight feet in height, except as provided in
Subsection (5)(b)1 in this Division, nor shall any attached sign extend higher than one foot below
the roof line.
(3) Lighting. Illuminated signs shall be permitted only as a conditional use.
(4) Identification signs.
(a) Identification signs shall be limited to one per principal entrance.
(b) Freestanding identification signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign.
(5) Special sign regulations.
(a) Business signs for surface water-oriented commercial uses placed in accordance
with § 152.114(F)(1) shall be permitted in the Flood Plain and Park and Recreation Districts only.
(b) Freestanding identification signs whose sole purpose is to display the name of the
City shall be permitted adjacent to arterial streets and highways within the Agricultural Districts
under the following conditions:
1. Maximum height shall be 20 feet, and the sign surface area shall not exceed
200 square feet;
2. The signs shall not be located within 500 feet of Residential Districts;
§ 152.095 Zoning Code 105
3. No two such signs shall lie closer to one another than 1,500 feet, measured in
all directions;
4. The signs shall meet the setback requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located;
5. The signs shall be landscaped along the base; and
6. Up to 20% of the sign surface area may be used to display the insignia or
name of any nonprofit organizations and educational institutions sponsoring the sign.
(c) Free standing identification signs whose purpose is to display the name of the City
or a City Facility shall be permitted adjacent to arterial streets and highways within the Park and
Recreation Districts (PR) under the following conditions:
1. Maximum sign height shall be 26 feet, and maximum sign surface area shall
be 100 square feet;
2. The signs shall be set back not less than ten feet from the lot line or highway
right-of-way line, whichever is the furthest from the traveled street;
3. The signs shall be landscaped along the base;
4. The sign surface may be used to display an event;
5. The sign surface area may be used to display the insignia or name of any
nonprofit organizations and educational institutions sponsoring the sign; and
6. The signs may be illuminated if the illumination does not reflect into any
homes located in the Residential Districts.
(B) Residential Districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4). The following shall apply in Residential
Districts:
Permitted Signs
Permit Required
Maximum Sign Surface
Area in Square Feet
Directional
No
4
Home occupation
Yes
3
Identification
Yes
30
Public service
Yes
24
Real estate
No
6
106 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.095
(1) Yard requirements. All signs, except directional signs, shall be subject to the same
setback and yard requirements as all other permitted accessory uses. All directional signs, except
attached directional signs, shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the lot line.
(2) Height limitation. No sign shall exceed eight feet in height, nor shall any attached
sign extend higher than one foot below the roof line.
(3) Lighting. Illuminated signs shall be permitted only as a conditional use.
(4) Identification signs.
(a) Identification signs shall be limited to one per principal entrance.
(b) Freestanding identification signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign.
(5) Special sign regulations.
(a) Free standing identification signs whose sole purpose is to display the name of the
City shall be permitted adjacent to arterial streets and highways within the Residential Districts
under the following conditions:
1. Maximum sign height shall be six feet, and maximum sign surface area shall
be 50 square feet;
2. The signs shall be set back not less than ten feet from the lot line or highway
right-of-way line, whichever is the furthest from the traveled street;
3. The signs shall be landscaped along the base;
4. Up to 20% of the sign surface area may be used to display the insignia or
name of any nonprofit organizations and educational institutions sponsoring the sign; and,
5. The signs may be illuminated if the illumination does not reflect into any
homes located in Residential Districts.
§ 152.095 Zoning Code 107
(C) Neighborhood Business District (C-1). The following shall apply in Neighborhood
Business Districts.
Permitted Signs
Permit Required
Maximum Sign Surface
Area in Square Feet
Business
Yes
50
Directional
No
4
Identification
Yes
30
Public service
Yes
24
Real estate
No
20
Temporary
Yes
32
(1) Business sign requirements. Except as provided below, within C-1 Districts only one
attached wall sign, or two attached wall signs if on a corner lot, shall be permitted, and the sign(s)
shall not project more than 18 inches from the face of the wall.
(2) Yard requirements. All signs, except directional and temporary signs, shall be subject
to the same setback and yard requirements as all other permitted accessory uses. All directional and
temporary signs shall be set back a minimum of four feet from the lot line.
(3) Height limitation. Except for freestanding business signs, no sign shall exceed eight
feet in height nor shall any attached sign extend higher than one foot below the roof line.
(4) Identification signs.
(a) Identification signs shall be limited to one per principal entrance.
(b) Freestanding identification signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign.
(5) Freestanding business sign requirements.
(a) Only one freestanding sign is permitted per business.
(b) A business must have a minimum frontage of 75 feet in order to have a
freestanding business sign. More than one adjoining business may be combined to obtain the
required frontage for a freestanding business sign, if the adjoining businesses jointly use the sign.
(c) The maximum sign surface area shall be 50 square feet.
(d) The maximum sign height shall be 16 feet.
108 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.095
(e) The vertical distance between the ground surface and the bottom of the sign
surface area shall be not less than nine feet.
(f) The maximum distance the sign surface area may project over public rightsof-
way shall be eight feet but may not extend over traveled streets.
(g) The sign post shall be set back not less than two feet from the lot line.
(D) General Business District (C-2). The following shall apply in General Business Districts.
Permitted Signs
Permit Required
Maximum Sign Surface Area in
Square Feet
Business
Yes
See Subsections (1), (2) and (6)
Directional
No
24
Identification
Yes
See Subsections (1), (2) and (6)
Public service
Yes
24
Real estate
No
32
Temporary
Yes
32
(Ord. No. 99, 3rd Series – adopted 04/4/17)
(1) Business and identification sign requirements; general. Within the C-2 Districts
there shall be two options for business and identification signs.
(a) Option A. Only attached wall signs shall be allowed. The maximum number of
signs on any principal building shall be two, including existing signs. The maximum combined sign
surface area of both signs shall be 300 square feet or 20% of the gross silhouette area of the front
building wall, whichever is less. Where the principal building is on a corner lot facing two public
streets, the maximum number of wall signs on the principal building shall be three, including
existing signs. The sign surface area of the third sign shall not exceed 100 square feet, and the
maximum combined sign surface area of all signs shall be 350 square feet or 25% of the gross
silhouette area of the front building wall, whichever is less. No more than two attached signs shall
be placed on any one front or side wall. For buildings with single walls exceeding 10,000 square
feet, the sign surface area may be up to 2% of the single wall area, but shall not exceed 500 square
feet.
(b) Option B. The following sign types may be utilized: attached, freestanding,
projecting, and suspended. The maximum number of signs shall be two, including existing signs.
Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted. The maximum sign surface area of any attached,
projecting, or suspended sign shall be 200 square feet or 13_% of the gross silhouette area of the
front building wall, whichever is less. Where the principal building is on a corner lot facing two
public streets, a third sign, which shall be a projecting sign attached to the side wall of the principal
building, shall be permitted. The maximum sign surface area of this third sign shall be 100 square
feet or ten percent of the gross
§ 152.095 Zoning Code 109
silhouette area of the front building wall, whichever is less. No more than two attached signs shall
be placed on any one front or side wall. For buildings with single walls exceeding 10,000 square
feet, the sign surface area may be up to 2% of the single wall area, but shall not exceed 500 square
feet.
(c) Additional.
1. In addition to Options A and B, buildings which provide a secondary public
entrance into the rear of the building and which rear entrance provides access to a public alley,
parking lot, or street shall be permitted one additional projecting sign attached to the rear building
wall. The maximum sign surface area of this sign shall be 100 square feet or seven and one-half
percent of the gross silhouette area of the rear building wall, whichever is less.
2. In addition to Options A and B, buildings with an interior sidewall abutting a
parking lot, which parking lot has a minimum frontage of 100 feet, shall be permitted one additional
projecting sign attached to the wall facing the parking lot. The maximum sign surface area of this
sign shall be 50 square feet or seven and one-half percent of the gross silhouette area of the front
building wall, whichever is less.
(d) Combined sign area. If a front yard setback of the principal building is in excess
of 149 feet or if the front principal building wall is in excess of 100 feet wide, the maximum
combined sign surface area of both wall signs under Option A shall be up to 20% of the gross
silhouette area of the front building wall, and the maximum sign surface area of the wall sign in
Option B shall be up to 13.5% of the gross silhouette area of the front building wall. In neither case
shall the maximum square footage apply, only percentage of gross silhouette area.
(2) Freestanding business and identification sign requirements. Only one freestanding
sign is permitted per business, planned shopping center, or institution. Businesses are eligible for
those freestanding signs listed in their street classification in the following table.
Street Classification
Street Speed
Limit
Minimum
Frontage (ft.)
Maximum Sign
Surface Area
(sq. ft.)
Maximum
Height (ft.)
Local street
0-30
30-45
75
75
50
50
16
16
Collector
0-30
31-45
46-55
75
100
150
50
70
85
16
18
20
Arterial
0-30
31-45
46-54
75
150
200
50
100
125
20
26
30
Highway
55+
300
200
32
110 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.095
(a) More than one adjoining business may be combined to obtain the required
frontage for a freestanding sign, if the adjoining businesses jointly use the sign.
(b) The maximum distance the sign surface area may project over public
rights-of-way shall be eight feet but may not extend over traveled streets.
(c) Freestanding signs located in a parking lot or adjacent to a driveway shall be
surrounded by a landscaped or planted area five feet in all directions from the base of the sign.
(d) Where premises used for commercial or industrial use are within 100 feet of
Residential or Agricultural Districts, freestanding signs located in that commercial or industrial use
shall not exceed 25 feet in height. A freestanding sign must be set back from the lot line the same
distance as structures in any Residential or Agricultural District facing the same public street and
within 100 feet of the sign. This provision affects only freestanding signs on commercial and
industrial premises on the same block and on the same street as a Residential or Agricultural
District.
(3) Yard requirements. All signs, except directional and temporary signs, shall be subject
to the same setback and yard requirements as all other permitted accessory uses. In the case of a
corner lot, all signs, except directional and temporary signs, shall abide by the front yard setback for
both sides abutting a public street. All directional, temporary, and freestanding signs shall be set
back a minimum of six feet from the lot line or, where adjacent to a frontage street, six feet from the
interior edge of the frontage street.
(4) Height limitations. No attached sign shall exceed eight feet in height nor shall any
attached sign extend higher than the roof line. (Ord. No. 104, 3rd Series – adopted 03/6/18)
(5) Canopy, marquee, and suspended signs. Signs suspended from the bottom of a
canopy or marquee shall not exceed 30 square feet of sign surface area. The bottom of the
suspended signs shall be a minimum vertical distance of eight feet from the ground surface.
Canopies and marquees, whether signed or not, and suspended signs shall be a minimum horizontal
distance of two feet from the street pavement.
(6) Special sign regulations.
(a) Freestanding identification signs whose sole purpose is to display the name of the
City shall be permitted adjacent to arterial streets in accordance with this Chapter.
(b) Public service banners suspended over arterial streets may exceed the 24 square
feet maximum sign surface area indicated in the table but shall not exceed 48 square feet.
(c) In addition to signage permitted in Subsections (a) and (b) above, gasoline service
stations may place lettering and/or logos on pump island canopies. Regardless of the number of
pump island canopies on the site, no more than three canopy faces may be signed. The maximum
sign surface area of this signage shall not exceed 75 square feet for each canopy face. These signs
shall not protrude above or below the canopy.
§ 152.095 Zoning Code 111
(E) Central Business District (C-3). The following shall apply in the Central Business
District.
Permitted Signs
Permit Required
Maximum Sign Surface Area
in Square Feet
Business
Yes
See Subsections (1), (2) and
(6)
Directional
No
4
Identification
Yes
See Subsections (1), (2) and
(6)
Public service
Yes
24
Real estate
No
32
Temporary
Yes
32
(1) Business and identification sign requirements; general. Within the C-3 District there
shall be two options for business and identification signs.
(a) Option A. Only attached wall signs shall be allowed. The maximum number of
signs on any principal building shall be two, including existing signs. The maximum combined sign
surface area of both signs shall be 200 square feet or 15% of the gross silhouette area of the front
building wall, whichever is less. Where the principal building is on a corner lot facing two public
streets, the maximum number of wall signs on the principal building shall be three, including
existing signs. The sign surface area of the third sign shall not exceed 75 square feet and the
maximum combined sign surface area of all signs shall be 240 square feet or 20% of the gross
silhouette area of the front building wall, whichever is less. No more than two attached signs shall
be placed on any one front or side wall.
(b) Option B. The following sign types may be utilized: attached, freestanding,
projecting, and suspended. The maximum number of signs shall be two, including existing signs.
Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted. The maximum sign surface area of any attached,
projecting, or suspended sign shall be 130 square feet or ten percent of the gross silhouette area of
the front building wall, whichever is less. Where the principal building is on a corner lot facing two
public streets, a third sign, which shall be a projecting sign attached to the side wall of the principal
building, shall be permitted. The maximum sign surface area of this third sign shall be 65 square
feet or ten percent of the gross silhouette area of the front building wall, whichever is less. No more
than two attached signs shall be placed on any one front or side wall.
(c) Additional.
1. In addition to options A and B, buildings which provide a secondary public
entrance into the rear of the building and which rear entrance provides access to a public alley,
parking lot, or street shall be permitted one additional projecting sign attached to the rear building
wall. The
113 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.095
maximum sign surface area of this sign shall be 50 square feet or seven and one-half percent of the
gross silhouette area of the rear building wall, whichever is less.
2. In addition to Options A and B, buildings with an interior sidewall abutting a
parking lot, which parking lot has a minimum frontage of 50 feet, shall be permitted one additional
projecting sign attached to the wall facing the parking lot. The maximum sign surface area of this
sign shall be 50 square feet or seven and one-half percent of the gross silhouette area of the front
building wall, whichever is less.
(2) Freestanding business and identification sign requirements. Only one freestanding
sign is permitted per business, planned shopping center or institution. Businesses are eligible if the
business has a minimum frontage of 75 feet and the sign surface area can be no larger than 50
square feet and the maximum height of the sign is 20 feet.
(a) More than one adjoining business may be combined to obtain the required
frontage for a freestanding sign, if the adjoining businesses jointly use the sign.
(b) The vertical distance between the ground surface and the bottom of the sign
surface area shall be either less than two feet or more than 12 feet.
(c) The maximum distance the sign surface area may project over public
rights-of-way shall be eight feet but may not extend over traveled streets.
(d) Where premises used for commercial or industrial use are within 100 feet of
residential or agricultural districts, freestanding signs located in that commercial or industrial use
shall not exceed 25 feet in height. A freestanding sign must be set back from the lot lane the same
distance as structures in any residential or agricultural district facing the same public street and
within 100 feet of the sign. This provision affects only freestanding signs on commercial and
industrial premises on the same block and on the same street as a residential or agricultural district.
(3) Yard requirements. All signs shall abide by the setback requirements for the C-3
District, except for canopy, marquee, and suspended signs which shall be in accordance with
Subsection (5) below, and:
(a) Attached projecting business and identification signs may project not more than
18 inches over public rights-of-way; and
(b) Directional signs in the rear yard shall be set back not less than four feet from the
rear lot line.
§ 152.095 Zoning Code 114
(4) Height limitations. No attached sign shall exceed eight feet in height nor shall any
attached sign extend higher than one foot below the roof line.
(5) Canopy, marquee, and suspended signs. Within the C-3 District, signs suspended
from the bottom of a canopy or marquee shall not exceed 15 square feet of sign surface area. The
bottom of the suspended signs shall be a minimum vertical distance of eight feet from the ground
surface. Canopies and marquees, whether signed or not, and suspended signs shall be a minimum
horizontal distance of two feet from the traveled street.
(6) Special sign regulations.
(a) Public service banners suspended over arterial streets may exceed the 24 square
feet maximum sign surface area indicated in the table but shall not exceed 48 square feet.
(b) In addition to signage permitted in Subsection (a), gasoline service stations may
place lettering and/or logos on pump island canopies. Regardless of the number of pump island
canopies on the site, no more than three canopy faces may be signed. The maximum sign surface
area of this signage shall not exceed 75 square feet for each canopy face. These signs shall not
protrude above or below the canopy.
(F) Downtown Fringe District (C-4). The following shall apply in the Downtown Fringe
District.
Permitted Signs
Permit Required
Maximum Sign Surface Area in
Square Feet
Business
Yes
50
Directional
No
4
Identification
Yes
50
Public service
Yes
24
Real estate
No
20
Temporary
Yes
32
115 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.095
(1) Business sign requirements. Except as provided below, within the C-4 Districts, only
one attached wall sign, or two wall signs if on a corner lot, shall be permitted, and the sign(s) shall
not project more than 18 inches from the face of the wall.
(2) Yard requirements. All signs, except directional, temporary, and freestanding signs,
shall be subject to the same setback and yard requirements as all other permitted accessory uses. All
directional, temporary, freestanding, and identification signs shall be set back a minimum of four
feet from the lot line.
(3) Height limitation. Except for freestanding business signs, no sign shall exceed eight
feet in height nor shall any attached sign extend higher than one foot below the roofline.
(4) Special sign regulations. Public service banners suspended over arterial streets may
exceed the 24 square feet maximum sign surface area indicated in the table but shall not exceed 48
square feet.
(5) Identification signs.
(a) Identification signs shall be limited to one per principal entrance.
(b) Freestanding identification signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign.
(6) Freestanding business sign requirements.
(a) Only one freestanding sign is permitted per business.
(b) A business must have a minimum frontage of 75 feet in order to have a
freestanding business sign. More than one adjoining business may be combined to obtain the
required frontage for a freestanding business sign, if the adjoining businesses jointly use the sign.
(c) The maximum sign surface area shall be 50 square feet.
(d) The maximum sign height shall be 16 feet.
(e) The vertical distance between the ground surface and the bottom of the sign
surface area shall be not less than nine feet.
(f) The maximum distance the sign surface area may project over public rightsof-
way shall be eight feet but may not extend over traveled streets.
(g) The sign post shall be set back not less than two feet from the lot line.
§ 152.095 Zoning Code 116
(G) Light Industrial District (I-1) and General Industrial District (I-2). The following shall
apply in both Industrial Districts.
Permitted Signs
Permit Required
Maximum Sign Surface Area in
Square Feet
Advertising
Yes
300
Business
Yes
See Subsection (1)
Directional
No
32
Identification
Yes
See Subsection (1)
Public service
Yes
24
Real estate
No
32
Temporary
Yes
32
(Ord. No. 109, 3rd Series – adopted 05/1/18)
(1) Business and identification sign requirements; general. Within the Industrial
Districts there shall be two options for business and identification signs which shall be in
accordance with Section 152.095(D)(1).
(2) Freestanding business and identification sign requirements. Freestanding business
and identification signs shall be permitted adjacent to all classifications of streets within the
Industrial Districts under the following conditions:
(a) The premises on which such freestanding signs are located shall have a minimum
width of 250 feet measured at the front building line. If the premises does not meet this frontage
requirement, the provisions of Section 152.095(D)(2) shall apply;
(b) The signs shall be in accordance with Section 152.095(D)(2) when located within
150 feet of a Zoning District other than I-1 or I-2;
(c) The maximum sign surface area shall not exceed 200 square feet;
(d) The maximum height for a pylon-type business or identification sign shall be 25
feet. The maximum height for a ground-billboard-type business or identification sign shall be 15
feet;
(e) There shall be a minimum distance, measured in all directions, of 300 feet
between freestanding business and identification signs;
117 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.095
(f) Ground-billboard-type freestanding business or identification signs shall be
surrounded by a landscaped or planted area five feet in all directions from the base of the sign, and
the landscaping and planting shall be maintained; and,
(g) Only one freestanding sign of any type, other than directional or public service
signs, shall be permitted on any one premises.
(3) Yard requirements. All signs shall be subject to the same setback yard requirements
as all other permitted accessory uses with the following exceptions:
(a) Freestanding business and identification signs shall be set back not less than 25
feet from the front lot line; and,
(b) Freestanding directional, public service, real estate, and temporary signs shall be
set back not less than six feet from the front lot line.
(4) Height limitations. Except as provided in Subsection (G)(2) and in Subsection (6), no
attached sign shall exceed eight feet in height nor shall any attached sign extend higher than one
foot below the roof line.
(5) Canopy, marquees, and suspended signs. Within the Industrial Districts, signs
suspended from the bottom of a canopy or marquee shall not exceed 30 square feet of sign surface
area. The bottom of the suspended signs shall be a minimum vertical distance of eight feet from the
ground surface. Canopies and marquees, whether signed or not, and suspended signs shall be a
minimum horizontal distance of two feet from the traveled street.
(6) Freestanding advertising signs. Freestanding advertising signs shall be permitted
adjacent to arterial streets and highways within the Industrial Districts under the following
conditions:
(a) The maximum height for a pylon type advertising sign shall be 30 feet. The
maximum height for a ground-billboard-type advertising sign shall be 20 feet;
(b) The signs shall not be located within 750 feet of Residential or Commercial
Districts;
(c) There shall be a minimum distance, measured in all directions, of 1,500 feet
between freestanding advertising signs;
(d) Freestanding advertising signs of a ground-billboard-type shall be landscaped
along the base and the landscaping shall be maintained; and,
(e) Only one freestanding sign of any type shall be permitted on any one premises.
§ 152.097 Zoning Code 118
(7) Special sign regulations. Public service banners suspended over arterial streets may
exceed the 24 square feet maximum sign surface area indicated in the table but shall not exceed 48
square feet.
§ 152.096 MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
All signs shall be maintained. The Building Official shall have the authority to order the
painting, repair, or removal of signs which are not maintained, which are abandoned or which
constitute physical hazard to the public safety. If the sign is nonconforming, restoration shall be in
accordance with § 152.093.
§ 152.097 DYNAMIC DISPLAY SIGNS.
A. Dynamic Displays: Dynamic Display signs, where specifically allowed by this
Ordinance, shall comply with the following requirements.
(1) Brightness: LED dynamic displays shall be adjusted to a night time
brightness setting of no more than 20 percent of their maximum brightness setting, but in no event
shall they exceed 0.3 footcandles over ambient lighting conditions when measured with an
illuminance meter when measured at the recommended distance, based upon the Dynamic Display
illuminated sign size. LED dynamic displays may operate at up to 100 percent of their maximum
brightness during the day time. Incandescent dynamic displays shall be adjusted to the night time
brightness setting of no more than 60 percent of their maximum brightness setting, but in no event
shall they exceed 0.3 footcandles over ambient lighting conditions when measured with an
illuminance meter when measured at the recommended distance, based upon the Dynamic Display
illuminated sign size. Incandescent dynamic displays may operate at up to 100 percent of their
maximum brightness during the day time. Constant night time displays of bright or “hot colors”
such as complete red or white display background shall be prohibited. All dynamic displays shall
be equipped with a night time manufacturer auto dim feature and operated according to
manufacturer night intensity specifications and as required herein. Legal non-conforming dynamic
displays without a manufacturer auto dim feature shall comply with this requirement to the extent
feasible within the limits of the dynamic display’s programming.
(2) Brightness measurement: No Dynamic Display shall exceed a brightness
level at night of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a footcandle illuminance
meter at a preset distance depending on the sign area, measured as follows:
119 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.097
(3) Time/Duration: Minimum frame hold display time duration shall not be
less than ten seconds. There shall be no animation, motion, blinking, scrolling, rotating, oscillating,
or other apparent flashing or movement on any dynamic display during the night time. There shall
be no scrolling or flashing during the daytime. Display change shall be instantaneous.
(4) Dynamic Displays shall be permitted in certain zoning districts on free
standing and monument signs or as a wall sign, as specified by this Ordinance.
(5) Maximum number: There shall be no more than one Dynamic Display
sign permitted per property.
§ 152.111 Zoning Code 120
(6) Spacing from residential uses: No Dynamic Display shall be located
within 100 feet of a residential district. The distance shall be measured based upon a horizontal line
beginning at the nearest residential property line and the leading edge of the Dynamic Display, or
viewing radius of 45 degrees, whichever is closer. A church located in a residential zone may be
allowed a Dynamic Display, subject to the spacing requirements, as applied to the nearest adjacent
residential property line.
Amended Ordinance 112, 3rd Series (07/03/2018)
(7) The City shall have the right to place conditions on any Dynamic Display
located within 50 feet of an official traffic control signal to prevent interference or confusion with
the official traffic control signal. The distance shall be measured based upon a horizontal line
beginning at the leading edge of the Dynamic Display and any portion of the official traffic control
signal.
SHORELAND MANAGEMENT
§ 152.110 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND POLICY.
(A) Authorization. This Subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies
contained in M.S. Chapter 103, Minn. Rules, Parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900 and the planning
and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 462.
(B) Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the City affects the public health, safety, and
general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public waters but also by impairing the local
tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare to provide for
the wise subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of public waters and, thus, preserve
and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values
of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources. This responsibility
is recognized by the City.
§ 152.111 JURISDICTION; COMPLIANCE.
(A) Jurisdiction. The provisions of this Section shall apply to the shorelands of the public
water bodies as classified in § 152.113. Pursuant to Minn. Rules, Parts 6120.2500 through
6120.3900, no lake, pond, or flowage less than ten acres in size need be regulated in the City’s
shoreland regulations. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous
shoreland may, at the discretion of the governing body, be exempt from this Section.
(B) Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of lots; the use,
size, type, and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and
waste treatment systems; the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland
vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this Section and
other applicable regulations.
Amended Ordinance 81, 3rd Series (10/6/2015)
121 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.112
§ 152.112 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Permits required.
(1) A permit is required for the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems
and those grading and filling activities not exempted by § 152.114. Application for a permit shall
be made to the Building Official on the forms provided. The application shall include the necessary
information so that Building Official can determine the site’s suitability for the intended use and
that a compliant sewage treatment system will be provided.
(2) A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an
identified nonconforming sewage treatment system shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance
with State regulations.
(B) Certificate of zoning compliance. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of
zoning compliance for each activity requiring a permit as specified in Division (A) of this Section.
This certificate will specify that the use of land conforms to the requirements of this Section. Any
use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a
violation of this Section and shall be punishable as provided in § 152.998.
(C) Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
(1) Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments, or
conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the Commissioner or
the Commissioner’s designated representative and shall be postmarked at least ten days before the
hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats located within shoreland shall
include copies of the subdivision/plat.
(2) A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats and final decisions granting
variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the
Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated representative and shall be postmarked within ten
days of final action.
(3) When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally
recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance required in
Subsection (C)(2), shall also include the Board of Adjustments and Appeals summary of the public
record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the
variance.
§ 152.113 Zoning Code 122
§ 152.113 SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM AND LAND USE DISTRICTS.
(A) Shoreland classification system. The public waters of the City have been classified below
consistent with the criteria found in Minn. Rules, Part 6120.3300 and the Protected Waters
Inventory Map for Pennington County, Minnesota.
(1) Shoreland area. The shoreland area for the waterbodies listed in Subsection (A)(2)
shall be as defined in this Code.
(2) Rivers and streams.
(a) Urban rivers. The Thief River and the Red Lake River within the following
described limits are classified as urban rivers:
1. Legal description of the Red Lake River: beginning at the east line of Section
35, Township 154 North, Range 43 West and ending at the south line of Section 4, Township 153
North, Range 43 West; and,
2. Legal description of the Thief River: beginning at the north line of the
southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 154 North, Range 43 West and ending at its intersection
and confluence with the Red Lake River in the south one-half of Section 27.
(b) Tributary streams. All protected watercourses in the City shown on the Protected
Waters Inventory Map for Pennington County, a copy of which is adopted by reference, not given a
classification in Subsection (a), shall be considered “Tributary.”
(B) Land Use District descriptions. The Land Use Districts within shoreland and the
delineation of a land use district’s boundaries on the Zoning Districts Map shall be consistent with
the goals, policies, and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and the following criteria,
considerations, and objectives:
(1) Preservation of natural areas;
(2) Present ownership and development of shoreland areas;
(3) Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities;
(4) Topographic characteristics;
(5) Vegetative cover;
(6) In-water physical characteristics, values, and constraints;
123 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.114
(7) Recreational use of the surface water;
(8) Street and service center accessibility;
(9) Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they involve water and related land
resources;
(10) The land requirements of industry which, by its nature, requires location in shoreland
areas; and,
(11) The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having significant historical or
ecological value.
§ 152.114 ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY/SANITARY PROVISIONS.
(A) Lot area and width standards. The lot area and lot width standards for residential,
commercial, and industrial lots created after the date of enactment of this Subchapter for the rivers
and tributary streams classifications are as indicated in the yard requirements for each zoning
district.
(B) Placement, design, and height of structures.
(1) Placement of structures on lots. Where adjacent structures have shoreland setbacks
different from those required, the minimum shoreland setback shall be the average of the adjacent
structures. If there is one adjacent structure, the minimum shoreland setback shall be the average of
the adjacent structure and the required setback. In no case shall the shoreland setback be less than
30 feet.
(a) Accessory structure. One water-oriented accessory structure designed in
accordance with Subsection (B)(2)(a) may be set back a minimum distance of ten feet from the
ordinary high water level.
(b) Structure setback; bluff. Structures shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from
the top of a bluff.
(c) Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory structures, except stairways and
landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.
(d) Uses without water-oriented needs. Uses without water-oriented needs shall be
substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions.
§ 152.114 Zoning Code 124
(2) Design criteria for structures.
(a) Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have one water-oriented
accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback in Subsection (B)(1), if this
water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions:
1. The structure shall not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and
cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet
above grade at any point;
2. The setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level shall be at
least ten feet;
3. The structure shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public
waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions;
4. The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails but shall not be enclosed or
used as a storage area;
5. The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation and shall not
contain water supply or sewage treatment systems; and,
6. As an alternative for water-oriented accessory structures used solely for water
craft storage and including storage of related boating and water-oriented sporting equipment may
occupy an area up to 400 square feet, provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as
measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
(b) Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to
major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore
areas. Stairways and lifts shall meet the following design requirements:
1. Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet in width on residential lots.
Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties and public open space recreational
properties;
2. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not exceed 32 square
feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used for commercial properties and public
open-space recreational properties;
3. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;
4. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on
posts or pilings or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that
ensures control of soil erosion;
125 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.114
5. Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
6. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped
persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and
performance standards of Subsections (b)1. through (b)5. are complied with in addition to the
requirements of Minn. Rules, Chapter 1341.
(c) Decks within shoreland. Deck additions to a structure, which structure does not
meet the required setback from the ordinary high water level, may be allowed without a Variance if
all of the following standards are met:
1. The structure met the requirements of the official controls when established;
2. A thorough evaluation of the lot and structure reveals no reasonable location
for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing shoreland setbacks for the structure;
3. The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed
15% of the existing setback for the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not
encroach closer than 30 feet to the ordinary high water level, whichever is more restrictive; and
4. The deck is constructed primarily of wood and is not roofed or screened.
(d) Significant historic sites. No structure may be placed on a significant historic site
in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been
removed and documented in a public repository.
(e) Steep slopes. The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate possible soil erosion
impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of
sewage treatment systems, streets, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes.
When determined necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to
preserve existing vegetative screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the
surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
(C) Shoreland alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to
prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic
values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
(1) Vegetation alterations.
(a) Alteration of vegetation necessary for the construction of streets and parking areas
regulated by Division (D) of this Section and for the construction of structures and sewage
treatment systems are exempt from the vegetation alterations standards of Subsection (C)(1)(b).
§ 152.114 Zoning Code 126
(b) Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest
management uses as regulated in Subsections (F)(2) and (3), is allowed subject to the following
standards:
1. Intensive clearing of vegetation within the shore and bluff impact zones and
on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive clearing of vegetation for forest land conversion to another
use outside of these areas is allowable as a conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation
plan is developed and approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District in which the property
is located; and,
2. In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees
and shrubs and cutting, pruning and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water
from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways, landings, picnic
areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach areas, and watercraft access areas, and permitted
water-oriented accessory structures, provided that:
a. The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from
the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced;
b. Existing shading of water surfaces is preserved along rivers; and,
c. The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or
branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
(2) Topographic alterations: grading and filling.
(a) Grading, filling, and excavations necessary for the construction of structures,
sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly issued construction permits for these
facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading
and filling standards in this Section shall be incorporated into the issuance of permits for
construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways.
(b) Public streets and parking areas are regulated by Division (D) of this Section.
(c) Notwithstanding Subsections (a) and (b) above, a grading and filling permit will
be required for:
1. The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep slopes or
within shore or bluff impact zones; and,
2. The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of steep
slopes, shore impact zones, and bluff impact zones.
127 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.114
(d) The following considerations and conditions shall be adhered to during the
issuance of Building Permits, Grading Permits, Filling Permits, Conditional Use Permits, Variances,
and subdivision approvals:
1. Grading or filling in any wetland shall be evaluated to determine how
extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetlands:
a. Trapping and retention of sediment and pollutants;
b. Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
c. Fish and wildlife habitat;
d. Recreational use;
e. Shoreline and bank stabilization; and
f. Historic significance and critical habitat.
2. Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the
smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;
3. Mulches or similar materials shall be used, where necessary, for temporary
bare soil coverage and a permanent vegetative cover shall be established as soon as possible;
4. Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any
surface water feature shall be used;
5. Altered areas shall be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation District
and the United States Soil Conservation Service;
6. Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in a manner that creates an
unstable slope;
7. Plans to place fill or excavate material on steep slopes shall be reviewed at
applicant’s cost by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and shall not create finished
slopes of 30% or greater;
8. Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact zones;
9. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters shall
first be authorized by the Commissioner under M.S. §§ 103G.245 and 103G.405;
§ 152.114 Zoning Code 128
10. Alterations of topography shall only be allowed if they are accessory to
permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and
11. Placement of riprap and placement of a filter blanket, including associated
grading of the shoreline, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to
one foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water level
and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet.
(e) Permission for excavations, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, where
the intended purpose is connection to a public water, may be given only after the Commissioner has
approved the proposed connection to public waters.
(D) Placement and design of streets, driveways, parking areas, and essential services.
(1) Public and private streets, parking areas, and essential services shall be designed to
take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view
from public waters. Documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that all streets,
parking areas, and essential services are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion
to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water
Conservation District.
(2) Streets, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and shall not be
placed within bluff and shore impact zones when other reasonable and feasible placement
alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas and shall be
designed to minimize adverse impacts.
(3) Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach streets, and access-related
parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative screening and
erosion control conditions of this Division (D) are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling
provisions of Division (C) of this Section shall be met.
(E) Stormwater management. The following general and specific standards shall apply.
(1) General standards.
(a) When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil
surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to
public waters.
(b) Development shall be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the
extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes.
Disturbed areas shall be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods must
be used to retain sediment on the site.
129 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.128
(c) When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation
conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and
vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming
devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes, manmade materials, and
facilities.
(2) Specific standards.
(a) Impervious surface coverage of lots may not exceed 75% of the lot area without a
Conditional Use Permit. Criteria for granting impervious surface coverage Conditional Use Permits
shall include consideration of the following:
1. No other reasonable alternatives exist;
2. Surface drainage can be reasonably filtered; and,
3. Rate of run off resulting from normal rainfall can be controlled to prevent
erosion.
(b) When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, they must be
designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local Soil and Water
Conservation District.
(c) New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide for filtering or
settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.
(F) Special provisions for Agricultural, Park and Recreation, Commercial, and Industrial
Districts.
(1) Standards for Agricultural, Park and Recreation, Commercial, and Industrial
Districts.
(a) Agricultural, park and recreation, commercial, and industrial uses with needs to
have access to and use of public waters shall meet the following standards:
1. The uses shall be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative
screening of parking areas and structures;
2. Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons shall centralize
these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size
necessary to meet the need; and,
3. Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting
to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards:
a. No business signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or
upon pubic waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or on public
waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the County Sheriff;
§ 152.128 Zoning Code 130
b. Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if
they are in accordance with §§ 152.085 et seq. They shall only convey the location and name of the
establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs shall not contain other
detailed information such as product brands and prices, shall not be located higher than ten feet
above the ground and shall not exceed 30 square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the
lights shall be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters; and,
c. Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or
over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or
otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude
use of navigational lights.
(b) Uses without water-oriented needs shall be set back in accordance with the
applicable yard requirements for the zoning district in which the use is located. The uses shall be
screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, in a manner acceptable to the City Forester and Zoning Administrator.
(2) Agriculture use standards.
(a) General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod
farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes or shore and bluff impact zones
are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan consistent
with the field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation District or the United
States Soil Conservation Service. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted or conditional
agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.
(b) Feedlots shall not be located in the shoreland, in watercourses, or in bluff impact
zones and shall meet a minimum setback of 300 feet from the ordinary high water level of all public
waters basins.
(3) Forest management standards. The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation
shall be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution
Assessment Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management "Best Management
Practices in Minnesota."
(4) Extractive use standards.
(a) Site development and restoration plan. An extractive use site development and
restoration plan shall be developed, approved by the Council and followed over the course of
operation of the site. The plan shall address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and
duration of operation, anticipated vegetation, and topographic alterations and such other information
as required by the Zoning Administrator. It shall also identify actions to be taken during operation
to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and shall clearly explain how the
site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.
131 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.128
(b) Setbacks for processing machinery. Processing machinery shall be located
consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and
from bluffs.
WETLAND CONSERVATION
§ 152.125 PURPOSE.
This Subchapter is adopted to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, (Minnesota
Laws 1991 Chapter 354, as amended) and the accompanying rules of the Minnesota Board of Water
and Soil Resources (Minn. Rules Ch. 8420, as amended).
§ 152.126 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
This Subchapter incorporates by reference the Act and the Rules. Terms used in this
Subchapter which are defined in the Act or the Rules have the meanings given there.
§ 152.127 SCOPE.
This Subchapter regulates the draining and filling of wetlands and parts of wetlands within the
City.
§ 152.128 PROCEDURES.
(A) Exemption and no-loss determinations. Exemption and no-loss determinations under
Minn. Rules, Parts 8420.0210 and 8420.0220 shall be made by the Zoning Administrator. The
Administrator should seek the advice of the technical evaluation panel on questions of wetland
delineation and type. The Zoning Administrator’s decision is final unless appealed to the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals within 30 days.
(B) Sequencing and replacement plan decisions. Sequencing and replacement plan decisions
under Minn. Rules, Part 8420.0520 through .0550 shall be made following the same procedures as
for conditional use permits, plus the additional notice and time requirements of Minn. Rules, Part
8420.0230. If the amount of wetland to be drained or filled is less than one-tenth of an acre, the
sequencing determination under Minn. Rules, Part 8420.0520 shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator.
(C) Monitoring. The Zoning Administrator shall assure that the replacement plan monitoring
and enforcement requirements of Minn. Rules, Part 8420.0600 through .0630 are fulfilled.
§ 152.134 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 132
(D) Wetland banking. Wetlands may be restored or created within the City for purposes of
deposit in the wetland bank in accordance with Minn. Rules, Parts 8420.0700 through .0760. The
Zoning Administrator is responsible for approving bank plans, certifying deposits, and monitoring
of banked wetlands and enforcement under the rules.
(E) Appeals. Decisions made under this Subchapter may be appealed to the Board of Water
and Soil Resources under Minn. Rules, Part 8420.0250 after administrative appeal rights under the
official controls have been exhausted.
(F) Variances. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals may issue variances from the official
controls of the City so long as the variances do not vary requirements of the Act or the Rules.
(G) Technical evaluation panel. The City Council shall appoint a person to serve on the
technical evaluation panel. Decisions under this Subchapter must not be made until after receiving
the determination of the technical evaluation panel regarding wetland public values, location, size,
and/or type if the decision-maker, the landowner or a member of the technical panel asks for such
determinations. This requirement does not apply to wetlands for which the data is included in an
approved comprehensive wetland management plan per Minn. Rules, Part 8420.0240. The Planning
Commission may seek and shall consider recommendations, if any, made by the technical
evaluation panel in making replacement plan decisions.
§ 152.129 HIGH PRIORITY AREAS.
Decisions regarding sequencing, replacement plans, and banking shall particularly favor
preservation, restoration and creation of wetlands in high priority areas as identified in water
management plans pursuant to Minn. Rules, Part 8420.0350.
§ 152.130 DELEGATION.
The City may delegate to the Soil and Water Conservation District under M.S. §§ 471.59 and
103C.331, Subd. 19, the authority to administer all or any part of this Subchapter.
§ 152.134 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS.
(A) Purpose. To regulate the installation of Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) within
the City, not otherwise subject to siting and oversight by the State of Minnesota.
(B) Interpretation, Conflict, and Separability.
(1) Interpretation. In interpreting these regulations and their application, the provisions
of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection of public
health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) Conflict. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except as provided in these
133 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.134
regulations. If any provision of these regulations that impose restrictions different from any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or provision of law, the provision that is more restrictive or
imposes higher standards shall control, except for tower height.
(3) Separability. If any part or provision of these regulations or the application of these
regulations to any developer or circumstances is found invalid by any competent jurisdiction, the
judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in
the controversy in which the judgment shall be rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of
the remainder of these regulations or the application of them to other developers or circumstances.
(C) Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
(1) Aggregated Project. Aggregated projects are those which are developed and operated
in a coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities separately owning one or more of the
individual WECS within the larger project. Associated infrastructure such as power lines and
transformers that service the facility may be owned by a separate entity but are also included as part
of the aggregated project.
(2) Commercial WECS. A WECS of equal to or greater than 5 kW in total name plate
generating capacity.
(3) Decommissioning. Decommissioning shall mean removal of wind turbines,
buildings, cabling, electrical components, foundations, and any other associated facilities.
(4) FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
(5) Fall Zone. The area surrounding the base of the tower, defined as the area with a
radius being the furthest distance from the natural grade in which a tower will collapse in the event
of a structural failure. This area is not less than an area with the radius that is the total height of the
structure.
(6) Feeder Line. Power lines that transport electrical power from one or more wind
turbines to the point of interconnection with a high-voltage transmission line.
(7) High-Voltage Distribution or Transmission Line. A conductor of electric energy
and associated facilities designed for and capable of operations at a nominal voltage of 2 kilovolts
or more.
(8) Hub Height. Shall mean, when referring to a WECS, the distance measured from
natural grade to the center of the turbine hub.
(9) Meteorological Tower. For the purposes of this Chapter, meteorological towers are
those towers which are erected primarily to measure wind speed and directions plus other data
relevant to siting WECS. Meteorological towers do not include towers and equipment used by
airports, the Minnesota Department of Transportation, or other similar applications to monitor
weather conditions.
§ 152.134 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 134
(10) Natural Grade. The grade unaffected by construction techniques such as fill,
landscaping, or berming.
(11) Non-Commercial WECS. A WECS of less than 5 kW in total name plate generating
capacity.
(12) Power Purchase Agreement. A legally enforceable agreement between one or more
persons and a utility where one or more of the signatories agrees to provide electric power and one
or more of the signatories agrees to purchase the power.
(13) Public Conservation Lands. Land owned in fee title by State or Federal agencies
and managed specifically for conservation purposes, including but not limited to State Wildlife
Management Areas, State Parks, State Scientific and Natural Areas, Federal Wildlife Refuges, and
Waterfowl Production Areas. For the purpose of this Section, public conservation lands will also
include lands owned in fee title by non-profit conservation organizations. Public conservation lands
do not include private lands upon which conservation easements have been sold to public agencies
or non-profit conservation organizations.
(14) Rotor. That part of a wind turbine that rotates as a result of energy derived from the
wind.
(15) Rotor Blades. That part of the wind turbine that moves in the air and transfers
energy from the wind into mechanical movement.
(16) Rotor Diameter. The diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor blades.
(17) Substations. Any electrical facility designed to convert electricity produced by Wind
turbines to a voltage for interconnection with transmission lines.
(18) Total Height. The highest point, above natural grade, of any structural or moving
part of the WECS.
(19) Tower. Towers include vertical structures that support the electrical generator, rotor
blades, or meteorological equipment.
(20) WECS – Wind Energy Conservation System. An electrical generating facility
comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including but not limited to:
towers, power lines, transformers, substations, and meteorological towers that operate by converting
the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy. The energy may be used on-site or distributed into
the electrical grid.
(21) Wind Turbine. A wind turbine is any piece of electrical generating equipment that
converts the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy with rotor blades.
(D) Application Procedures. Application for WECS shall be reviewed and processed in
accordance with the Conditional Use Permit procedures established in Section 152.148 of this
Chapter. The following information is required in addition to the information required for a Site
Plan or Conditional Use Permit application:
135 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.134
(1) The application for all WECS shall include the following information:
(a) The names and addresses of project applicants;
(b) The name and address of the project owners;
(c) The name and address of the owners of the real property upon which the WECS
will be located.
(d) The legal description and address of the project.
(e) A description of the project including: number, type, name plate generating
capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, tower construction, and total height of all wind turbines, and
means of interconnection with the electrical grid.
(f) Site layout, including the location of property lines, wind turbines, electrical
wires, interconnection points with the electrical grid, and all related accessory structures. The site
layout shall include distances and be drawn to scale.
(g) Evidence, being certificate of insurance, insurance policy, or other certification
satisfactory to City, that the applicant can obtain and maintain liability insurance for the WECS and
subject property.
(h) Evidence of a power purchase agreement, except where all electrical load served
by the WECS is isolated from the utility electric distribution system (Commercial WECS only).
(i) Registered Engineer’s certification (Commercial WECS only).
(j) Documentation of property ownership or legal control of the property.
(k) Decommissioning Plan as required in part (G)(2)(i) and (G)(2)(j) of this Section.
(l) A noise study, prepared by a qualified professional or WECS provider that
demonstrates that, except for intermittent episodes, the WECS shall not emit noise in excess of the
limits established in Minnesota Rules 7030 governing noise. (Commercial WECS only). Noncommercial
WECS shall comply with the noise limits established by Minnesota Rules 7030.
(m) (Commercial WECS only) A shadow flicker model that demonstrates that
shadow flicker shall not fall on, or in, any existing residential structure. Shadow flicker expected to
fall on a roadway or a portion of a residentially zoned property may be acceptable if the flicker does
not exceed 30 hours per year; and the flicker will fall more than 100 feet from an existing residence;
or the traffic volumes are less than 500 vehicles (ADT). The shadow flicker model shall:
(i) Map and describe with a 1,000 foot radius of the proposed WECS the
topography, existing residences and location of their windows, location of other structures, wind
speeds and directions, existing vegetation, and roadways. The model shall represent the most
probable scenarios of wind constancy, sunshine constancy, and wind directions and speed.
§ 152.134 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 136
(ii) Calculate the locations of shadow flicker caused by the proposed project
and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations, and calculate the total number of hours
per year of flicker at all locations.
(iii) Identify problem areas where shadow flicker will interfere with existing
or future residences and roadways and describe proposed mitigation measures, including, but
limited to, a change in siting of the WECS, a change in the operation of the WECS, or grading or
landscaping mitigation measures.
(n) The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines. A USGS topographical
map, or map with similar data, of the project site including boundaries of the project area,
surrounding property within one-quarter mile, and any other WECS within ten rotor diameters of
the proposed project. (Commercial WECS only).
(o) Location of wetlands, scenic, and natural areas (including bluffs) within one mile
of the proposed WECS. (Commercial WECS only).
(p) FAA Permit Application. (Commercial WECS only).
(q) Location of all known communications towers within two miles of the proposed
project. Provide proof that the WECS will not interfere with emergency or other microwave
communications. (Commercial WECS only).
(r) Description of potential impacts on nearby WECS and wind resources on adjacent
properties. (Commercial WECS only).
(s) The process to resolve complaints from residents and owners of nearby properties
as required by Section 152.134(G)(2)(m), which process shall be subject to City approval.
(Commercial WECS only).
(t) Additional information as stated in Minnesota Rules, Part 7854.0500 (Subpart 1),
as amended.
(2) Application Procedures for Aggregated Projects. Aggregated Projects may jointly
submit a single application and be reviewed under joint proceedings, including notices, hearings,
reviews, and as appropriate, approvals. Permits will be issued and recorded separately. All
aggregated projects over the 5 MW threshold currently outlined in State Statute are subject to State
regulation.
(E) District Regulations. WECS will be conditionally permitted or not permitted based on the
generating capacity and land use district as established in the table below:
Zoning Non-Commercial Commercial
Meteorological
District WECS WECS Tower
FP, PR Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted
137 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.134
AG Conditionally Conditionally Conditionally
Permitted Permitted Permitted
R-1, R-2, Conditionally Not Permitted Not Permitted
R-3, R-4 Permitted
C-1, C-2, Conditionally Conditionally Conditionally
C-3, C-4 Permitted Permitted Permitted
I-1, I-2, Conditionally Conditionally Conditionally
Permitted Permitted Permitted
(F) Setbacks. All towers shall adhere to the setbacks established in the following table:
Non-Commercial Commercial WECS Meteorological Tower
Property Lines 1.25 times the total 1.25 times the total 1.25 times the total
height height height
Other Existing N/A 600 feet 600 feet
WECS
(G) Requirements and Standards.
(1) Safety Design Standards.
(a) Engineering Certification. For all Commercial WECS, the manufacturer’s
engineer or another qualified engineer shall certify that the turbine, foundation, and tower design of
the WECS is within acceptable professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
(b) Clearance. Rotor blades or airfoils must maintain at least 20 feet of clearance
between their lowest point and the ground.
(c) Warnings. For all Commercial WECS, a sign or signs shall be posted on the
tower, transformer, and substation warning of high voltage. Signs with emergency contact
information shall also be posted on the turbine or at another suitable point. Painted aviation
warnings are recommended on meteorological towers less than 200 feet.
(d) Residentially Zoning Areas. No towers shall be constructed on or attached to
structures.
(e) Automatic Shut Down. All WECS shall have a mechanism supplied by the
manufacturer that shuts down the WECS in high wind conditions. This information shall be
provided with the permit application.
§ 152.134 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 138
(2) Standards.
(a) Total Height. Non-Commercial WECS shall have a total height of less than 120
feet and Commercial WECS shall have a total height of less than 180 feet;
(b) Tower Configuration. All wind turbines shall be installed with a tubular,
monopole type tower.
(c) Color and Finish. All wind turbines and towers shall be white, off-white, grey, or
light blue in color. Blades may be black. Finishing shall be matte or non-reflective.
Meteorological towers are exempt from this requirement.
(d) Lighting. Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of strobe, shall
adhere to but not exceed requirements established by FAA permits and regulations. Red strobe
lights are preferred for night-time illumination to reduce impact on migrating birds. Red pulsating
incandescent lights shall be avoided.
(e) Other Signage. All signage on site shall comply with City ordinances. The
manufacturer’s or owner’s company name and/or logo may be placed upon the nacelle,
compartment containing the electrical generator of the WECS.
(f) Feeder Lines. All communications and feeder lines, equal to or less than 34.5k V
in capacity, installed as part of a WECS shall be buried where reasonably feasible. Feeder lines
installed as part of a WECS shall not be considered an essential service. This standard applies to all
feeder lines subject to City authority. The owner must apply for a variance if the owner desires not
to bury the feeder line.
(g) Shadow Flicker. Shadow flicker may not exceed 30 hours per year and shall not
fall more than 100 feet from an existing residential property.
(h) Waste Disposal. Solid and hazardous wastes, including but not limited to crates,
packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils and lubricants, shall be removed
from the site promptly and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, or federal
regulations.
(i) Discontinuation and Decommissioning. A WECS shall be considered a
discontinued use after one year without energy production, unless a plan is developed, submitted to,
and approved by the City zoning officer outlining the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to
service. All WECS and accessory facilities, including the foundation, shall be completely
decommissioned within one year of the discontinuation of use.
(j) Each WECS shall have a decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means
and cost of removing WECS at the end of their serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued
use. The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party; such as a professional engineer, a
contractor capable of decommissioning, or a person with suitable expertise or experience with
decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial resources that will be available to pay
for the decommissioning of the WECS and accessory facilities.
139 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.134
(k) Orderly Development. Upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit, all
Commercial WECS greater than 5 MW shall notify the Energy Facility Permitting staff or
Department of Commerce of the project location and details on the form specified by the
Department.
(l) Noise. All WECS shall comply with Minnesota Rules 7030, governing noise.
(m) Complaint Resolution. The owner/operator of all Commercial WECS shall
develop a process to resolve complaints from residents and owners of nearby properties, which
complaints cannot be resolved pursuant to the City Code. The process shall use an independent
mediator or arbitrator and include a time frame for acting on a complaint. The applicant shall make
every reasonable effort to resolve any complaint.
(n) Electrical Codes and Standards. All WECS and accessory equipment and
facilities shall comply with the National Electrical Code and other applicable standards.
(o) FAA. All WECS shall comply with FAA standards and permits.
(p) Minnesota State Building Code. All WECS shall comply with the Minnesota
State Building Code adopted by the State of Minnesota, as amended from time to time.
(q) Interference. The applicant shall minimize or mitigate interference with
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves, or television signals caused
by any WECS. The applicant shall notify all communication tower operators within two miles of
the proposed WECS location upon application to the City for permits. No WECS shall be
constructed so as to interfere with any microwave transmissions.
(r) Right of Entrance. By the acceptance of the Conditional Use Permit, the owner/
operator grants permission to the City to enter the property to remove the WECS pursuant to the
terms of the Conditional Use Permit and to assure compliance with other conditions set forth in the
permit.
(s) Compliance. All WECS shall comply with any applicable local, state, or federal
laws, rules, standards, or regulations impacting their location, construction, operation, or
decommissioning.
(t) Signage. No advertising signs or banners of any nature shall be allowed on the
WECS, except as set forth herein.
(u) Ladders. Any access ladder existing on the outside of the tower shall start a
minimum of 15 feet above ground level.
(v) Such other conditions can be attached to the Conditional Use Permit as the City
deems reasonable.
(w) Meteorological towers shall not exist in one location for more than 18 months.
The location of a meteorological tower shall not be considered to have moved unless the
meteorological tower shall have moved at least 1,000 feet from its prior location.
§ 152.134 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 140
(x) Should a WECS not be decommissioned as required herein, the City shall have the
right to enter upon the land where the WECS is located for the purpose of decommissioning the
WECS. The cost of decommissioning shall be the responsibility of the owner o the land where the
WECS is located and the owner of the WECS, jointly and severally. Should either or both fail to
pay the City the cost the City incurred in decommissioning the WECS, the City may then spread the
charges against the real property benefited as a special assessment under the authority of Minnesota
Statute 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes for
certification to the County Auditor for collection along with current taxes the following year or in
annual installments, not exceeding 10, as the City may determine in each case.
(3) Avoidance and Mitigation of Damages to Infrastructure and Utilities.
(a) Roads. Applicants shall:
(i) Identify all county, city, or township roads to be used for the purpose of
transporting Commercial WECS, substation parts, concrete, and/or equipment for construction,
operation, or maintenance of the WECS and obtain applicable weight and size permits from the
impacted road authority(ies) prior to construction.
(ii) Be responsible for restoring or paying damages as agree to by the applicable
road authority(ies) sufficient to restore the road(s) and bridges to preconstruction conditions.
(b) Drainage System. The applicant and owner of the WECS shall be responsible for
immediate repair of damage to public drainage systems stemming from construction, operation,
maintenance, or decommissioning of the WECS.
(c) The applicant and owner of the WECS shall be responsible for any damage to any
below grade public or private utilities, due to construction, operation, maintenance,
decommissioning, or action otherwise resulting for any WECS.
Amended by Ordinance No. 46, 3rd Series, adopted April 20, 2010
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.145 ENFORCING OFFICER.
(A) The Council shall appoint a Zoning Administrator.
(B) The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Chapter and perform the following duties:
(1) Issue Building Permits in conjunction with the Building Official;
(2) Conduct inspections of buildings and land use;
141 Thief River Falls - Land Usage § 152.146
(3) Maintain permanent records;
(4) Receive, file, and forward all applications for appeals, variances, conditional uses,
amendments, or other matters to the designated official bodies;
(5) Institute in the name of the City any appropriate actions or procedures against a
violator of this Chapter;
(6) Serve as an ex-officio, nonvoting member of the Planning Commission and represent
the Planning Commission at Council meetings; and,
(7) Perform such other duties as determined by the Council.
§ 152.146 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.
The property owner whose land is annexed into the corporate limits shall immediately request a
public hearing to determine the proper zoning district. The request shall be treated as a zoning
amendment.
§ 152.147 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 142
§ 152.147 ZONING AMENDMENTS.
(A) Criteria for granting zoning amendments. In granting a request for a rezoning, the
Council shall consider the effect of the proposed zoning amendment upon the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the occupants of surrounding lands. Among other things, the Council shall
make the following findings where applicable:
(1) That the rezoning conforms to the Comprehensive Plan for the City, as well as present
land uses;
(2) That the rezoning will not impede the normal and orderly development and
improvement of surrounding property for uses predominant in the area;
(3) That the rezoning will not adversely affect property values of adjacent landowners;
(4) That the rezoning will not impose other undue hardship on adjacent landowners such
as noise, electrical display signs, odors, or other nuisances;
(5) That necessary utilities be available to serve the use intended;
(6) That additional public services needed by the rezoning be considered;
(7) That alternate areas previously zoned for the intended use be considered; and,
(8) That there is a public need for the proposed land use.
(B) Procedure.
(1) Application for amendments to this Chapter may be initiated by the Council, by the
Planning Commission or by the property owner or agent of the property owner.
(2) Persons wishing to initiate an application for amendment to this Chapter shall fill out
a zoning application prepared by the Zoning Administrator and submit it to the Zoning
Administrator, together with a fee of $150.00. The person shall also submit exhibits deemed
necessary by the Zoning Administrator to evaluate the application.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application for a zoning amendment and
exhibits to the Planning Commission for public hearing.
(4) A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper of the City at least ten days prior to the day of hearing.
143 Zoning Code § 152.148
(5) A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten
days before the day of the hearing to property owners within 350 feet of the property to which the
amendment relates when an amendment involves changes in district boundaries affecting an area of
five acres or less. Notice shall be in writing, mailed by first class mail, to be effective on date of
mailing. Failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this provision has been
made.
(6) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning
amendment.
(7) Persons requesting a zoning amendment shall appear at the public hearing in order to
answer questions.
(8) The Planning Commission shall report its recommendation of approval, disapproval,
or conditional approval of the proposed zoning amendment to the Council.
(9) The Council shall take action on the application within 60 days after receipt of the
application. The Council may extend the time limit before the end of the initial 60 day period by
providing written notice of the extension to the applicant. The notification must state the reasons for
the extension and its anticipated length, which may not exceed 60 days unless approved by the
applicant. The Council may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve a proposed zoning
amendment. A two-thirds vote of all its members is necessary for an approval or conditional
approval.
(10) Once denied by the Council, an application for a zoning amendment shall not be
reconsidered by the Planning Commission for six months.
Amended: Ordinance No. 27, 3rd Series
§ 152.148 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
(A) Criteria for Granting Conditional Use Permits.
(1) The establishment, maintenance, or operation of a conditional use will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.
(2) The conditional use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks, schools,
streets, and other public facilities and services which serve or are proposed to serve the area.
(3) The conditional use will be sufficiently compatible with or separated by distance or
screening from adjacent Agricultural or Residential zoned or used land.
§ 152.148 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 144
(4) The structure and site shall have an appearance that will not have an adverse effect
upon adjacent agricultural or residential zoned or used land.
(5) The conditional use is related to the overall needs of the City and to existing land use.
(6) The conditional use is consistent with the purposes of this Chapter and requirements
of the Zoning District.
(7) The conditional use is not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan.
(8) Adjacent businesses will not be adversely affected because of curtailment of customer
trade brought by the intrusion of noise, glare, or general unsightliness.
(B) Supplemental Criteria for granting Conditional Use Permits in Shoreland.
(1) The ability to prevent soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both
during and after construction.
(2) The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters is limited.
(3) The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment.
(4) The types, uses and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are
compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.
(C) Conditions. Conditions maybe imposed to protect the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the City to any new or amended Conditional Use Permit. The conditions shall be in
addition
to the requirements specified in this Chapter. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions;
(2) Limiting the height, size, or location of buildings;
(3) Controlling the location and number of motor vehicle access points;
(4) Increasing the street width;
(5) Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces;
(6) Limiting the number, size, location, or lighting of signs;
(7) Requiring buffers, diking, drainage, fencing, landscaping, or other facilities to protect
adjacent or nearby property;
145 Zoning Code § 152.148
(8) Designating sites for open space; or,
(9) Time limits and review dates.
(D) Supplemental conditions for shoreland. Additional conditions within shoreland may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
(2) Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement that additional
vegetation be planted; or,
(3) Special provisions for the location, design and use of structures, sewage treatment
systems, watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking areas.
(E) Procedure.
(1) Persons applying for a Conditional Use Permit shall fill out a Conditional Use Permit
application prepared by the Zoning Administrator and submit it to the Zoning Administrator
together with a fee of $150.00. The person shall also submit exhibits deemed necessary by the
Zoning Administrator to evaluate the application.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application for a Conditional Use Permit
and exhibits to the Planning Commission for public hearing.
(3) A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper of the City at least ten days prior to the day of hearing.
(4) A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten
days before the day of the hearing to property owners within 350 feet of the property to which the
proposed conditional use relates. Notice shall be in writing, mailed by first class mail, to be
effective on date of mailing. Failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects
in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this
Provision has been made.
(5) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Conditional
Use Permit.
(6) Persons requesting a Conditional Use Permit shall appear at the public hearing in
order to answer questions.
(7) The Planning Commission shall report its recommendation of approval, disapproval,
or conditional approval of the Conditional Use Permit to the Council.
§ 152.148 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 146
(8) The Council shall take action on the application within 60 days after receipt of the
application. The Council may extend the time limit before the end of the initial 60 day period by
providing written notice of the extension to the applicant. The notification must state the reasons for
the extension and its anticipated length, which may not exceed 60 days unless approved by the
applicant. The Council may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve a proposed Conditional
Use Permit.
(9) Once denied by the Council, an application for a Conditional Use Permit shall not be
reconsidered by the Planning Commission for six months.
(F) Review. If a time limit or periodic review is included as a condition by which a
Conditional Use Permit is granted, the Conditional Use Permit maybe reviewed at a public hearing
with notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing published at least ten days prior to the
review. The holder of the Conditional Use Permit shall receive ten days mailed notice of the time,
place, and purpose of the hearing, notice to be effective on date of mailing. It shall be the
responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to schedule the public hearings, and the owner of land
having a Conditional Use Permit shall not be required to pay a fee for the review. A public hearing
for annual review of a Conditional Use Permit may be granted at the discretion of the Council.
(G) Time limits. Once issued, a Conditional Use Permit shall be null and void if construction
on the proposed project has not been 20% completed within one year of the date that the
Conditional Use Permit was granted or the project has not been completed within three years of the
date the Conditional Use Permit was granted. The conditional use shall expire if that use shall cease
for more than 12 consecutive months.
(H) Modification. Any modification involving structural alterations, enlargement,
intensification of use, or similar modification not specifically permitted by the Conditional Use
Permit shall require a new Conditional Use Permit.
Amended: Ordinance No. 27, 3rd Series
147 Zoning Code § 152.149
§ 152.149 VARIANCES.
(A) Criteria for granting variances.
(1) Variances shall only be permitted:
(a) When they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
Chapter; and
(b) When the variances are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
(2) Variances may be granted when the applicant for the variance establishes that there
are practical difficulties in complying with this Chapter.
(3) Practical difficulties as used in connection with the granting of a variance means that:
(a) The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not
permitted by this Chapter;
(b) The plight of the property owner is due to circumstances unique to the
property not created by the property owner; and
(c) The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical
difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy
systems.
(B) Conditions. Conditions may be imposed to protect the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the City to any new or amended Variance. The conditions shall be in addition to the
requirements specified in this Chapter. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions;
(2) Limiting the height, size, or location of buildings;
(3) Controlling the location and number of motor vehicle access points;
(4) Increasing the street width;
(5) Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces;
(6) Limiting the number, size, location, or lighting of signs;
§ 152.149 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 148
(7) Requiring buffers, diking, drainage, fencing, landscaping, or other facilities to protect
adjacent or nearby property;
(8) Designating sites for open space; or,
(9) Time limits and review dates.
(C) Procedure.
(1) Persons applying for a variance shall fill out a variance application prepared by the
Zoning Administrator and submit it to the Zoning Administrator together with a fee of $150.00. The
person shall also submit exhibits deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to evaluate the
application.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application for Variance and exhibits to
the Board of Adjustments and Appeals for public hearing.
(3) A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper of the City at least ten days prior to the day of hearing.
(4) A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten
days before the day of the hearing to property owners within 350 feet of the property to which the
Variance relates. Notice shall be in writing, mailed by first class mail to be effective on date of
mailing. Failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this provision has been
made.
(5) The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
variance.
(6) Persons requesting a Variance shall appear at the public hearing in order to answer
questions.
(7) The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall report its recommendation of approval,
disapproval, or conditional approval of the proposed Variance to the Council.
(8) The Council shall take action on the application within 60 days after receipt of the
application by the Zoning Administrator. The Council may extend the time limit before the end of
the initial 60 day period by providing written notice of the extension to the applicant. The
notification must state the reasons for the extension and its anticipated length, which may not
exceed 60 days unless approved by the applicant. The Council may approve, disapprove, or
conditionally approve a proposed Variance.
(9) Once denied by the Council, an application for Variance shall not be reconsidered by
the Board of Adjustments and Appeals for six months.
Amended: Ordinance No. 27, 3rd Series
Amended: Ordinance No. 56, 3rd Series (4/17/2012)
149 Zoning Code § 152.151
§ 152.150 APPEALS.
(A) Appeals of administrative decisions. A person having interest in land may appeal an
administrative decision in the carrying out of the provisions of this Chapter. The appeals may
include, but are not limited to, the interpretation of the zoning map or any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or any other administrative official
charged with enforcing this Chapter.
(B) Procedure.
(1) Any person wishing to appeal an administrative decision in the enforcement of this
Chapter shall fill out an appeal application on a form prepared by the Zoning Administrator and
submit it to the Zoning Administrator, together with a fee of $50. The person shall also submit
exhibits deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to evaluate the appeal.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application for appeal and exhibits to the
Board of Adjustments and Appeals.
(3) A notice of the time and place of the time that the Board of Adjustments and Appeals
will meet to hear the appeal shall be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to the
appellant.
(4) The appellant shall appear before the Board of Adjustments and Appeals in order to
answer questions.
(5) The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall review the application, exhibits and
statements and make a recommendation to the Council.
(6) The Council shall take action on the application within 60 days after receipt of the
application by the Zoning Administrator. The Council may extend the time limit before the end of
the initial 60 day period by providing written notice of the extension to the applicant. The
notification must state the reasons for the extension and its anticipated length, which may not
exceed 60 days unless approved by the applicant. The Council may affirm, reverse or modify the
order, interpretation, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator.
152.151 SITE PLAN.
(A) An individual applying for a Zoning Amendment, Conditional Use Permit, or
Variance shall submit a site plan at the time of application.
(B) The applicant shall be bound by the site plan after the granting of a Zoning
Amendment, Conditional Use Permit or Variance. No Building Permit shall be issued unless it is in
conformance with the approved site plan. Any changes shall be approved by the Council.
(C) The site plan shall include those requirements deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator and may include, but are not limited to, the following:
152.151 Thief River Falls - Land Usage 150
(1) The name and address of all owners and developers of the proposed
development;
(2) The legal description and lot size, in feet, of the proposed development;
(3) The location and size of buffers, parking lots, recreation areas and facilities,
streets, sidewalks, signs, storage areas, and water areas;
(4) Detailed grading plans and specifications, landscaping, and topography
diagrams;
(5) Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, fire hydrants, water
systems, electrical services, gas services, cable television, and street lighting;
(6) Preliminary floor plans and elevations for all permanent structures; or,
(7) Staging and timing of construction program regardless of whether the entire
area will be developed at one time or in stages.
§ 152.152 NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES, AND USES.
(A) Nonconforming lots.
(1) Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on the effective date of this
Chapter that do not meet the minimum lot area requirements of this Chapter may be allowed as
building sites without variances from minimum lot area requirements, provided it meets the
requirements of § 152.028(E), the use is permitted in the zoning district, that the lot has been in
separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became substandard, the lot was created
compliant with official controls in effect at the time and sewage treatment requirements are met. If
there were no official controls in effect at the time a lot was established, the lot must meet the
requirements of the official controls that were first adopted.
(2) If in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership any individual
lot does not meet the minimum lot area requirements of this Chapter, the lot must not be considered
as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of development. The lot must be combined with one or
more contiguous lots, each group of combined lots meeting the minimum lot area requirements of
this Chapter where possible.
(B) Nonconforming structures. Any structure existing upon the effective date of this Chapter
that does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions, unless otherwise specified herein:
(1) Nonconforming structures shall not be physically expanded or enlarged; and,
151 Zoning Code § 152.998
(2) If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed, the structure may be repaired
or rebuilt to the original outside dimensions. Any rebuilt structure shall be repositioned on the lot to
minimize as many violations of the setback requirements of this Chapter as possible as determined
by the Board of Adjustments and Appeals.
(C) Nonconforming use. Any use existing upon the effective date of this Chapter that does not
conform to the provisions of this Chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions,
unless otherwise specified herein:
(1) A nonconforming use shall not be intensified;
(2) If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, any
further use must conform to the provisions of this Chapter; and,
(3) Normal maintenance of a structure containing or related to a lawful nonconforming
use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not
extend, enlarge, or intensify the nonconforming use.
§ 152.153 SALES, GARAGE, RUMMAGE, OR YARD
An activity conducted on a residential lot where an owner or rent of the property sells personally
used clothing, equipment, furnishings, machines, or tools. Sales of this nature shall be conducted
no more than four times per year on a residential lot and each sale shall have duration of not more
than three days.
§ 152.998 VIOLATION.
Every person violates a Section, Division, Subsection or Provision of this Chapter when they
perform an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fail to act when the failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
Ch. 152, App. A Zoning Code 152
APPENDIX A: LOTS
153 Thief River Falls - Land Usage Ch. 152, App. B
APPENDIX B: YARDS
LEGEND
LLF- Lot Line Front
LLR- Lot Line Rear
LLS- Lot Line Side
CL- Corner Lot
TL- Through Lot
IL- Interior Lot
Ch. 152, App. C Zoning Code 154
APPENDIX C: PARKING DIMENSIONS
T.S.O. III Thief River Falls - Table of Special Ordinances 12
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Series Date Passed Description
CABLE FRANCHISE
2 2nd 06-24-1977 Granting a Cable TV Franchise to Sjobergs,
for a period of ten years.
130 2nd 11-24-1987 Granting a Cable TV Franchise to Sjobergs,
for a period of ten years.
292 2nd 02-04-1998 Granting a franchise to Sjobergs, Inc. to
construct, erect, operate and maintain in,
upon, along, across, above or over or under
the streets, alleys, easements, public ways and
public places all poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other
conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the City of a
cable television system for the City for a term
of 10 years.
GAS FRANCHISE
301 1st 09-07-1964 Granted a Gas Franchise to Northern Star
Natural Gas Company.
334 1st 01-01-1969 Amendment to Gas Franchise
151 2nd 08-08-1989 Amendment to Gas Franchise.
155 2nd 10-10-1989 Granted a Gas Franchise to Northern
Minnesota Utilities for a period of 25 years.
317 2nd 12-28-1999 Extending Gas Franchise date until 3/13/00.
321 2nd 03-28-2000 Amending Gas Franchise Fee regulations.
322 2nd 04-28-2000 Amending Ord. 155 – Gas Franchise
323 2nd 04-28-2000 Extending Gas Franchise date until 12/31/2014
69 3rd 10-21-2014 Amending Ord. 155 – Gas Franchise.
T.S.O. III Thief River Falls - Table of Special Ordinances 13
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
71 3rd 12-02-2014 Amending Ord. 155 – Gas Franchise.
82 3rd 10-19-2015 Amending Ord. 155 – Gas Franchise by
amending the provision related to Franchise
Fee

3 Annexations T.S.O. I
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
81 1st 8-26-1903 Annexing Highland Addition
83 1st 06-25-1904 Annexing Oakland Addition.
91 1st 04-21-1906 Annexing P. Meehan’s Addition.
94 1st 07-8-1908 Annexing Riverside Addition.
199 1st 05-17-1938 Annexing Blocks 1 & 6 of Fairground Addition
and Lots 56, 57, 58, 59, 70 and 71 of Fairfield
Addition.
204 1st 05-23-1939 Annexing Block 1, Outlots A & B and a part of C
of Park Addition and Lots 21 & 22, Block 3 of
Bratrud’s Rearrangement.
212 1st 09-09-1941 Annexing portion of Fairfield Addition.
219 1st 12-11-1945 Annexing portion of Fairground Addition and
Wonderland Addition.
225 1st 10-22-1947 Annexing Blocks 1, 2, 3, & 4 of Southern
Addition.
239 1st 03-26-1952 Annexing portion of Fairfax Addition and
Townsite of Fairfield.
250 1st 08-18-1954 Annexing tract of land between present limits
north of 6th Street and 8th Street.
268 1st 05-24-1956 Annexing tract in 27-154-43.
271 1st 02-28-1957 Annexing Bratrud’s 2nd Re-Arr of part of Park
Addition.
273 1st 06-18-1957 Annexing Magnuson’s Addition.
281 1st 11-27-1958 Annexing part of Lot 3 of Section 4-153-43.
291 1st 03-06-1961 Annexing part of Lot 3 of Section 3-153-43.
300 1st 03-02-1964 Annexing part of Lot 4 Section 27-154-43.
T.S.O. I Thief River Falls - Table of Special Ordinances 4
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
309 1st 09-22-1966 Annexing portion of 28-254-43 (apts. on North
State).
310 1st 12-21-1966 Annexing Govt Lot 8 and part of Govt Lot 9, of
27-154-43.
312 1st 03-01-1967 Annexing Vocational School Property 27-154-43.
315 1st 03-22-1967 Annexing Govt Lots 1 and 2 Section 4-153-43.
316 1st 03-22-1967 Annexing Lots 9, 14, and 15 of Fairfield
Addition.
319 1st 05-15-1967 Annexing part of Govt Lot 5 Section 4-153-43.
320 1st 09-06-1967 Annexing Lots 5 & 6 in Block 3 of Park Addition.
329 1st 03-20-1968 Annexing Lots 19 & 20 in Rustad’s Subdivision
of Govt Lots 7 & 8, 34-154-43.
330 1st 03-20-1968 Annexing Lots 10, 11 & 12 of Garden Addition to
Fairfield.
331 1st 03-20-1968 Annexing Lots 3 & 4 in Block 35 of Townsite of
Red Lake Rapids; parts of Lots 7-10 in Block 7 of
Park Addition; and Lot 1 in Block 5 of Park
Addition.
335 1st 04-07-1969 Annexing tract in SE ¼ of SW ¼ 25-154-43 and
tract in Twnshp 154, Range 43.
336 1st 04-07-1969 Annexing two tracts in Govt Lot 3 of Section 3-
153-43.
337 1st 04-07-1969 Annexing part of Govt Lot 4 Section 3-153-43.
338 1st 04-07-1969 Annexing part of Govt Lot 10 and 11 Section 4-
153-43.
339 1st 04-07-1969 Annexing part of Section 27-154-43 and 34-154-
43.
343 1st 11-26-1969 Annexing portion of Park Addition.
5 Annexations T.S.O. I
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
344 1st 11-26-1969 Annexing part of Lots 1, 2, and 3 in Block 7 of
Park Addition.
345 1st 12-08-1969 Annexing part of Govt Lots 3 & 4 Section 4-153-
43.
347 1st 12-24-1969 Annexing part of Govt Lot 3 Section 3-153-43.
348 1st 12-24-1969 Annexing part of Govt Lot 4 Section 27-154-43.
349 1st 12-24-1969 Annexing Lots 1 & 2 of Heinze Addition and part
of Govt Lot 11 Section 4-153-43.
351 1st 1-28-1970 Annexing part of Govt Lot 4 Section 3-153-43.
352 1st 01-28-1970 Annexing part of Rustad’s Subdivision and
Sherwood Forest Addition.
353 1st 01-28-1970 Annexing part of Govt Lot 7 Section 34-154-43.
354 1st 03-30-1970 Annexing part of Park Addition, Govt Lot 13 and
part of Govt Lot 12 and part of Govt Lot 11
Section 35-154-43.
355 1st 03-30-1970 Annexing tract in N1/2 of Section 4-153-43.
356 1st 03-30-1970 Annexing 3 parcels in Township of North.
357 1st 03-30-1970 Annexing tract in Township of North.
359 1st 07-15-1970 Annexing Lots 5 – 10 in Block 1 of Arthur’s First
Addition.
362 1st 11-16-1970 Annexing tract in Govt Lot 3 Section 3-153-43.
363 1st 09-23-1970 Annexing NW1/4 of SW1/4 of Section 3-153-43.
365 1st 02-10-1971 Annexing tract in Noper’s 2nd Addition and part
of 32-154-53.
366 1st 03-23-1971 Annexing tract in Section 28-154-43.
T.S.O. I Thief River Falls - Table of Special Ordinances 6
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
371 1st 10-20-1971 Annexing part of NW1/4 of NW1/4 Section 35-
154-43.
372 1st 11-17-1971 Annexing north portion of Govt Lot 3, and Govt
Lot 1 & 2 of 3-153-43 and of Govt Lot 1 Section
2-153-43.
373 1st 11-29-1971 Annexing part of Govt Lots 9-11 of Section 35-
154-43 and part of Govt Lots 6-8 of Section 2-
153-43.
378 1st 03-27-1972 Annexing part of Govt Lot 3 Section 3-153-43.
382 1st 10-09-1972 Annexing part of Govt Lot 3 Section 3-153-43.
383 1st 10-09-1972 Annexing part of Govt Lot 4 Section 3-153-43.
389 1st 07-18-1973 Annexing part of NW1/4 of NW1/4 Section 35-
154-43.
399 1st 12-04-1974 Annexing part of E1/2 of SE1/4 Section 32-154-
43.
400 1st 12-04-1974 Annexing tract abutting NW corner of Lot 9 in
Oakland Addition.
401 1st 04-16-1975 Annexing part of W1/2 of SW ¼ and part o fS1/2
of NW1/4 Section 4-153-43.
403 1st 08-25-1975 Annexing part of replat of Tessum’s Addition.
404 1st 09-24-1975 Annexing Stordahl Truck Line property –
originally part of Old Dumpground.
414 1st 07-19-1976 Annexing part of Govt Lot 3 Section 3-153-43.
416 1st 08-30-1976 Annexing part of SE1/4 of SW1/4 Section 28-154-
43.
418 1st 09-20-1976 Annexing part of Govt Lot 1 Section 3-153-43.
419 1st 10-04-1976 Annexing tract in NE1/4 of SW1/4 Section 3-153-
43.
7 Annexations T.S.O. I
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
420 1st 11-29-1976 Annexing part of Gov’t Lot 9 Section 35-154-43
(Kordel Furniture).
421 1st 02-14-1977 Annexing part of Gov’t Lot 2 Section 3-153-43.
3 2nd 07-11-1977 Annexing part of Gov’t Lot 2 Section 3-153-43.
4 2nd 07-26-1977 Annexing parcel in SW1/4 of NE1/4 Section 28-
154-43.
5 2nd 09-13-1977 Annexing part of N1/2 of NE1/4 Section 32-154-
43.
12 2nd 12-13-1977 Annexing part of S1/2 of SW1/4 Section 35-154-
43.
14 2nd 12-27-1977 Annexing part of NW1/4 of NW1/4 Section 35-
154-43.
16 2nd 02-14-1978 Annexing NE corner of SE1/4 of SW1/4 south of
Wonderland,/west of Oakland/east of Burlington
Railroad.
19 2nd 04-26-1978 Annexing part of Gov’t Lots 9-12 Section 35-154-
43 (Barnick property).
21 2nd 06-13-1978 Annexing part of Gov’t Lots 11-12 Section 35-
154-43 (Ornquist property).
25 2nd 09-12-1978 Annexing tract in NE1/4 Section 32-154-43 and
part of Noper’s 2nd Addition.
29 2nd 04-10-1979 Annexing Lots 1-3 in block 1 of Myhrer’s
Addition.
31 2nd 09-10-1979 Annexing Lot 4 of Block 1 of Peterson’s 1st
Addition.
32 2nd 11-13-1979 Annexing Gov’t Lots 2 & 3 Section 3-143-43
(Kleinvachter church property).
87 2nd 09-11-1984 Annexing Gov’t Lots 2 & 3 Section 3-153-43
(Arctco property).
T.S.O. I Thief River Falls - Table of Special Ordinances 8
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
102 2nd 12-03-1985 Annexing 5 acres in Section 2-153-43 and a part
of Gov’t Lot 1 Section 2-153-43.
164 2nd 12-27-1990 Annexing E. 646.3’ of North 270’ of SE 1/4 of SE
1/4 Section 4-153-43 (Greg Stauss property).
219 2nd 07-13-1993 Annexing that part of Government Lot 1, Section
3 and that part of Government Lot 1, Section 2,
all in Township 153 North, Range 43 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian to the City.
220 2nd 07-13-1993 Annexing a parcel of land which is part of the
south half of the southeast quarter of Section 32,
Township 154 North, Range 43 West to the City.
244 2nd 12-13-1994 Annexing Lots 4 and 5 of Block 1 of Peterson’s
Addition to the City; Lots 1 through 9 of Block 6
of Nelson’s First Addition to the City; and Lots 4,
5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of Block 7 of Nelson’s First
Addition to the City.
245 2nd 12-13-1994 Annexing Lots 1 through 5 of Block 1 of Baken’s
First Addition to the City.
246 2nd 12-13-1994 Annexing that part of the northeast quarter of
the southeast quarter of Section 5, Township 153
North, Range 43 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian to the City.
247 2nd 12-13-1994 Annexing a parcel of land lying in and being a
part of the east one half of the southwest quarter
of Section 28, Township 154 North, Range 43
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, containing
seven acres more or less; Lots 5 and 6, Block 1, in
Wonderland’s Addition to the City; Lots 7, 8, 9
and 10 of Block 1 and Lots 7 and 8 of Block 2 of
Wonderland Addition; all that vacated part of
Tenth Street lying between Lot 7 of Block 2 and
Lot 10 of Block 1 of the Wonderland Addition;
the east half of that part of vacated State Avenue
extending north from the northwest corner of
Lot 10 of Block 1 to the northwest corner of Lot
9 Annexations T.S.O. I
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
8 of Block 2 of Wonderland Addition; the west
five feet of that part of the alley in Block 1 in the
Wonderland Addition vacated by judgement of
the District Court; and, subject to the dedication
for highway and road purposes, the south 15 feet
of Lot 7 of Block 1 in Wonderland Addition to
the City.
248 2nd 03-14-1995 Annexing a parcel of land which is part of the
northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of 5
Section 32, Township 154 North of Range 43
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian; and a
parcel of land which is part of the northeast
quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 32,
Township 154 North of Range 43 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian to the City.
249 2nd 03-14-1995 Annexing that part of the northwest quarter of
the southeast quarter of Section 27, Township
154 North, Range 43 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian to the City.
250 2nd 03-14-1995 Annexing Lots 2 through 8 of Block 5, Nelson’s
First Addition; and Lots 1, 2, 3 and 10 of Block 7,
Nelson’s First Addition to the City.
259 2nd 07-25-1995 Annexing the unplatted territory described as
follows: beginning at a point 593 feet south of the
northeast corner of Government Lot 10, Section
4, Township 153 North, Range 43 West; thence
west parallel to the south line of Government Lot
10, continuing over and across Government Lot 9
of the same Section, Township and Range and
parallel to the south line of Government Lot 9 to
the Government meander line on the east bank of
the Red Lake River; thence southeasterly along
the Government meander line a distance equal to
330 feet if the meander line ran directly south;
thence due east over and across the Government
Lots 9 and 10 and parallel to the south line of
T.S.O. I Thief River Falls - Table of Special Ordinances 10
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
the Lots to the east line of Government Lot 10;
thence north a distance of 330 feet to the place of
beginning, said tract of land containing 17.50
acres more or less; and that part of Lots 9 and
10, Section 4, Township 153 North, Range 43
West to the City.
283 2nd 03-25-1997 Annexing Lots 4 and 5 of Block 1 of Peterson’s
Addition; Lots 1 through 9 of Block 6 of Nelson’s
First Addition; and Lots 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of
Block 7 of Nelson’s First Addition to the City.
284 2nd 03-25-1997 Annexing a parcel of land lying in and being a
part of the east one half of the southwest quarter
of Section 28, Township 154 North of Range 43
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian; Lots 5 and
6 of Block 1 in Wonderland’s Addition; Lots 7, 8,
9 and 10 of Block 1 and Lots 7 and 8 of Block 2 of
Wonderland Addition; all that vacated part of
Tenth Street lying between Lot 7 of Block 2 and
Lot 10 of Block 1 in Wonderland Addition;
adjacent vacated State Avenue extending north
from the northwest corner of Lot 8 of Block 2 of
the Wonderland Addition; and the adjacent alley
in Block 1 in the Wonderland Addition to the
City.
285 2nd 03-25-1997 Annexing Lots 2 through 8 of Block 5, Nelson’s
First Addition, including adjacent street and the
adjacent river (Red Lake); and Lots 1, 2, 3 and
10 of Block 7, Nelson’s First Addition to the City.
300 2nd 10-13-1998 Annexing that part of Government Lots 1 and 2,
Section 5, Township 153 North, Range 43 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian to the City.
306 2nd 02-09-1999 Annexing Lot 6 of Block 1 and Lots 1-5 of Block
2 and Outlot A of Baken’s First Addition.
307 2nd 02-09-1999 Annexing Challenger Park Area
11 Annexations T.S.O. I
Ord. No. Series No. Date Passed Description
308 2ND 02-09-1999 Annexing Lot 1, less that east 25 feet, Block 5,
Nelson’s First Addition, including adjacent
Nelson Drive to its centerline and also including
adjacent Red Lake River to its centerline,
containing approximately .5 acres, to the City.
309 2nd 02-09-1999 Annexing the north 33 feet of Thirteenth Street
right-of-way lying between Magnuson’s Addition
and M. & J. Second Addition in the City in the
southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 28, Township 154 North, Range 43 West
of the Fifth Principal Meridian, containing .4
acres, to the City.
328 2nd 12-18-2001 Annexing the northeast quarter of the southeast
quarter of Section 27, Township 154 north of
Range 43 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian.
(Baseball/Softball complex).
329 2nd 12-18-2001 Annexing Part of Government Lot 1, Section 2,
Township 153 North, Range 43 West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, and part of Government Lot
1, Section 3, Township 153 North, Range 43 West
of the Fifty Principal Meridian. (Hanson’s First
Addition).
5 3rd 06-24-2003 Annexing part of Block 3 and 4 of Riverwood
Subdivision and part of 34-153-43 and part of
Bothun’s 2nd Subdivision. (MMCDC/Thompson/
Hilderbrand).
28 3RD 04-17-2007 Annexing 65 acres of Rocksbury Township –
(MMCDC)
Resolution No. 2-41-09 02-17-2009 Annexing portion of Rocksbury Township (TRF
Care Center)
Resolution No. 6-134-09 06-02-2009 Annexing portion of North Township (Beito,
Ness, Konickson, Digi-Key,) “Orderly
Annexation”
48 3RD 09-21-2010 Annexing portion of Rocksbury – 100%
surrounded by City limit properties.
l,l Zoning Map Changes
TABLE III: ZONING MAP CHANGES
T.S.O. III
6
7
8
25
3'd Series 10-28-2003
3'd Series
3'd Series 05-25-2004
09-28-2004
Rezone Lots 1-3 of Block 13 of Originat
Townsite from Downtown Fringe District (C-
4) to General Residential District (R-2),
Rezone West 600' of part of Govt Lot 5 of
Section 4-153N-43W. (Oakland Park Nursing
Home property).
Rezone part of Block 3 and 4 of Riverwood
Subdivision and part of Section 4-153-N43
and Bothun's 2"d Subdivision from AG and
UR to Suburban Residential District (R-1).
02-24-2004 Rezone Lots 3-5 of Block I and Lots l-9 of
Block 2 of Rohl's Addition from AG to
General Residential District (R-2).
t2
t4
t5
24
30
39
3d Series
3'd Series 02-22-2005 Amending Comp PIan to designate area lying
S.W. of Nelson Drive to Hwy 59 as
commercial.
3'd Series 03-18-2005 Rezone Barnick's 3.d Addition from AG to
General Business District (C-2).
3RD Series 08-24-2006 Rezone Lots 3 & 4, Block l, Valley Omdahl
Addition from R-4 to C-2.
3RD Series 08-24-2006 Amend Comprehensive PIan Land Use Map to
include Ordinance #24.
3'd Series 04-17 -2007 Adopting Comprehensive Plan.
3'd Series 06-17-2008 Rezone portions of Blocks l-5 of Elementary
First Addition from Agricultural to R-2.
03-17-2009 Rezone Lots l-8 Block I & Lot I Btock 2 &
Outlots A&B Block 2 of South Eastwood
Addition.
.t0 3'd Series
Ord. No. Series Date Passed Descriotion
l5 Zoning Map Changes T.S.O. III
Series Date Passed Descriolion
3'd Series 07 -20-2010 Zone 2001 Eastwood Drive (St Francis Health
Services - TR Care Center) to Mutti-Family
Residential District R-,1.
3rd Series ll-15-2011 Rezone part of SEI/4 of SEI/4 Section 4
Township 153 Range 43W from R-2 to R-4.
3'd Series 12-04-2012 Rezone lots 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20, Block I of
Swanson-Horien First Addition
3'd Series 8-20-2013 Rezone lots 13, 14, and the North 10 feet oflot
15, Block 19, Original Townsite
3'd Series 5-20-2014 Rezone Lot 1,2,3,4,5 the southerly 16 feet of
lot 5 all in block I of Original Townsite and
northerly 40 feet of the vacated 6th street
right-of-way - part of vacated blocks 17 and
32 of Original Townsite
3'd Series 11-18-2014 Rezone Block I and 2 of Sanford First
Addition from Agriculture District (AG) to
General Business District (C-2)
3'd Series 02-03-2015 Rezone Lots 9 and 10, Block 1, Pine Wood
Estates from R-l to R-2
3'd Series 03-03-2015 Rezone Lots 1, Block I and Lot l, Block 2,
River Pointe Addition from AG to R-2
3"d Series 04-07 -2015 Rezone Lots 1 and 2, Block I ofNopers Fourth
Addition from AG to R-4
3'd Series 05-05-2015 Rezone Lot 4, Block I of Oakland Park
Fourth Addition from C-2 to R-4
Rezone Lots 1 and 2, Block 4 of Nelson's First
Addition from AG to R-l -
Part of Government Lots 8 and 9 of Section
35, Township 154 North of Range 43 West of
the 5th Principal Meridian from AG to R-2
Ord. No.
47
5.1
59
6l
65
74
75
76
70
77
79 3'd Series 07-07-201s
86
88
93
80
8,1
87
90
95
97
100
3'd Series 09-01-2015 All of Lots 20,27,40, Lot 32 less the South 50
feet of the East 125 feet and Lot 39 less the
East 125 feet; and the West Yz of vacated
Horace Avenue lying adjacent to Lots 20,,27
and 32 Iess the South 50 feet and that part of
Resen'e D lying adjacent to the previously
described properfy all within Fairfield
Addition
3'd Series l2-01-2015 Lots 1, 2 and 9 of Block 1, all of Block 2 and
all of Block 5 of Aspenwood Addition from
AG to C-2
Lots 3,4,5,6,7, and 8 of Block l, all of Btock
3 and all of Block 4 of Aspenwood Addition
from AG to R-4
3'd Series 03-01-2016 Lot 52, Fairfield Addition from General
Industrial District (I-2) to General Business
District (C-2)
3'd Series 03-01-2016 Lots l-5, Block 11, Porter's Addition from
Central Business District (C-3) to Downtown
Fringe District (C-4)
3'd Series 03-01-2016 Lot 1, Block l, Valley Omdahl Addition from
Agricultural District (AG) to Multi-Family
Residential District (R-4)
3'd Series 06-07 -2016 Lots 5-8, Block 21, Original Townsite from
Downtown Fringe District (C-4) to Central
Business District (C-3)
3'd Series 07-19-2016 All vacated platted property in Hightand
Addition from General Industrial District (I-
2) to General Business District (C-2)
3'd Series 09-06-2016 Blocks I and 2, Riverside Addition from High
Density Residential District (R-3) to General
Residential District (R-2)
3'd Series 11-15-2016 Lots 1,2 & 3, Useldinger's First Addition, a
replat of lots 4 & 7, block l, Raedel's First
Addition
3'd Series 07 -05-2017 Lots 1, 2, & 3, Blk l, Nopers Fifth Addition
from Agricultural District (AG) to Multi-
Family Residential District (R-4)
105 3'd Series 03-06-2018 Lots l, Blk 1, Nopers Fifth Addition from
106 3'd Series 05-01-2018
3'd Series 09-04-2018
3'd Series 02-19-2019
High Density Residential District (R-4) to
General Business District (C-2)
Parts of Barnick's First Addition property
from Agricultural District (AG) to High
Density Residential District (R-4)
Lot 2, Lot 3 and N 80' of Lot 4, BIk 1,
Millyard Subdivision from General Industrial
District (I-2) to General Business District (C-
2)
Lots l-5, Blk I and Lots l-6, Blk 2, Barnick's
Fourth Addition from High Density
Residential District (R-4) to General
Residential District (R-2)
115
119