CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF VADNAIS HEIGHTS, MINNESOTA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Bob Fletcher 
Mayor 
____________ 
Heidi Gunderson 
Craig Johnson 
Terry Nyblom 
Greg Urban 
City Council 
____________ 
Kevin Watson 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Erickson, Bell, Beckman, and Quinn, P.A. 
City Attorneys 
____________ 
CURRENT CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Heidi Gunderson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Craig Johnson 
Greg Urban 
Patricia Youker 
Bob Morse 
City Council 
____________ 
Kevin Watson 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Erickson, Bell, Beckman, and Quinn, P.A. 
City Attorneys 
____________ 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1999 Code, as supplemented through May 17, 2017, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1999 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, that may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Amanda Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Nolan Wall, AICP, City Planning and Community Development Director and Peggy Aho, Deputy City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota. 2018. 
CITY OF VADNAIS HEIGHTS
COUNTY OF RAMSEY
STATE OF MINNESOTA 
ORDINANCE NO. 729 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF VADNAIS HEIGHTS, MINNESOTA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
The City Council of the City of Vadnais Heights does hereby ordain: 
I. 
The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 38, each inclusive, is adopted. 
II. 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 1, 2018, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
III. 
The repeal provided for in Section II hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance. 
IV. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum required or permitted by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
V. 
Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
VI. 
Ordinances adopted after May 1, 2018, which amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
VII. 
Sec. 2-84 of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(b)  The commission shall at its first meeting of each year, elect a vice chairperson who shall automatically become chairperson the following year in the event that a chairperson does not seek another term or has served the maximum term . No member shall serve more than two consecutive years as chairperson. The planning commission may, at its discretion, elect a secretary from their membership. 
VIII. 
Sec. 32-187 of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(1)  All interior street rights-of-way shall be at least 50 feet wide, however, the city may require additional right-of-way to be dedicated to accommodate utilities, trail/sidewalk facilities, or for other reasons as determined necessary by the city council. 
IV. [IX.] 
Sec. 38-215(b) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(1)  Medical marijuana distribution facilities, in compliance with section 38-624 subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The following shall be prohibited: 
1.  The sale of any products other than medical marijuana within the facility. 
2.  The sale of non-medical marijuana. 
b.  All distribution facilities shall be at least 1,000 feet from any existing K-12 schools, as well as existing commercial daycare facilities as measured between buildings. 
c.  Only one distribution facility per 10,000 city residents, or a fraction thereof, shall be allowed. 
d.  The following security measures shall be required: 
1.  During all hours of operation, there shall be at least one licensed, uniformed security guard present and visible on all premises. 
2.  The facility shall operate and maintain in good working order a closed-circuit television (CCTV) surveillance system on its premises that operates 24 hours per day, seven days per week, and visually records all areas that might contain plant material or medical marijuana, including all safes and vaults, and all points of entry and exit, including sales and clinic areas. 
3.  The facility shall install and maintain a professionally monitored security alarm system that provides intrusion and fire detection of all entrances and exits. The alarm system must remain operational during a power outage. 
4.  The facility shall be equipped with an electronic controlled access that limits access to the building to authorized individuals, tracks personnel entry and exit times, locks down the distribution facility in the event of a security threat, stores data for retrieval, remains operational during a power outage, and is capable of remote administration. 
e.  In addition to the submittal requirements stated in the conditional use permit application section, operating documents that describe operational and management practices shall be submitted, including: 
1.  Security measures to deter and prevent theft of medical marijuana. 
2.  Disposal methods for all waste material. 
3.  Response plans for measures to be taken in the event of a security breach at a distribution facility, or while medical marijuana is en route to a distribution facility. 
4.  Proposed product delivery plan. 
5.  Other information deemed necessary and requested by the city. 
X. 
Sec. 38-273(b) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(10)  Medical marijuana distribution facilities, in compliance with section 38-624 subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The following shall be prohibited: 
1.  The sale of any products other than medical marijuana within the facility. 
2.  The sale of non-medical marijuana. 
b.  All distribution facilities shall be at least 1,000 feet from any existing K-12 schools, as well as existing commercial daycare facilities as measured between buildings. 
c.  Only one distribution facility per 10,000 city residents, or a fraction thereof, shall be allowed. 
d.  The following security measures shall be required: 
1.  During all hours of operation, there shall be at least one licensed, uniformed security guard present and visible on all premises. 
2.  The facility shall operate and maintain in good working order a closed-circuit television (CCTV) surveillance system on its premises that operates 24 hours per day, seven days per week, and visually records all areas that might contain plant material or medical marijuana, including all safes and vaults, and all points of entry and exit, including sales and clinic areas. 
3.  The facility shall install and maintain a professionally monitored security alarm system that provides intrusion and fire detection of all entrances and exits. The alarm system must remain operational during a power outage. 
4.  The facility shall be equipped with an electronic controlled access that limits access to the building to authorized individuals, tracks personnel entry and exit times, locks down the distribution facility in the event of a security threat, stores data for retrieval, remains operational during a power outage, and is capable of remote administration. 
e.  In addition to the submittal requirements stated in the special use permit conditional use permit application section, operating documents that describe operational and management practices shall be submitted, including: 
1.  Security measures to deter and prevent theft of medical marijuana. 
2.  Disposal methods for all waste material. 
3.  Response plans for measures to be taken in the event of a security breach at a distribution facility, or while medical marijuana is en route to a distribution facility. 
4.  Proposed product delivery plan. 
5.  Other information deemed necessary and requested by the city. 
XI. 
Sec. 38-363(c) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(2)  Medical marijuana distribution facilities, in compliance with section 38-624 subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The following shall be prohibited: 
1.  The sale of any products other than medical marijuana within the facility. 
2.  The sale of non-medical marijuana. 
b.  All distribution facilities shall be at least 1,000 feet from any existing K-12 schools, as well as existing commercial daycare facilities as measured between buildings. 
c.  Only one distribution facility per 10,000 city residents, or a fraction thereof, shall be allowed. 
d.  The following security measures shall be required: 
1.  During all hours of operation, there shall be at least one licensed, uniformed security guard present and visible on all premises. 
2.  The facility shall operate and maintain in good working order a closed-circuit television (CCTV) surveillance system on its premises that operates 24 hours per day, seven days per week, and visually records all areas that might contain plant material or medical marijuana, including all safes and vaults, and all points of entry and exit, including sales and clinic areas. 
3.  The facility shall install and maintain a professionally monitored security alarm system that provides intrusion and fire detection of all entrances and exits. The alarm system must remain operational during a power outage. 
4.  The facility shall be equipped with an electronic controlled access that limits access to the building to authorized individuals, tracks personnel entry and exit times, locks down the distribution facility in the event of a security threat, stores data for retrieval, remains operational during a power outage, and is capable of remote administration. 
e.  In addition to the submittal requirements stated in the special use permit conditional use permit application section, operating documents that describe operational and management practices shall be submitted, including: 
1.  Security measures to deter and prevent theft of medical marijuana. 
2.  Disposal methods for all waste material. 
3.  Response plans for measures to be taken in the event of a security breach at a distribution facility, or while medical marijuana is en route to a distribution facility. 
4.  Proposed product delivery plan. 
5.  Other information deemed necessary and requested by the city. 
XII. 
Sec. 38-395(a) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
Building Feet Minor arterial street 40 Collector street 40 Local street 35 Interior lot line 20 Residential zoning boundary 50  
  
Parking Lot or Circulation Drive Feet Arterial street 20 25 Collector street 20 Local street 15 20 Interior lot line 10 Residential zoning boundary 15  
XIII. 
Sec. 38-420(a) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(7)  Warehousing. 
a. (8)  Office showrooms. 
b. (9)  Public utility uses, public parks, provisions of underground utilities and the use of solar energy systems, including solar collectors for the use of the particular site, storage facilities and distribution components of space heating and cooling and domestic water heating. 
XIV. 
Sec. 38-420(c) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(13)  On-site retail sales for an allowed principal use , but only after application by the owner and determination by the council that such retail sales are not incompatible with surrounding land use and upon such conditions as the council shall establish. 
XV. 
Sec. 38-158 of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
Use Front Yard Setback Side Yard Setbacks 1 Rear Yard Setback Between Buildings Building Height Single-family detached dwelling and two-family dwelling 25 feet; 40 feet (arterial street) 10 feet; 25 feet (corner) 40 feet N/A 36 feet Three to eight-family dwelling and townhouse 30 feet; 40 feet (arterial street) 20 feet 2 ; 25 30 feet (corner) 4 3 0 feet Equal to the height of the building Senior housing 30 feet 20 feet 2 ; 30 feet (corner) 2 3 0 feet Apartment building No less than 35 feet, or 40 feet on an arterial street, or the average height of the building, whichever is greater  
XVI. 
Sec. 38-186 of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
Use Front Yard 
Setback Side Yard 
Setbacks Rear Yard 
Setback Building 
Height Single-wide manufactured home 20 feet 10 feet (one side); 25 feet (entry side) 10 feet Greater of 14 feet or the height of 1 manufactured home Double-wide manufactured home 20 feet 10 feet (each) 25 feet  
XVII. 
Sec. 38-622 of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
Any building proposed to exceed the maximum height restrictions contained in the underlying zoning district may be allowed by a variance conditional use permit subject to section 38- 38 43 and the following considerations: 
XVIII. 
Sec. 38-420(c) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(8)  Screened outside storage of materials, supplies, products or equipment. 
XIX. 
Sec. 38-420(a) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(10)  Screened outside storage of materials, supplies, products or equipment. 
XX. 
Sec. 38-420(c) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(13)  On-site retail sales, but only after application by the owner and determination by the council that such retail sales are not incompatible with surrounding land use and upon such conditions as the council shall establish. 
XXI. 
Sec. 38-420(b) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows (strikethrough indicates deletions; underline indicates additions): 
(3)  On-site retail sales, but only after review by the Development Review Committee that such retail sales are compatible with surrounding land uses and compliant with applicable standards. 
XXII. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect on November 1, 2018 and be enforced from and after its passage and publication. 
    PASSED by the City Council of the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota, this 18th day of September, 2018. 
/s/ Bob Fletcher 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Kevin Watson 
      City Administrator   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 729  9-18-2018 Included 1  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Authority; how Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections constitute a codification of the general ordinances of the city which have been enacted and published in accordance with the authority granted by state law. This Code shall be designated as "Code of Ordinances of the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited by the shortened title "Code of Vadnais Heights." 
State Law reference- Codification, M.S.A. § 415.021; codification as evidence, M.S.A. § 415.02. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all city ordinances, the following rules shall be observed; provided these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code or any ordinance that contains an express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content of such section may be repugnant thereto: 
    General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
    Acts by agents. When any provision requires an act to be done which may, by law, as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
    City. The term "city" or "this city" means the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota. 
    Code. The term "Code" or "this Code," unless otherwise expressly provided, means this Code of Ordinances. 
    Council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota. 
    County. The term "county" or "this county" means Ramsey County, Minnesota. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever any authority, duty or other activity is charged to a town officer or employee, it may be done as well by such person's duly appointed agent, so long as not prohibited by ordinance or the laws or constitution of the state, and so long as such officer or employee retains supervision over the discharge of the duly delegated authority, duty or activity. 
    Fee schedule. The term "fee schedule" means the official consolidated list of rates and amounts of city fees and charges as determined from time to time by the city council, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to the feminine and neutral genders. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, or another ordinance, the provision imposing the greater restriction on regulation shall be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers, give such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive and discretionary. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed. 
    M.S.A. The abbreviation "M.S.A." means and refers to the latest edition or supplement of Minnesota Statutes Annotated. 
    Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota" were added thereto. 
    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
    Occupant. The term "occupant" means any person who occupies the whole or any part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," as the sense requires. 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the city council of a general and permanent nature. 
    Owner of building or land. The phrase "owner of building or land" includes any sole owner, part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals. The term "person" shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever a violation of any section of this Code is punishable by a penalty or fine, and whenever the term "person" is used in such section for which a penalty is imposed for such violation, the term "person" includes partners or members of partnerships or associations, and as to corporations, includes the officers, agents, or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of the section. 
    Police. Whenever the term "police" is used in this Code, it refers to any police authority having jurisdiction within the city, and specifically to the Ramsey County sheriff, who has a contract to act as the police authority for the city. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes tangible or intangible, real, personal, or mixed property. 
    Public way. The term "public way" includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare. 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city council of a special or temporary character. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Minnesota. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, or other public thoroughfare. Each of the words includes the others, and, if the context permits, shall also include sidewalks. 
    Tenant. The term "tenant" means any person who occupies the whole or any part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the present, future or past tense includes each of the other tenses. 
(Code 1999, §§ 2.010, 223.010) 
State Law reference- Construction of words and phrases, M.S.A. § 645.08 et seq.; definitions of words and phrases, M.S.A. § 645.44 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines, notes, and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed to be titles of such sections or any part of the section. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes and state law references that may appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1999, § 2.020) 
Sec. 1-4. - Conflicting provisions. 
(a)  It is intended that no provision of this Code conflict with any federal or state law intended to preempt municipal jurisdiction with respect to the subject matter contained in this Code, and the provisions of this Code shall be construed, whenever possible, to avoid such conflict. 
(b)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(c)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(d)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
(e)  If any provisions of this Code and any technical code, adopted herein by reference, conflict, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
Sec. 1-5. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances, resolutions and activities not affected by Code. 
(a)  The adoption of this Code shall not repeal or otherwise affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any resolution not mentioned in the Code and not inconsistent with it; 
(4)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance zoning or rezoning a particular parcel of property, or accepting any plat or subdivision; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(9)  Any administrative or personnel ordinance not mentioned in the Code and not inconsistent with it; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with this Code regulating traffic on specific streets or portions thereof or in specific areas of the city; and 
(11)  Any ordinance levying any tax not in conflict with this Code. 
(b)  All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
    A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city clerk for examination by all persons. 
Sec. 1-8. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
    Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the city clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful to change or amend by deletion any part of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
State Law reference- Destruction, mutilation, alteration and falsification of public records prohibited, M.S.A. § 609.63(6). 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code sections. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all ordinances are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code or any ordinance shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment or decree shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code or any ordinance. 
(Code 1999, § 2.030) 
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section, article or chapter not theretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Vadnais Heights, Minnesota, is hereby amended by adding a section, article or chapter to be numbered _____, which the section reads as follows:...." The new section, article or chapter may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contractor or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code includes all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into this Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect or ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalties; attorney's fees and costs. 
(a)  Petty misdemeanor. Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this Code, and unless otherwise required by state law for a particular violation, whenever an act or omission is declared by this Code to be a petty misdemeanor any person violating the provision shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of nor more than $300.00. 
(b)  Misdemeanors. Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this Code, and unless otherwise required by state law for a particular violation, any person violating any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation adopted in the pursuance thereof, or any other provision of any code adopted in this Code by reference, including any provision declaring an act or omission to be a misdemeanor, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or both, plus, in each case, the costs of prosecution. If a provision of this Code is not designated as a petty misdemeanor, it shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in this subsection. 
(c)  Separate, continuing violations. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every day on which a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  Attorney fees and costs. In all cases where the county is enforcing compliance with this Code and the enforcement does not involve criminal prosecution, the offending party shall be required to reimburse the county for the county's attorney's fees and costs associated with enforcing the offending party's compliance with this Code. 
(e)  Other remedies. Nothing in this section shall abrogate other remedies available to the county under state law, which may be applied in addition to, or as an alternative to, penalties prescribed in this section for ordinance violation, including, without limitation, revocation of licenses or permits, injunctive relief, abatement authority regarding nuisances, and civil actions for recovery of damages to the extent permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of county ordinances, M.S.A. § 375.53; maximum fine for petty misdemeanors, M.S.A. § 609.0331; maximum penalty for misdemeanors, M.S.A. § 609.033; maximum penalty for ordinance violations, M.S.A. § 609.034. 
Sec. 1-15. - Issuance of citations for ordinance violations. 
(a)  The persons listed in this section, as employees or agents of the city, shall have power to issue citations for violations of this Code when such violations constitute offenses involving: 
(1)  Building construction, operation or maintenance; 
(2)  Fire and fire prevention; 
(3)  Public health and sanitation; 
(4)  Animal control; and 
(5)  Zoning. 
(b)  Authority granted by this section does not include authority to arrest or otherwise take a violator into custody or to secure a promise to appear in the court in lieu of arrest. 
(c)  Persons entitled to exercise the authority granted under this section are as follows: 
(1)  Fire chief and assistant fire chief. 
(2)  Code enforcement officer. 
(3)  Building official. 
(4)  Electrical inspector. 
(5)  Animal control officer. 
(6)  Parks/public works superintendent. 
(7)  Other employees or agents of the city specifically designated in writing by the city council. 
(d)  The form of the notice to be provided by persons authorized under this section shall be a summons with a complaint incorporated therein in the form adopted by rule or regulation of the municipal court. 
(Code 1999, §§ 224.010, 224.020) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-19. - Compensation of mayor and councilmembers. 
    The monthly salary of the mayor and each councilmember shall be established annually at the first council meeting of the year. 
(Code 1999, § 221.010; Ord. No. 161; Ord. No. 262; Ord. No. 364; Ord. No. 427; Ord. No. 545; Ord. No. 578, 9-19-2006) 
Secs. 2-20-2-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-42. - Elections. 
(a)  Time for holding. The city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of every even year. 
(b)  Notices. The city clerk shall cause ten days' posted notice and may also cause ten days' published notice of the city election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even year, and such notice shall specify the date, time and place of such election and shall also specify the offices to be filled and the questions, if any, to be determined by vote. 
(c)  Special elections. A special election shall be held to fill a council vacancy when required by M.S.A. § 412.02, subd. 2a, and any other applicable state law. The council shall, by resolution, determine the scheduling of the special election and in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1999, §§ 215.010-215.030) 
State Law reference- City elections, officers, terms, vacancies and employees, M.S.A. § 412.02. 
Sec. 2-43. - Combined office of clerk-treasurer. 
    The city has established the office of clerk-treasurer to be held by one person, to be appointed by a majority of the city council and to serve at the pleasure of the council. This section abolishes the separate offices of city clerk and city treasurer and combines the same. 
(Code 1999, § 219.010; Ord. No. 55, 8-24-1964) 
State Law reference- Duties of clerk and treasurer may be combined, M.S.A. § 412.591. 
Sec. 2-44. - Criminal history review for prospective city personnel. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state's computerized criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks for the positions described in this section. 
(b)  Criminal history employment background investigations. The county sheriff's office shall conduct a criminal history background investigation of applicants for the following full- or part-time positions within the city, unless the city's hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed: 
(1)  Employees of the city; 
(2)  Contract employees; 
(3)  Volunteers; 
(4)  Coaches. 
(c)  Access of data. In conducting the investigation, the sheriff's office is authorized to access data maintained in the state bureau of criminal apprehension's (BCA) computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is acquired shall be maintained at the sheriff's office under its custody. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be released by the sheriff's office to the hiring authority, including the city council, the city administrator, or other city staff involved in the hiring process. 
(d)  Authorization. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the sheriff's office, by written consent, to undertake the investigation, which must fully comply with the provisions of state law regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S.A. § 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: 
(1)  The reasons for the denial. 
(2)  The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S.A. § 364.06. 
(3)  The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment. 
(4)  That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. 
(Code 1999, § 234.100; Ord. No. 607, 1-20-2009) 
Secs. 2-45-2-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND SIMILAR BODIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-62. - Rules for certain city advisory commissions. 
(a)  Applicability. This division applies to the following city commissions: 
(1)  Health and public safety commission; 
(2)  Park, recreation and trails commission; and 
(3)  Planning commission. 
(b)  Notice of intended absence. A commission member shall notify the commission chairperson or the city clerk's office of any intended absence at a commission meeting prior to the meeting. 
(c)  Leaves of absence. A commissioner may request a leave of absence for no less than 60 days from all commission duties and must state the reason for such request. The request shall be acted upon by the chairperson of that commission, except that if the request is for over 90 days, it shall be acted upon by the council. If approved, such commissioner shall not be considered as absent under this section. 
(d)  Constructive resignation due to absences. A commission member who is absent from three consecutive meetings or who is absent from four or more meetings in any calendar year from their commission, shall be considered to have constructively resigned, and that commissioner's position shall then be filled in the manner set forth in this Code for such commission. 
(e)  Filling vacancies. In the event of a vacancy of any commission, the council liaison person for that commission shall initially interview applicants and then recommend the successor candidate to the council through the staff liaison. 
(f)  Membership on multiple committees restricted. No person may be on more than one commission, except that a commissioner may be a temporary alternate member on a commission. A temporary alternate member may be appointed by the council when there are openings on a commission and after advertisements to fill the positions and/or vacancies continue to exist. Upon filling all regular and alternate positions, the person filling the temporary alternate position must resign. 
(g)  Conflicts of interest. A commissioner shall not vote on an application nor take part in any business if the commissioner has any legal interest or relationship with an outside organization in which the city is having business dealings with and such interest or relationship might tend to impair the ability of the commissioner to not serve the best interests of the city or give preferential treatment. The commissioner should disclose any conflict of interest. Questions on potential conflicts of interest should be addressed to the staff or council liaison. 
(h)  Acceptance of gifts. Acceptance of any gift, outside of a ritual cup of coffee is prohibited. 
(i)  Conduct. Commissioners shall treat applicants, staff, consultants, other commissioners, council members, the general public, and city equipment in a respectful manner. 
(Code 1999, §§ 227.010-227.090) 
Sec. 2-63. - Health and public safety commission. 
    The city has established a health and public safety commission that shall assist and advise the city council in all policy matters relating to public safety and solid waste in the city and perform the following specific duties: 
(1)  Annually, and on a long-term basis, review police, fire, paramedic and EMT medical response, animal control, emergency management, traffic, and other street/trail safety-related concerns in the city and report recommendations, if any, to the council. 
(2)  Review and recommend procedures to the city council to promote the collection and recycling of solid waste and yard waste that the city must accomplish in order to meet or exceed requirements of the state Waste Management Act, M.S.A. ch. 115A, the county planning goals of M.S.A. § 473.803, subd. 1, and the Ramsey County Solid Waste Management Plan adopted February 23, 1987, to reduce the use of landfills for disposal of solid waste and to make each resident aware of the need to reduce the quantity of articles reaching the refuse stream. 
(3)  Attempt to provide the most cost-effective pickup service of solid waste and recycling that takes into consideration safety and minimal wear on streets within the city. 
(4)  With the assistance of the public service staff, plan spring and fall cleanups for the community. 
(5)  Propose, recommend, and advise the council on other matters of general environmental safety concerns within the community. 
(6)  Assist the public safety agencies in the development of management information and communication systems. 
(7)  Annually sponsor Minnesota Night to Unite events on the first Tuesday of August and assist in communicating public safety messages to the community through various modes of communication. 
(8)  Advise the council on all matters referred to it by the council. 
(Code 1999, §§ 217.010, 217.020) 
Secs. 2-64-2-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-83. - Established; composition; quorum; member qualifications; ex-officio and alternate members. 
(a)  The city has established a city planning commission to consist of not more than seven members. Four members shall constitute a quorum. Each member of the planning commission shall be a resident of the city who does not hold any elective or appointive public office. Civil service employment does not constitute public office. 
(b)  The city engineer and the city planner shall be ex-officio members of the commission, but shall not be entitled to vote as such. All other regular employees and consultants of the city shall cooperate with the planning commission and make themselves available and attend meetings when requested to do so. 
(c)  The council may appoint no more than two alternates to the commission. Such alternates may attend and take part in the commission meeting but shall have no vote, provided that, if one or more regular members is absent for any meeting, then an alternate (in order of seniority if more than one is present) may sit with all the privileges of a member for that meeting only. 
(Code 1999, §§ 211.010, 211.020) 
Sec. 2-84. - Appointments, vacancies; organization; expenses; removal of members. 
(a)  Each member shall be appointed by the council for a term of three years; vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of an existing term. To acquaint the proposed member with the work of the planning commission and to avoid conflicts of interest, each proposed member shall submit a personal and occupational resume and be personally interviewed by the council liaison to the commission and city staff. 
(b)  The commission shall at its first meeting of each year, elect a vice chairperson who shall automatically become chairperson the following year in the event that a chairperson does not seek another term or has served the maximum term. No member shall serve more than two consecutive years as chairperson. The planning commission may, at its discretion, elect a secretary from their membership. 
(c)  Members shall receive an expense allowance of not more than $20.00 per month for the chairperson and secretary, if appointed, and not more than $15.00 per month for other members, including alternates. The amount of such allowance and the basis for its payment shall be determined by the commission members at the first meeting of the year. An additional expense allowance of $10.00 per month will be provided to members who attend additional meetings per month for representing the city at other meetings as requested. 
(d)  Any members may be removed from office by the council for cause duly found. 
(Code 1999, § 211.030; Ord. No. 729 , § VII, 9-18-2018) 
Sec. 2-85. - Duties and authority. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have the following duties and authority: 
(1)  Recommend updates to the city's comprehensive plan as required by the Metropolitan Council; 
(2)  Periodically review and recommend modifications, if any, to the city's zoning and subdivision codes; 
(3)  Propose, draft or recommend overall or partial plans for the future physical development and improvement of the city, including all matters relating to zoning and planning as cities are authorized and empowered to undertake pursuant to state law; 
(4)  Consider all plats submitted by private property owners, and all plans and proposals for development of private or public property within the city; 
(5)  Study, plan, recommend and promote public transportation and transportation alternatives and opportunities within the city including appointing representatives to study commissions; 
(6)  Review and propose regulations to protect the natural environment and characteristics of the city such as lakes/ponds, wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes and other environmental concerns; 
(7)  Promote life-cycle housing within the city and recommend methods to obtain such housing; 
(8)  Serve as the board of zoning adjustment and appeals, in the following capacities: 
a.  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in the enforcement of this division. 
b.  Hear requests for variances from the requirements of this division and make recommendations to the city council. 
c.  Advise the council on any and all matters referred to it by the council. 
(b)  All action of the planning commission shall be in the nature of recommendations to the council, and the commission shall have no final authority with reference to any matters except as the council may delegate authority to it. 
(Code 1999, § 211.040) 
Sec. 2-86. - Meetings, minutes and reports. 
    All regular and special meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public, and such monthly regular and special meetings shall be at the times that the membership determines. Meeting minutes shall be provided by the commission and the commission shall report semi-annually its activities and recommendations to the council and such other reports as requested by the council. 
(Code 1999, § 211.050) 
Sec. 2-87. - Expenditures. 
    The council shall provide, out of available funds, for the ordinary and necessary expenses, including training of the planning commission. 
(Code 1999, § 211.060) 
Sec. 2-88. - Staff liaison. 
    The city planning/development director shall be the lead staff liaison to the planning commission. Annually, by a prescribed date, the staff liaison shall submit a budget request to the city finance director for the operation needs of the commission for the ensuing year. The staff liaison shall assist the council liaison to the commission with communication and information as requested. 
(Code 1999, §§ 212.010-212.040) 
DIVISION 2.5. - HEALTH AND PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-89. - Membership qualifications; ex-officio and alternate members; terms; removal; vacancies. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of not more than seven members to be appointed by the council. Four members shall constitute a quorum. Each member of the commission shall be a resident of the city who does not hold any elective or appointive public office. Civil service employment does not constitute public office. 
(b)  Representatives of the city fire department, county sheriff's department, city paramedic service provider, and the city emergency management director shall be ex-officio members of the commission, but shall not be entitled to vote on matters. 
(c)  All members shall be appointed by the city council for three-year terms, and vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term of office which is vacated. 
(d)  Any member may be removed by the council for cause duly found. 
(e)  The council may appoint no more than two alternates to the commission. Such alternates may attend and take part in the commission meeting but shall have no vote, provided that if one or more regular members is absent for any meeting, then an alternate (in order of seniority if more than one is present) may sit with all the privileges of a member for that meeting only. 
(Code 1999, §§ 217.030, 217.032) 
Sec. 2-90. - Meeting schedule, participation and sponsorship of community activities. 
    The commission shall establish its own meeting dates but shall meet at least eight times a year and participate or sponsor other various activities throughout the year. 
(Code 1999, § 217.040) 
Sec. 2-91. - Procedural rules. 
    The commission may adopt its own rules and procedure consistent with this division and other city ordinances and state law. These rules may include methods of calling meetings, conducting hearings, methods of voting, and maintaining commission records. 
(Code 1999, § 217.050) 
Sec. 2-92. - Minutes and reports. 
    The commission shall provide a copy of the minutes of each meeting and semi-annually submit a report of its activities and any recommendations to the council. 
(Code 1999, § 217.060) 
Sec. 2-93. - Expense allowances. 
    Members of the commission may receive an expense allowance of not more than $20.00 per month for the chairperson and secretary and not more than $15.00 per month for other members, including alternates for each month in which a commission meeting is held or commission activities or events take place. The amount of such allowance and the basis for its payment shall be determined by the commission members. 
(Code 1999, § 217.070) 
Sec. 2-94. - Staff liaison. 
    The fire chief shall serve as the lead staff liaison to the commission. The staff liaison shall assist the council liaison with communication and information as requested. All other regular employees and consultants shall assist the commission when requested. Annually, by a prescribed date, the staff liaison shall submit a budget request to the finance director for operations of the commission for the ensuing year. 
(Code 1999, § 217.080) 
Secs. 2-95-2-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARK, RECREATION AND TRAILS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-107. - Establishment, purpose, authority. 
    The city has established a park, recreation, and trails commission for the city for the purpose of recommending and overseeing the operation of public recreation and recommending the development and maintenance of parks and trails within the city, pursuant to the authority of this division and of M.S.A. §§ 471.15 through 471.17. 
(Code 1999, § 213.010) 
Sec. 2-108. - Composition; member terms; vacancies; expenses; alternate members; removal. 
(a)  The park, recreation, and trails commission shall consist of not more than seven members to be appointed by the council. Four members shall constitute a quorum. 
(b)  Each member of the commission shall be a resident of the city who does not hold any elective or appointive public office. Civil service employment does not constitute public office. 
(c)  Each member of the commission shall serve three-year terms, and vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term of office which is vacated. 
(d)  Members shall receive an expense allowance of not more than $20.00 per meeting for the chairperson and secretary, if appointed, and not more than $15.00 per meeting for all other members, including alternates. The amount of such allowance and the basis for its payment shall be determined by the city council. 
(e)  The council may appoint no more than two alternates to the commission. Such alternates may attend and take part in the commission meeting but shall have no vote, provided that if one or more regular members is absent for any meeting, then an alternate (in order of seniority if more than one is present) may sit with all the privileges of a member for that meeting only. 
(f)  Any member may be removed by the council for cause duly found. 
(Code 1999, §§ 213.020, 213.030) 
Sec. 2-109. - Chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary. 
    The commission shall, at its first meeting of each year, elect a vice chairperson from its members. The vice chairperson shall automatically become the chairperson the following year. No member shall serve more than two consecutive years as chairperson. The commission may, at its discretion, elect a secretary from their membership. 
(Code 1999, § 213.040) 
Sec. 2-110. - Meetings, minutes and reports. 
    The commission shall hold one meeting each quarter and hold such special meetings as necessary. The commission shall provide minutes of each meeting and an annual report of its activities and recommendations to the council. The public service director shall prepare an annual inventory of park and trail equipment and facilities and trails within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 213.050) 
Sec. 2-111. - Power and duties. 
    The commission shall have the powers and duties provided in this section and may recommend expending funds to carry out such purposes by the public service director, but only to the extent that such funds are available in the approved annual budget and capital improvement plan. Purchases of items that require a quote or bids shall be approved by the city council. Power and duties of the commission include the following: 
(1)  The commission shall establish and oversee park maintenance policies for implementation by the public service director. Annually, the commission shall recommend park and trail construction needs to the council as part of the city's capital improvement plan and budget process. 
(2)  The commission shall annually review and recommend policies for trail maintenance. Trail maintenance shall be applied in a manner that is cost effective, similar to the city's pavement management program. The commission shall recommend trail construction needs to the council as part of the city's capital improvement plan and budget process. 
(3)  The commission shall review, recommend and monitor a program of public recreation upon property which is owned or otherwise made available to the city for such public recreational purposes. All recreation programs and special events shall be reviewed for participation and cost effectiveness to its citizens and taxpayers and avoid unnecessary duplication of school district or other programs available to the community. The commission shall recommend to the council the leasing or acquisition of further real or personal property for public recreational use as it deems desirable. 
(4)  The commission shall recommend improvements for recreational facilities, such as driveways, parking lots, trails, buildings, parks, athletic fields, play structures, pavilions and other necessary structures. The commission may recommend contracts and leases for the construction and operation of park facilities, but every such contract or lease shall provide that the structures shall be operated for the public use and convenience, the charges shall be reasonable and the commission shall recommend rules and regulations for use of the facilities. 
(5)  The commission may formulate and prescribe reasonable rules and regulations for the use of the general public of any facilities in any recreational or park area, except those rules that are established by city ordinance, in which case, the commission shall recommend such regulations. 
(6)  The commission shall do whatever other acts are reasonable, necessary and proper to carry out their prescribed duties as set forth herein, and advise the council on any and all matters referred to it by the council. 
(Code 1999, § 213.060) 
Sec. 2-112. - Park and recreation fund. 
    For the purpose of carrying out the powers and functions of the commission, the city has established in the city treasury a special fund to be called the "park and recreation fund." The council may transfer to the fund such monies as it shall consider necessary for public recreational purposes. Into this fund shall be placed the various revenues or monies received by the city from gifts, bequeaths, contributions, earnings and other miscellaneous revenues. The city shall, in the same manner as the council under M.S.A. § 412.271, subd. 1, and to the same extent, audit claims to be paid from the park and recreation fund. Expenditures from this fund shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 213.070) 
Sec. 2-113. - Budget. 
    Each year, by an established date, the public service director, under direction from the commission shall submit a budget and five-year capital improvement plan request for operations and improvements for parks, recreation and trails. 
(Code 1999, § 213.080) 
Sec. 2-114. - Staff liaison. 
    The city public service director shall be the lead staff liaison to the commission and shall assist the council liaison with communication and information as requested. All other regular employees and consultants shall cooperate with the commission to make themselves available and attend meetings when requested to do so. 
(Code 1999, § 213.090) 
Secs. 2-115-2-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-178. - Authority for payment of assessments directly to county treasurer and auditor. 
    When a property owner or other person desires to pay unpaid installments for any assessment for a local improvement in which the assessment roll has been certified to the county auditor for collection with general taxes, the county treasurer and the county auditor are authorized to accept such payment in lieu of payment to the city through a procedure established by the county. For the purposes of this section, county officials are designated as agents for the city to collect such assessments. This section is adopted to provide to property owners and other members of the public the convenience of making assessment payments in the same place and manner as general taxes. 
(Code 1999, § 222.010; Ord. No. 102, 11-18-1969) 
Sec. 2-179. - Community service fund. 
(a)  Establishment. Organizations in the city desired to make donations to the city for the purpose of providing assistance to the city's economically disadvantaged citizens and providing assistance with community events. To provide for the efficient distribution of such donations, the city established the community service fund and initial guidelines for the operation thereof in December 1991. 
(b)  Type of fund; purpose. The community service fund is a special revenue fund established by the city to account for donations, including donations from charitable gambling proceeds, given to the city to provide for various community services and programs. 
(c)  Administration. The fund shall be administered by a committee consisting of the mayor, a member of the council, the city administrator and a designated member of the community, all of whom shall serve without compensation. The committee shall review and approve of all expenditures from the fund. 
(d)  Accounting. Regular accounting, disbursement, budgeting, and other appropriate financial procedures shall apply to the fund, including a separate audit of the fund which shall occur on an annual basis. 
(e)  Meetings. All meetings shall be at such time and place as the fund committee determines. 
(f)  Operational guidelines. By separate resolution, the city council shall provide guidelines for the operation of the fund, which may be amended from time to time as the council deems appropriate. 
(Code 1999, §§ 229.010-229.060; Ord. No. 476, 2-2-1999) 
Sec. 2-180. - Consultant fees. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The council deems it necessary to retain consultants to assist and advise the planning commission and council in the review and formulation of plans and developments pertaining to subdivisions, zoning requirements, capital improvements, street and traffic systems, residential, commercial and industrial developments and like matters. 
(b)  Authority for assessment. When the planning commission, council, or city administrator refers to a consultant, a petition, or application submitted under the chapters pertaining to zoning, subdivisions, planning, or any provision pertaining to the method and manner of construction of buildings, the person or organization submitting the same shall pay the city a fee in addition to any other fee imposed under this Code. 
(c)  Amount. The amount of the additional fee required by this section shall be that amount charged the city by the consultant for the necessary work performed by the consultant based upon the schedule of fees available in the office of the city clerk, which amount shall be paid prior to receiving final approval of the petition or application. 
(d)  Advanced payment required upon referral by city to consultant. When the planning commission, council, or city administrator refers a petition or application to a consultant, the applicant shall pay the city a cash deposit in the established amount. There shall be no further processing of the petition or application until the advance payment has been made. The unused portion, if any, of the advance payment shall be refunded to the applicant when the proceeding has been completed. If the established amount is not sufficient to complete the work, additional funds will be required from the applicant. 
(e)  Advanced payment required upon submission of informal inquiries. When a person presents an informal inquiry to the planner which may lead to a formal petition or application requiring the planner to study and review the plan or concept as it relates to any city or other governmental requirements, advance payment shall be required as provided in this section. The planner shall not perform any such work until the cash deposit has been tendered to the city. 
(f)  Applicability of advance payment provisions. The provisions of this subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall also apply to any such work performed by the city engineer, city attorney, or other city consultants. 
(Code 1999, §§ 212.010-212.040) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    3.2 percent malt liquor means any malt liquor containing not less than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume or more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
    Brewer means a person who manufactures malt liquor for sale. 
    Brewer taproom means an area on the premises of a brewery or on premises adjacent to a brewery owned by the brewer in which the brewer sells, or otherwise provides exclusively, malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption within the brewer taproom. 
    Brewpub means a brewer who also holds one or more retail on-sale licenses and who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one licensed premises, the entire production of which is solely for consumption on tap on any licensed premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from those licensed premises as permitted in M.S.A. § 340A.24, subd. 2. 
    Cocktail room means an area on the premises of a microdistillery or on premises adjacent to a microdistillery and owned by the distiller in which the distiller sells, or otherwise provides exclusively, distilled spirits produced by the distiller for consumption within the cocktail room. 
    Distilled spirits means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial use. 
    Intoxicating liquor means ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt liquid of any kind potable as a beverage, which contains an alcoholic content in excess of 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight. 
    Microdistillery means a distillery operated within the state producing premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year. 
    Off sale means the sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages in retail stores for consumption off or away from the premises where sold. 
    On sale means the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only. 
    Package or original package means a sealed or corked container of alcoholic beverages. 
    Sale and sell means all barters and all manner or means of furnishing intoxicating liquor in violation or evasion of law. 
(Code 1999, § 135.010) 
Secs. 4-2-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-21. - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell intoxicating liquor for consumption at any time or place within the limits of the city without first having obtained a license therefore and paying the fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 135.020) 
Sec. 4-22. - Types of liquor licenses. 
    A person may make application for the following types of liquor licenses: 
(1)  On-sale intoxicating liquor. On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued to those establishments allowed under M.S.A. § 340A.404, and shall permit on-sale of liquor for consumption on the licensed premises only. 
(2)  Off-sale intoxicating liquor. Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued to an exclusive liquor store and shall permit off-sales of liquor only. 
(3)  On-sale wine. On-sale wine licenses may be issued only to restaurants meeting the qualifications of M.S.A. § 340A.404(5), and shall permit the sale of wine not exceeding 24 percent alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food. To qualify for a license under this section, a restaurant must have appropriate facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time. The holder of an on-sale wine license, who also is licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale and whose gross receipts are at least 60 percent attributable to the sale of food, may sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license. 
(4)  Intoxicating liquor Sunday sales. A Sunday on-sale license may be issued to a restaurant, club, or hotel with a seating capacity for at least 30 persons and which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food. 
(5)  On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor. An on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license shall permit the licensee to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor for consumption on the licensed premises only. It is unlawful for any person licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor, but not licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, to have intoxicating liquor in their possession on the licensed premises. No business establishment or club which does not hold an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display of alcoholic beverages or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a permit from the state and city. A consumption and display permit shall only be issued to those entities allowed under M.S.A. § 340A.414(2). 
(6)  Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor. An off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license shall permit the licensee to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor in original packages for consumption off the premises only. It is unlawful for any person licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor, but not licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, to have intoxicating liquor in their possession on the licensed premises. 
(7)  Temporary on-sale. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization may be issued a temporary on-sale license for the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor for a period of three consecutive days or less. A temporary on-sale license may also be issued to a brewer who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year or a microdistillery in connection with a social event sponsored by the brewer or microdistillery. 
(8)  Brewer taproom on-sale. A brewer taproom license may be issued to a state-licensed brewer. A brewer taproom license authorizes on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of, or adjacent to one, brewery location owned by the brewer. A brewer may only have one taproom license and may not have ownership interest in a brewpub. A brewer taproom license may only be issued to a brewer that brews less than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces less than 250,000 gallons of wine annually. A taproom may be open and conduct on-sale business on Sunday's with an additional Sunday sales license. No single entity may hold both a brewer taproom and a cocktail room license, and a brewer taproom and a cocktail room may not be co-located. 
(9)  Small brewer off-sale. A small brewer off-sale license may be issued to a state-licensed brewer. A small brewer off-sale license authorizes the off-sale of malt liquor at a brewer's licensed premises that has been produced and packaged by the brewer. A brewer may only have one small brewer off-sale license and the amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed 500 barrels annually. A small brewer off-sale license may only be issued to a brewer that brews less than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces less than 250,000 gallons of wine annually. Malt liquor authorized for off-sale shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers commonly known as "growlers" or in 750 milliliter bottles. The containers or bottles shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug. At the time of sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extended over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug, forming a seal that must be broken upon opening the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer. The containers or bottles shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brew pub or brewer selling the malt liquor, and shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is labeled as otherwise. 
(10)  Brewpub. A brewpub may be issued an on-sale intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor license for a restaurant operated in the place of manufacture. A brewpub that holds an on-sale license may also be issued an off-sale license for the sale of malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises. Brewpub licenses are subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  A brewpub's total retail sales at on- or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels. 
b.  Malt liquor authorized for off-sale shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers commonly known as "growlers" or in 750 milliliter bottles. The containers or bottles shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug. At the time of sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extended over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug, forming a seal that must be broken upon opening the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer. The containers or bottles shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brew pub or brewer selling the malt liquor, and shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is labeled as otherwise. 
(11)  Microdistillery cocktail room. An on-sale microdistillery cocktail room license may be issued to a state licensed microdistillery and shall permit the licensee to sell distilled liquor produced by the distiller for consumption onsite. A microdistillery may only have one on-sale cocktail room license. No single entity may hold both a cocktail room and a brewer taproom license, and a cocktail room and a brewer taproom may not be co-located. 
(12)  Microdistillery off-sale. A microdistillery off-sale license may be issued to a state-licensed microdistillery for the off-sale of distilled spirits manufactured onsite. The license may allow the sale of one 375 milliliter bottle per customer, per day of product manufactured onsite. 
(Code 1999, § 135.025) 
Sec. 4-23. - Application. 
    Applications for licenses shall be filed in writing for presentation to the council and shall be signed and verified by the applicant in person, and if the applicant is a corporation, by an officer of the corporation. Each such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and place of residence of the applicant. 
(2)  The location of the premises upon which the applicant proposes to sell such liquor and an exact description of the particular place within the building structure where such sales are proposed. 
(3)  Whether the applicant has ever been engaged in a similar business and, if so, the location thereof and the date when so engaged. 
(4)  Such other information as the state alcohol and gambling enforcement division, the council or city clerk requires. 
(Code 1999, § 135.030) 
Sec. 4-24. - Application fee. 
(a)  At the time of any new application, a fee set forth as provided in the city fee schedule, shall be paid for processing the application and investigating the applicant, which will not be returned even though the license may be refused. 
(b)  At the time of any renewal application, a fee set forth as provided in the city fee schedule, shall be paid for processing the application and investigating the applicant, which will not be returned even though the license may be refused. 
(Code 1999, § 135.032) 
Sec. 4-25. - Investigation. 
    Such application shall be forthwith transmitted to the council for investigation. After the council has completed its investigation, which shall include inspection of the premises by the local fire chief and a search to determine whether the applicant has a police record, the council shall either grant or deny the application for license, provided: 
(1)  Where the application is for an "off sale" liquor license and the applicant is the holder of an "on sale" 3.2 percent malt liquor license issued by the council to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor, the council shall not grant such "off sale" liquor license until the applicant surrenders their license to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor. If an "off sale" license is granted, the resolution granting it shall direct the city clerk to issue the license whenever the bond required by this article for has been approved by the council and the commissioner of public safety advises the city clerk that they approve of the issuance of the license to the particular applicant. 
(2)  If an "on sale" license is granted, such resolution shall direct the city clerk to issue the same whenever the bond hereinafter provided for has been approved by the council. 
(3)  Should the applicant for a license not be granted, the resolution refusing the same shall authorize and direct the proper city officials to refund the applicant the deposit made at the time of the filing of the application. 
(Code 1999, § 135.040) 
Sec. 4-26. - Places ineligible for license. 
(a)  Not more than one retailer's license shall be directly or indirectly issued to any one place in the city, nor shall any retailer's "on sale" or "off sale" license be directly or indirectly issued for any place for which a license of another class has been granted. 
(b)  No "on sale" or "off sale" license shall be effective beyond the compact and contiguous space named in such license and for which the same was granted. 
(c)  No license shall be issued for premises located within an area wherein such use of the premises is prohibited by the zoning code, nor within an area where such sales are forbidden by the state law or any other provision of this Code. 
(d)  No license shall be issued for premises located within 400 feet of any school building or church building. 
(e)  No "off sale" license shall be issued for any place where 3.2 percent malt beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises. 
(f)  No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent or unpaid. In the event an action has been commenced, pursuant to the provisions of M.S.A. ch. 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this provision; no wavier may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof, which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due. 
(Code 1999, § 135.050) 
Sec. 4-27. - Persons ineligible for license. 
(a)  Not more than one retailer's license shall be directly or indirectly issued to any one person in the city. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any person in connection with the premises of another to whom no license could be issued under the provisions of M.S.A. ch. 340A; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent the granting of a license to a proper lessee by reason of the fact that the lessee shall lease premises of a minor, noncitizen or a person who has been convicted of a crime other than a violation of this article or M.S.A. ch. 340A. 
(c)  No license shall be issued to anyone other than a citizen of the United States, over 21 years of age, of good moral character and repute, nor to any persons convicted of any willful violation of any federal, state or local law with regard to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor, or to any person whose license under state law or this chapter shall be revoked for any willful violation of such act or provision. 
(Code 1999, § 135.060) 
Sec. 4-28. - Bond. 
(a)  No "on sale" license shall be granted until a bond in the amount of $3,000.00 has been approved by and filed with the city clerk. No "off sale" license shall be granted until the bond in the amount of $1,000.00 has been approved by and filed with the city clerk. Applications for 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses shall not require a bond. 
(b)  The surety on such bond shall be a surety company duly licensed to do business in the state, and all bonds, after approval of the city, shall be deposited with the city clerk. All such bonds, whether "off sale" or on sale, shall be conditioned as follows: 
(1)  That the licensee will obey the law relating to such licensed business. 
(2)  That the licensee will pay to the city, when due, all taxes, license fees, penalties and other charges provided by law. 
(3)  That in the event of any violation of the provisions of any law relating to the business for which the license has been granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor, such bond shall be forfeited to the city in which such license was issued. 
(4)  That the licensee will pay, to the extent of the principal amount of such bond, any damages for death or injury caused by or resulting from the violation of any provisions of law relating to the business for which such licensee has been granted a license, and further conditioned that such recovery may be had also against the surety on their bond. 
(c)  The amount specified in any bond required is hereby declared to be a penalty, and the amount recoverable shall be measured by the actual damages; provided, however, that the surety thereon shall not be liable for any amount in excess of the penal amount of the bond. All such bonds shall be for the benefit of the obligee and of all persons suffering damages by reason of the breach of the conditions thereof. Such bonds shall run to the city as obligee, and, in the event of a forfeiture of any such bond for violation of the law, the district court of the county may forfeit the penal sum of the bond to the city. 
(Code 1999, § 135.100) 
Sec. 4-29. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  No license granted hereunder shall be transferable from person to person or from place to place without the consent of the council, which consent shall be evidenced by resolution passed by the council. No license granted for a specified part of any particular premises shall permit sales of such liquor on a part of such premises not specified in the license; provided, however, that the council may, by resolution, grant the right to use such other portion of the premises for such sales. 
(b)  The transfer of stock in any corporate licensee shall be deemed a transfer within the meaning of this section, and no such transfer of stock shall be made without the consent of the council. It is hereby made the duty of the officers of any corporation holding a license issued under the authority of this chapter to notify the council of any proposed sale or transfer of any stock in such corporation, and no such sale or transfer shall be effective without the consent of the council given in the manner above set forth. The transfer of any stock without the knowledge and consent of the council shall be deemed sufficient cause for revocation by the council of any license granted to such corporation under the authority of this article. 
(c)  Such corporate officers shall also notify the council whenever any change is made in the officers of any such corporation, and the failure to so notify the council shall likewise be sufficient cause for revocation of any liquor license granted to such corporation. 
(Code 1999, § 135.110) 
Sec. 4-30. - Revocation of license. 
    Any license granted hereunder may be revoked for a violation of any provision of this article or of M.S.A. ch. 340A. If the violator is the holder of an "on sale" license, such license may be revoked by the council. If the violator is the holder of an "off sale" license, such license may be revoked by the council or it may be revoked by the commissioner of public safety, but if revoked by the council, such revocation shall not be made until the council has held a public hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 135.120) 
Sec. 4-31. - Renewal of license. 
    The council may refuse to renew a license granted under this article for the same reasons that it may revoke a license under section 4-30 and, in addition, for violation of any provision of this Code which pertains to conditions of the premises or land upon which the liquor premises is located. 
(Code 1999, § 135.122) 
Sec. 4-32. - Duration of liquor licenses. 
    All liquor licenses, as provided for herein, shall run for a period of one calendar year commencing July 1 of each year. 
(Code 1999, § 135.150) 
Secs. 4-33-4-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PREMISES AND OPERATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4-53. - Generally. 
    The following are conditions of the license granted pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Any act by any clerk, barkeeper, agent, servant or employee of any licensee hereunder in violation of this article shall be deemed the act of the employer and licensee of such place as well as that of the clerk, barkeeper, agent, servant or employee, and every such employer and licensee shall be liable to all the penalties provided for the violation of same, equally with the clerk, barkeeper, agent, servant or employee. 
(2)  Any sale of intoxicating liquor by any clerk, barkeeper, agent, servant or employee made in or from any place duly licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor but not duly licensed to sell intoxicating liquor shall be deemed the act of the employer and licensee, as well as that of the person actually making the sale, and every such employer and licensee of such place shall be liable to all the penalties provided for such sale equally with the person making the sale. 
(3)  All sales shall be made in full view of the public. 
(4)  No liquor shall be sold or furnished for any purpose whatever to any person under 21 years of age or to a habitual drunkard or to one obviously intoxicated or to any person to whom such sale is prohibited by any law of the state or this article. 
(5)  No sale shall be made in any place or in any part of a building where such sales are prohibited by the state law or this article. 
(6)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms where intoxicating liquors are sold at retail "on sale." However, persons under the age of 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors are sold at retail "on sale." 
(7)  Every licensee is hereby made responsible for the conduct of their place of business and required to maintain order and sobriety in such place of business. 
(8)  No licensee shall keep, possess or operate or permit the keeping, possession or operation of, on any licensed premises or in any room adjoining the licensed premises, any pinball machine, slot machine, dice, or any gambling device or apparatus, nor permit any gambling therein, except as otherwise permitted pursuant to sections 10-59 through 10-68, nor permit the licensed premises or any room in the same or any adjoining building directly or indirectly under their control to be used as a resort for prostitutes or other disorderly persons. 
(9)  The license issued to the licensee shall be posted in a conspicuous place in that portion of the premises for which the license has been issued. 
(10)  The licensee shall maintain the premises in compliance with all provisions of this Code, including the structure and land upon which the liquor premises is situated. 
(Code 1999, § 135.130) 
Sec. 4-54. - Hours of operation. 
    "On sale" and "off sale" sale of liquor, as to days and hours of sale, shall be in conformity with M.S.A. ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1999, § 135.070) 
Sec. 4-55. - Sale within building. 
    Sale and consumption of "on sale" intoxicating liquors is limited to within the building or in approved outside eating and drinking areas at the address designated on the license. 
(Code 1999, § 135.072) 
Sec. 4-56. - Sale at Vadnais Heights Commons. 
    Sale or consumption of "on sale" intoxicating liquor is allowed outside of the Vadnais Heights Commons only when provided by a vendor approved by the city holding an "on sale" intoxicating liquor caterer's permit and with the following conditions: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages are allowed in an area up to 40 feet of the north wall (inclusive of the sidewalk) between the east wall, the public works building and the west wall, Vadnais Heights Commons. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages are allowed within an approved enclosed tented area. 
(3)  Sales of alcoholic beverages are limited to no later than midnight on Sunday through Saturday. 
(Code 1999, § 135.074) 
Sec. 4-57. - Persons on the premises. 
    It is unlawful for any private club, bar, or any other business or establishment dealing with the dispensing, serving or providing of liquor to allow any person within the confines or upon the premises of the business or establishment, other than employees of the business or establishment, who are then and there engaged in the exercise of their employment, after 1:30 a.m. and before the hour provided by law for the reopening of the business or establishment. 
(Code 1999, § 135.080) 
Sec. 4-58. - Employees on the premises. 
    It is unlawful for any person or employee to consume liquor of any kind on the premises or within the confines of the above business between the above hours. 
(Code 1999, § 135.090) 
Sec. 4-59. - Minors prohibited. 
    No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except to work, consume meals at a restaurant, or attend social functions held in a portion of the premises where liquor is not sold. 
(Code 1999, § 135.160) 
Sec. 4-60. - Misrepresentation of age to purchase intoxicating liquor. 
    It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to represent himself as of the age of 21 years or over that age, for the purpose of obtaining from any other person intoxicating liquor. The term "intoxicating liquor" means and includes any distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt liquid of any kind potable as a beverage which contains an alcoholic content in excess of 0.5 percent by volume. 
(Code 1999, § 135.140) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means any person hired or appointed by the city to assist or enforce this chapter. 
    Animal shelter means any premises designated by the city council or animal control officer for impounding and caring for all animals found running at large. 
    Attack means any unprovoked threatening, aggressive behavior of a dog which puts a reasonable person in fear of immediate bodily harm. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that has: 
(1)  Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being on public or private property; 
(2)  Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals. 
The term "dangerous dog" does not include a dog under the control of or on duty with a law enforcement officer or to an attack by a dog upon an uninvited intruder who has entered any structure with criminal intent. 
    Domestic animal means any dog or cat. 
    Kennel means a place which provides for boarding, training or otherwise caring for or providing service to dogs, cats or any other domestic pets. The term "kennel" includes any place where more than three domestic animals are kept for any purpose, with the exception of a litter of domestic animals up to six months from birth. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring a domestic animal. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public or private property; 
(2)  When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(3)  Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals. 
    Riding horse means any horse which is used primarily for riding. 
    Stray means any unlicensed dog or cat at large within the city, the owner of which is unknown. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.040, 131.010, 131.210, 132.010) 
Sec. 6-2. - Enforcement; records. 
(a)  Investigation. For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and to enforce its provisions, any agent of the city or any police officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which a dog is kept or harbored and demand exhibition by the owner of the license of such dog. Any agent of the city may enter the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal when, in their opinion, it may require humane treatment. 
(b)  Stopping attacks. If any police officer or animal control officer is witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officers and agents of the city must terminate the attack and prevent further injury to the victims. 
(c)  Interference. No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the city in the performance of any duty of such agent under this chapter or seek to release any animal in the custody of the city or its agents, except as herein provided. 
(d)  Recordkeeping. The animal shelter shall keep proper records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into custody. The city clerk shall keep proper records of the licensing of all dogs. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.070-130.100) 
Sec. 6-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this chapter except where duties are expressly stated to apply to them. 
(b)  The vaccination requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any dog belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the city for not longer than 30 days, provided all such dogs shall, while in the city, be kept within an enclosure, or vehicle while being transported, or be under restraint by the owner or keeper. 
(Code 1999, § 130.210) 
Sec. 6-4. - Number of domestic animals restricted. 
    No person shall keep more than three domestic animals (of which no more than two shall be dogs) on the same premises, unless a kennel license has been obtained, except that a litter of domestic animals may be kept for a period of six months from birth without a kennel license. 
(Code 1999, § 130.005) 
Sec. 6-5. - Running at large. 
    No owner of a dog or cat shall allow such dog or cat to be running at large. A dog or cat shall be deemed to be running at large if it is: 
(1)  Not effectively restrained within a fenced area; 
(2)  Permitted to be on any unfenced area or lot abutting upon a street, alley, public park, public place or upon any other private land without being effectively restrained from moving beyond such unfenced area or lot; or 
(3)  Permitted to be on any street, public park, school grounds or public place without being effectively restrained by chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.050, 130.200) 
Sec. 6-6. - Female dogs or cats in heat. 
    Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come in contact with another animal except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Code 1999, § 130.130) 
Sec. 6-7. - Dogs disturbing the peace; enforcement. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in possession, or harbor any dog which howls, yelps, or barks to the reasonable annoyance of another person. Any person violating this section, who upon first requested by a peace officer, animal control officer, or any city agent to stop or prevent the annoyance, and refuses to comply with the request, will be issued a citation or arrested in accordance with state law and, if the officer deems it necessary to stop the annoyance, may have the dog taken to the city animal shelter. Any dog placed in the animal shelter may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of the applicable fee, and, if not reclaimed, may be disposed of in the manner provided in M.S.A. § 343.235. 
(Code 1999, § 130.180) 
Sec. 6-8. - Removal of dog excrement. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit a dog or other domestic animal to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person, unless such person has in their immediate possession a device for the removal of excrement and depository for the transmission of excrement to a proper receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person. 
(b)  A person in control of, causing or permitting any dog or other domestic animal to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person, shall remove excrement left by such dog to a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the ownership or use of seeing-eye dogs by blind persons; ownership or use of companion dogs by quadriplegic, paraplegic or other individuals with severe disabilities who are unable to clean up after the companion dog; dogs when used in police activities of the city; or tracking dogs when used by, or with the permission of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 130.230) 
Sec. 6-9. - Riding horses. 
(a)  Minimum density; fencing. Each riding horse kept within the city shall be maintained on at least one acre of land per horse, and the land where such horse is kept shall be entirely fenced so as to contain the horse within such land and adequately drained so as to cause no health hazard or nuisance to adjacent property. The fence shall be constructed within all zoning setback lines and be more than 100 feet from any adjacent residential structure. 
(b)  Control by owner. No person shall allow a riding horse to be off the owner's or keeper's land unless the riding horse is under the immediate control of the owner or of the person having possession of the same. 
(c)  Zoning. No riding horse shall be kept except upon land which specifically permits the keeping of a horse under the zoning code. 
(Code 1999, §§ 132.020-132.040) 
Sec. 6-10. - Impoundment and disposition. 
(a)  Unlicensed dogs and other animals found at large shall be taken by the agents of the city and impounded in a shelter designated as the city animal shelter, and there confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than five working days and may thereafter be disposed of as provided in this chapter and in M.S.A. § 343.235. 
(b)  When a dog is found running at large and its ownership is known to the agents of the city, such dog need not be impounded, but the agent may, at their discretion, return the dog and charge the owner or keeper with violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Immediately upon impounding dogs or other animals, the agent of the city shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owners of the dogs or other animals so impounded and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody. 
(d)  No unspayed female dog which has been impounded for being at large shall be released from the animal shelter unless the prospective owner shall agree to have such female spayed; proof of spaying shall be furnished within ten days of release, signed by a licensed veterinarian. 
(e)  Any dog may be redeemed by the owner after being impounded within five working days after seizure of the dog upon payment of an impounding fee, as provided in the city fee schedule, to the administrator, or to such agent as the council may designate, plus the amount then being charged by the animal shelter for daily board. In addition, before the dog is released from impoundment, a license shall be obtained for the dog if it was unlicensed at the time of the seizure. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.060, 130.110) 
State Law reference- Animals may be impounded, M.S.A. § 561.07; authority of peace officers to impound, M.S.A. § 343.12; impoundment of unlicensed dogs, M.S.A. § 347.14; impoundment of animals as a result of investigation of cruelty complaint, M.S.A. § 343.22; impoundment of animals due to exposure, M.S.A. § 343.29; seizure and impoundment of animals used in animal fights, M.S.A. § 343.31; disposition of seized animals, M.S.A. § 343.235. 
Secs. 6-11-6-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES 

Sec. 6-39. - State law and rules applicable; duties of physicians and veterinarians. 
(a)  The state law and regulations regarding rabies control shall be controlling within the city with regard to disposition of animals suspected of being rabid and in cases in which a rabid animal has bitten any person. 
(b)  It is the duty of every physician to report to the city the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with other information helpful in rabies control, and it is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the city their diagnosis of any animal observed by them as a rabies suspect. 
(Code 1999, § 130.070) 
Sec. 6-40. - Biting animals to be quarantined. 
    Whenever any animal has bitten a person, or a known or suspected rabid animal is picked up by an agent of the city, such animal shall be confined as follows: 
(1)  Upon proof from the owner of a current rabies vaccination, the owner may quarantine the animal at his place of residence; such animal shall not be permitted to come into contact with other animals or persons, and the animal shall be muzzled and on a leash not to exceed four feet when taken from the place of confinement. 
(2)  If no proof of a current rabies vaccination is provided, or upon decision of the owner or animal control officer, the animal will be quarantined at the animal shelter or a licensed veterinary clinic for the term of the quarantine, at the expense of the owner in advance. 
(3)  The animal shall not be removed from the place of quarantine without written permission from the city council or the animal control officer. 
(4)  The animal shall be confined in an enclosure of suitable material which shall not permit the animal to get through, have a secure cover so as to prevent the animal from climbing over, and flooring of concrete and fencing buried at least three feet into the ground so as to prevent the animal from digging out. All openings shall be locked at all times and the animal shall not be removed from the enclosure unless on a leash not exceeding four feet and held by a competent person and muzzled. 
(Code 1999, § 130.140) 
Sec. 6-41. - Security dog confinement. 
    Business or residential security dogs must be kept on the premises in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 130.220) 
Secs. 6-42-6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-71. - License required; application and issuance. 
(a)  No domestic animal owner shall keep any domestic animal over six months of age within the city unless a license has been secured. Licenses shall be issued by the administrator upon payment of a license fee as provided in the city fee schedule. Licenses shall be issued for a two-year period, expiring April 30 of every even-numbered year and must be renewed at that time. 
(b)  Applications for licenses must be accompanied by a name and address of the applicant and by a certificate from a qualified licensed veterinarian certifying that the domestic animal has a current rabies vaccination. If the vaccination expires before the license, the owner is responsible for promptly renewing the vaccination and providing the city with a copy of the new certificate. 
(c)  Upon compliance with this section, the city designee shall issue a license tag showing the license number of the dog. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.010, 130.020) 
Sec. 6-72. - Tags to be affixed to collar. 
    The owner shall cause the license tag to be affixed with a permanent metal fastener to the animal's collar in such a manner that the tag can be easily seen. The owner shall ensure that the tag is constantly worn by the animal. 
(Code 1999, § 130.030) 
Sec. 6-73. - Duplicate tags, tags not transferrable, altered or counterfeit tags prohibited. 
    Duplicate tags shall be issued in the event the original is lost upon payment as provided in the city fee schedule. Tags are not transferable from one animal to another. No person shall counterfeit or alter any tag. 
(Code 1999, § 130.030) 
Secs. 6-74-6-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - KENNELS 

Sec. 6-105. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a kennel without first having obtained a license therefore. This division shall not apply to a veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1999, § 131.020) 
Sec. 6-106. - Application. 
(a)  A license to operate a kennel shall be obtained from the council, where allowed in applicable zoning districts, pursuant to such notice and a hearing by the council is required, and the council may, in its discretion, grant or deny such application. Application for license shall be made to the clerk and such application shall set forth: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  A legal description of the property on which the kennel is located; 
(3)  The number and type of species in the kennel; 
(4)  A description, including a drawing of any outdoor kennel showing the location on the property, distances from adjacent property dwellings, types of material that the kennel will be made from, drainage pattern from kennel, and screening provided from neighboring properties; 
(5)  The kind of services provided; 
(6)  The qualifications and experience of the applicant for operating a kennel business; 
(7)  For kennels in R-1, a petition signed by the majority of property owners within 350 feet of the subject parcel of land is required; 
(8)  Payment of application fee as set forth in the city's annual fee register; 
(9)  License information and proof of animal vaccinations as required by the city; 
(10)  Report from the city's animal control officer, which shall include, at a minimum, the past history of animal complaints lodged against the applicant at this address and in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  Upon completion of the application, a public hearing shall be held by the city council, with mailed notice of not less than ten days prior to hearing, to property owners within 350 feet of subject parcel of land. The city council may either deny or approve the application with or without conditions, including establishing a review or trial period. 
(Code 1999, § 131.030) 
Sec. 6-107. - License renewal process. 
(a)  Kennel licenses are subject to annual renewal. As part of the city's review and consideration of reissuance of license, the city shall consider whether the annual license fee is paid, whether required individual animal licenses and vaccinations are current, whether an animal control officer and city code enforcement officer recommend against renewal, and whether license conditions have been adhered to. 
(b)  If any item reviewed is considered unsatisfactory and cannot be remedied by mutually agreeable changes to the kennel, a public hearing before the city council shall be held to consider renewal of the license. 
(Code 1999, § 131.031) 
Secs. 6-108-6-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-130. - State law adopted. 
    M.S.A. §§ 347.50 through 347.56, inclusive, are adopted as though fully set forth in this article. Where a conflict exists between the provisions of this Code and the provisions adopted in this section, state law shall be controlling. 
(Code 1999, § 130.181) 
Sec. 6-131. - Determination; hearing; seizure; reclamation. 
(a)  Initial determination. The city's designated animal control authority shall be responsible for initially determining whether a dog is a potentially dangerous dog or a dangerous dog. The animal control authority may retain custody of a dog which has been initially determined to be a dangerous dog, pending the hearing, as provided in this section. The initial determination shall be conclusive unless the owner appeals the initial determination. 
(b)  Notice of initial determination. The notice of initial determination, in the form required by M.S.A. § 347.541, subd. 3, shall be personally served on the owner of the dog or on a person of suitable age at the residence of such owner. The notice of initial determination shall describe the dog deemed to be potentially dangerous or dangerous; shall identify the officer making the initial determination; and shall inform the owner of the owner's right to appeal the initial determination. 
(c)  Request for hearing. An owner may request a hearing on the initial determination by filing a request for hearing with the city administrator within five days of the owner's receipt of the notice of initial determination. A hearing shall be held within seven days after the city's receipt of the request for hearing. 
(d)  Conduct of hearing. The city administrator shall assign a hearing officer who shall not be the person who made the initial determination. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider the reports and comments of the animal control authority, the testimony of any witnesses, witness statements, and the comments of the owner of the dog. After considering all the evidence submitted, the hearing officer shall make written findings and shall determine whether the dog is a potentially dangerous dog or a dangerous dog (final determination). The findings shall be made within five days of the date of the hearing and shall be personally served upon the owner of the dog or upon a person of suitable age at the residence of the owner. In the event that the dangerous dog declaration is upheld by the hearing officer, actual expenses of the hearing, up to a maximum of $1,000.00, will be the responsibility of the dog's owner. 
(e)  Seizure of dangerous dog. The animal control authority shall immediately seize any dangerous dog if, within 14 days after the service of the notice of final determination declaring a dog to be a dangerous dog: 
(1)  The owner has not registered the dog in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  The owner does not secure the proper liability insurance pursuant to section 6-166. 
(3)  The dangerous dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure. 
(4)  The dangerous dog is outside a proper enclosure and not under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(f)  Reclaiming a dangerous dog. A dangerous dog may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog upon payment of the impounding and boarding fees, and upon presentation of proof to the animal control authority that the requirements of section 6-163 have been satisfied. A dangerous dog not reclaimed under this provision within seven days may be disposed of in a proper and humane manner pursuant to state law, and the owner shall be liable to the animal control authority for costs incurred in confining and disposing of the dangerous dog. 
(Code 1999, § 130.181) 
Sec. 6-132. - Destruction of dog in certain circumstances. 
    Upon a final determination and notwithstanding the provisions of section 6-131, a dangerous dog may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner by the animal control authority if the dog: 
(1)  Inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on public or private property without provocation; 
(2)  Inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private property without provocation; 
(3)  Bit multiple human victims on public or private property in the same attack without provocation; or 
(4)  Bit a human on public or private property without provocation in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack. 
(Code 1999, § 130.182) 
Secs. 6-133-6-162. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOG KEEPING AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 6-163. - Registration. 
(a)  Required. No person may keep a dangerous dog in the city unless the dog is registered with the animal control authority as provided in this division. The animal control authority shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of the dangerous dog if the owner presents evidence of compliance with this division. 
(b)  Fees; certificate. The owner of a dangerous dog shall pay an annual fee in addition to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog under this section. 
(c)  Renewal. The owner of a dangerous dog must renew the registration of the dog annually until the dog is deceased and pay the annual renewal fee as determined by chapter 90. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.183(1), 130.184(1), 130.184(2)) 
Sec. 6-164. - Enclosure; warning symbol. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog must provide a proper enclosure for the dog and post on his premises a warning symbol to inform children and other members of the public that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The design of the warning symbol must have been approved by the state commissioner of public safety. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.183(2), 130.183(5)) 
Sec. 6-165. - Notice to landlord. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog who rents property from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the property owner, prior to entering into the lease agreement and at the time of any lease renewal, that the person owns a dangerous dog that will reside at the property. 
(Code 1999, § 130.184(4)) 
Sec. 6-166. - Bond and insurance. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog must provide to the city proof of a surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to conduct business in the state in a form acceptable to the animal control authority in the sum of at least $300,000.00, payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog, or a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to conduct business in the state in the amount of at least $300,000.00, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. 
(Code 1999, § 130.183(3)) 
Sec. 6-167. - Microchip. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog must provide to the city proof that the dangerous dog has had a microchip identification implanted. The name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be provided to the animal control authority. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the animal control authority with the costs borne by the dog's owner. 
(Code 1999, § 130.183(4)) 
Sec. 6-168. - Tag. 
    The dangerous dog must have a standardized, easily identifiable tag identifying the dog as dangerous and containing the uniform dangerous dog symbol, affixed to the dog's collar at all times. 
(Code 1999, § 130.183(6)) 
Sec. 6-169. - Photograph. 
    The owner of the dangerous dog shall make the dog available to be photographed for identification by the animal control authority at a time and place specified by the animal control authority. 
(Code 1999, § 130.183(7)) 
Sec. 6-170. - Death or transfer of location of animal. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog must notify the animal control authority in writing of the death of the dog or its transfer to a residence outside of the city or its transfer within the city within 30 days of the death or transfer. 
(Code 1999, § 130.184(3)) 
Sec. 6-171. - Sale. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog must notify the purchaser that the animal control authority has identified the dog as a dangerous dog. The seller must also notify the animal control authority in writing of the sale and provide the animal control authority with the new owner's name, address and telephone number. 
(Code 1999, § 130.184(5)) 
Sec. 6-172. - Muzzling. 
    If the dangerous dog is outside a proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by substantial chain or leash and be under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration. 
(Code 1999, § 130.184(6)) 
Sec. 6-173. - Sterilization. 
    The animal control authority may require a dangerous dog to be sterilized at the owner's expense. If the owner does not have the dangerous dog sterilized, the animal control authority may have the animal sterilized at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1999, § 130.184(7)) 
Secs. 6-174-6-184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 6-185. - Registration. 
(a)  Required. No person may keep a potentially dangerous dog in the city unless the dog is registered with the animal control authority as provided in this division. The animal control authority shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of the dangerous dog if the owner presents evidence of compliance with this division. 
(b)  Fees; certificate. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual fee in addition to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a certificate of registration for a potentially dangerous dog under this section. 
(c)  Renewal. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must renew the registration of the dog annually, and pay the applicable renewal fee, until the dog is deceased or declared to be no longer potentially dangerous as provided in this division. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.185(1), 130.186(1), 130.186(2)) 
Sec. 6-186. - Enclosure; warning symbol. 
    The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must provide a proper enclosure for the dog and post on his premises a clearly visible warning sign, including a warning symbol to inform children and other members of the public, that there is a potentially dangerous dog on the property. The animal control authority shall approve the warning symbol and its location on the property. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.185(1)(b), 130.185(2)(a)) 
Sec. 6-187. - Notice to landlord. 
    The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who rents property from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the property owner, prior to entering into the lease agreement and at the time of any lease renewal, that the person owns a potentially dangerous dog that will reside at the property. 
(Code 1999, § 130.186(4)) 
Sec. 6-188. - Bond and insurance. 
    A surety bond issued by a surety company authorizing to conduct business in the state in a form acceptable to the animal control authority in the sum of at least $300,000.00, payable to any person injured by the potentially dangerous dog, or a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to conduct business in the state in the amount of at least $300,000.00, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the potentially dangerous dog. 
(Code 1999, § 130.185(2)(b)) 
Sec. 6-189. - Microchip. 
    The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the potentially dangerous dog, and the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be provided to the animal control authority. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the animal control authority with the costs borne by the dog's owner. 
(Code 1999, § 130.185(1)(a)) 
Sec. 6-190. - Photograph. 
    The owner of the potentially dangerous dog shall make the dog available to be photographed for identification by the animal control authority at a time and place specified by the animal control authority. 
(Code 1999, § 130.185(2)(c)) 
Sec. 6-191. - Death or transfer of animal. 
    The owner of any potentially dangerous dog must notify the animal control authority in writing of the death of the dog; of its transfer to a residence outside of the city or of its transfer within the city within 30 days of the death or transfer. 
(Code 1999, § 130.186(3)) 
Sec. 6-192. - Sale. 
    The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must notify the purchaser that the animal control authority has identified the dog as potentially dangerous. The seller must also notify the animal control authority in writing of the sale and provide the animal control authority with the new owner's name, address and telephone number. 
(Code 1999, § 130.186(5)) 
Sec. 6-193. - Removal of potentially dangerous dog designation. 
    After three years, and upon payment of the applicable review fee, a hearing officer, in his discretion, may remove the potentially dangerous dog designation if the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  No new violations or complaints; 
(2)  Compliance with all regulations, ordinances, and laws; and 
(3)  There is no objection by any victim involved in prior incidents involving the dog. 
(Code 1999, § 130.186(2)) 
Secs. 6-194-6-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-209. - Keeping wild or exotic animals. 
    It is unlawful to keep within the city limits, except as otherwise permitted under this article, any wild or exotic animal. For purposes of this section, the term "wild or exotic animals" includes any mammal, amphibian, reptile or bird which is of a species not usually domesticated and of a species which, due to size, wild nature or other characteristics, is dangerous to humans and would ordinarily be confined in a zoo or found in the wild. The term "wild or exotic animals" includes animals and birds, the keeping of which is licensed by the state or federal government, such as wolves, raptors and pheasants. The term "wild or exotic animals" also includes the following by way of example, but not of limitation: 
(1)  Any large cat of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, bobcats, lynxes and ocelots, except commonly accepted domesticated house cats. 
(2)  Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, except domesticated dogs. 
(3)  Any crossbreed such as crossbreeds between dogs and coyotes, or dogs and wolves, but does not include crossbred domesticated animals. 
(4)  Any snake that is a member of the pit viper or blodae family, including, but not limited to, copperheads, water moccasins, rattlesnakes, fer-de-lances, bushmasters, asps, cobras, mambas, kraits, coral snakes, sea snakes, South American anacondas, Asian reticulated pythons, boa constrictors, tree boas and sand boas. 
(5)  Any other snake or reptile which by its size, vicious nature or other characteristic is dangerous to human beings. 
(6)  Any skunk, raccoon, badger, weasel, wild ferret, or fox whether captured in the wild, domestically raised, descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated against rabies. 
(7)  Any bear, deer, bison, buffalo, ape, gorilla, monkey, ferret, weasel, mink or badger. 
(8)  Any Vietnamese pot-bellied pig. 
(9)  Any raptors, eagles, pheasants, grouse. 
(10)  Any poisonous spiders. 
(11)  Any other animal or reptile which is commonly considered wild and not domesticated or prohibited by federal or state law. 
(Code 1999, §§ 130.300, 130.310) 
Sec. 6-210. - Exceptions for animals kept pursuant to city permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to keep a wild animal prohibited by this division may apply for a temporary wild animal permit from the city. Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed 30 days and shall specify conditions under which such animals shall be kept; provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued unless such prohibited wild animal is brought into the city for entertainment, exhibition, or show purposes only, or by persons keeping wild animals for a public zoo as volunteers, or otherwise. Any bona fide research institution or veterinary hospital may be issued a permanent wild animal permit, provided applicable zoning requirements are met. 
(b)  Non-poisonous snakes or snakes not prohibited by this article, birds kept indoors, hamsters, mice, rabbits, gerbils, white rats, guinea pigs, chinchillas, or lizards, and similar small animals capable of being kept in cages continuously, are also exempt and do not require a permit. 
(Code 1999, § 130.320) 
Sec. 6-211. - Impounding of wild animals. 
    Any wild animal kept in violation of this article may be impounded by the city. Unless such impounded animal is reclaimed and removed from the city, or unless the owner petitions the district court for a determination that the animal is exempt from the provisions of this division, the animal may be destroyed or sold five days following notice to the owner of such animal of its impoundment and the provisions of this article. Any person reclaiming any such wild animal shall pay the costs of impounding and boarding at the time of its release. 
(Code 1999, § 130.330) 
Sec. 6-212. - Chickens. 
(a)  Permitted. Chickens are permitted as an accessory use on single-family residential properties one-half acre in size or greater located in the residence one (R-1) zoning district, in compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Neighbor consent. For properties less than one-half acre in size, the property owner shall be required to obtain written consent from 75 percent of the abutting property owners, excluding right-of-way and city-owned property, to be included with the permit application. 
(2)  A principal building shall be located on the lot and the owner of the chickens shall occupy the premises. 
(3)  Number of chickens. 
a.  Properties less than two acres in size shall be allowed a maximum of five chickens. 
b.  Properties two acres in size or greater shall be allowed an additional five chickens per additional acre of land, up to a maximum of 20 chickens. 
(4)  Roosters are prohibited. 
(5)  Raising of chickens for breeding purposes is prohibited. 
(6)  Slaughtering of chickens outdoors is prohibited. 
(7)  Chickens shall be fully-contained on the property at all times by fencing in compliance with the applicable Code standards, unless appropriately monitored by the property owner so as not to cause a public nuisance. 
(8)  A chicken coop shall be provided in compliance with applicable zoning and building codes, including the following standards: 
a.  The subject property may contain a maximum of two coops and shall not exceed the maximum number of accessory structures allowed in the R-1 district. 
b.  The coop shall not be located within front or side yards and not within any drainage and utility easements. 
c.  The coop shall have minimum setbacks of 50 feet from an adjacent principal dwelling and 20 feet from all property boundary lines. 
d.  The interior floor area shall provide a minimum of four square feet for each chicken and shall not exceed 120 square feet in area, unless a conditional use permit is obtained under the applicable code requirements. 
e.  The coop shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
f.  The coop shall be architecturally compatible or made with similar exterior materials as the principal building. 
(9)  Food materials stored outside shall be within closed containers with lids. 
(10)  All containment areas and structures shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and odor-free environment and shall be free from the presence of rodents or vermin at all times. 
(11)  The use must not constitute a public nuisance and shall be in compliance with the applicable Code requirements. 
(12)  Feces, discarded feed, and dead chickens shall not be composted or buried upon the subject property. 
(13)  Dead chickens shall be properly disposed of within 72 hours in accordance with the state board of animal health rules regarding disposal of carcasses. 
(14)  Chickens shall not be raised or kept for fighting. 
(15)  Chickens shall not be kept inside any residential dwelling or garage. 
(16)  Eggs produced on the property shall be for personal use and consumption by the owners of the premises and shall not be sold or offered for sale. 
(17)  Any use or structure permitted under this section may be inspected at any reasonable time by the animal control officer, or other agent of the city, to verify compliance with the applicable performance standards. 
(b)  Permit required. 
(1)  Any person keeping chickens on property within the city shall obtain a permit on forms provided by the city to be issued administratively. 
(2)  A permit approved in accordance with this section shall not be transferrable to another owner upon sale and change of ownership of the property. 
(3)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit. 
(Code 1999, § 20.210) 
Secs. 6-213-6-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HUNTING AND FEEDING 

Sec. 6-231. - Hunting generally. 
    Except as otherwise allowed under this division, it is unlawful for any person within the city limits to kill, injure or capture, by means of any instrumentality of any kind or description, any wild game. The term "wild game" includes all types of animals or fowl designated or defined as such by the state department of conservation pursuant to state law or rule. 
(Code 1999, § 147.060; Ord. No. 713, § 1551.010, 8-2-2017) 
Sec. 6-232. - Turkey, pigeon, or waterfowl feeding prohibited. 
(a)  No person may feed turkeys, pigeons, or waterfowl on private or public property in the city, or place or permit to be placed on the ground, shoreline, waterbody, or any structure food, food by-products, garbage or animal food, which may reasonably be expected to result in turkey, pigeon, geese, or other waterfowl feeding, unless such items are screened or protected in a manner that prevents turkeys, pigeons, or waterfowl from feeding on them. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to veterinarians, city animal control officers or county, state or federal game officials who, in the course of their duties, have turkeys, pigeons, or waterfowl in custody or under their management or to persons authorized by the city to implement turkey, pigeons, or waterfowl management programs approved by the city council. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit the placing of food for purposes of trapping or the taking of turkeys, pigeons, geese, or other waterfowl where such trapping or taking is pursuant to a permit issued by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1999, § 147.090; Ord. No. 713, § 151.090, 8-2-2017) 
Sec. 6-233. - Deer feeding prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall intentionally feed deer within the city. As used in this section, the term "feeding" includes placing or permitting to be placed on the ground, or within five feet of the ground, any edible material which may reasonably be expected to result in deer feeding, unless such items are screened or otherwise protected from deer consumption. 
(b)  Exceptions and exemptions. This section does not apply to maintaining living food sources, such as fruit trees or other natural vegetation, or maintaining compost piles, gardens, field crops, or similar agricultural-related activities. In addition, the state department of natural resources personnel, acting within their official capacity, are exempt from this section. 
(Code 1999, § 147.080; Ord. No. 713, § 151.080, 8-2-2017) 
Sec. 6-234. - Deer management; archery deer hunting. 
(a)  Annual deer survey. The city will participate in an annual deer survey to monitor the population. 
(b)  County deer hunts in Sucker/Vadnais Regional Park. The city council may approve special hunts in the Sucker/Vadnais Regional Park to be administered by the county. Special conditions for such hunts shall be established by the city council at the time of approval. 
(c)  City archery deer hunt permits. In addition, archery deer hunts may be approved within the city by the city council, subject to the following: 
(1)  No archery deer hunting shall be conducted in the city without a permit therefor. Permits may be issued by the city and become valid following approval by the city council. 
(2)  Any person wishing to archery deer hunt or to allow a deer hunter on his property in the city must submit an application. Applications must include the physical address or, if no address is assigned, the property identification number of the property to be hunted. The application shall include an attached map clearly showing parcel boundaries and exact locations of deer stands. 
(3)  Authorized archery deer hunting shall take place only on a parcel or contiguous parcels totaling five or more acres in size. The minimum dimension of hunting area in every direction is 200 feet. 
(4)  All hunters hunting on parcels under ten acres in size are required to participate in the official state bow hunter education class either online or in person through the state department of natural resources. A copy of evidence of completion of the class must be provided to the city with the application for permit. 
(5)  Hunters must carry the permit provided by the city at all times during the hunt. Copies of the permit will also be mailed to the property owner. 
(6)  It is the responsibility of the property owner to manage the number of approved hunters on his property. 
(7)  All guidelines of the department of natural resources must be followed. 
(8)  Hunting shall take place from elevated deer stands only. Hunters will take proper safety measures. 
(9)  No deer drives are permitted. 
(10)  The direction of hunting must be away from homes. 
(11)  No hunting is permitted: 
a.  Within 500 feet of any school parcel boundary. 
b.  Within 200 feet of any home unless the owner of the home is the applicant or the homeowner waives the "no hunting" prohibition by signature. 
c.  Within 30 feet from any approved parcel boundary. 
d.  On any property owned by the city. 
(d)  Archery deer hunt results form. Each permit for a special hunt or archery deer hunt issued by the city shall be accompanied by an archery deer hunt results form, which must be completed by the permit holder and returned to the city no later than January 31 of the year following issue of the permit. Failure to timely submit the archery deer hunt results form may result in loss of participation in the hunt the following year. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 151.03, 8-2-2017) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Building official. 
    The council shall appoint a building official who shall be responsible for the administration of city building and construction regulations and who shall be the chief local inspector pursuant to state law and this Code. The building official is the city's compliance officer for all plumbing and UVAC requirements, as well as American Disability Act (ADA) regulations for public property. 
(Code 1999, §§ 220.010-220.030) 
Secs. 8-2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 8-21. - State building code adopted. 
(a)  The city adopts the state building code as set forth in M.S.A. §§ 326B.101 through 326B.16 and optional Minn. R. 1306.0020, subpt. 3, special fire protection systems. The application, administration, and enforcement of the adopted building code shall be as provided in that code. The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S.A. § 326B.121. 
(b)  The city building code enforcement agency shall be the department of building safety and the code enforcement officer shall be the official within that department designated as such from time to time. 
(c)  Violations of the adopted code constitute misdemeanors. 
(Code 1999, §§ 46.010, 46.020, 46.040, 46.050) 
Sec. 8-22. - Property maintenance code adopted. 
(a)  The city has adopted the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city administrator, as though fully set forth herein, except as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 insert: City of Vadnais Heights. 
(2)  Section 103.5 insert: See city fee schedule. 
(3)  Section 302.4 insert: See city fee schedule. 
(4)  Section 304.14 insert: 10 inches. 
(5)  Section 602.3 insert: September 1 thru May 31. 
(6)  Section 602.4 insert: September 1 thru May 31. 
(b)  The code adopted in this section regulates and governs the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such existing structures in the city and provides for the issuance of permits and collection of fees. 
(Code 1999, §§ 45.010-45.030; Ord. No. 646, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 8-23. - State electrical code adopted. 
    The city adopts the state electrical code, the Minnesota Electrical Act, as set forth in M.S.A. §§ 326B.31 through 326B.38 as though fully set forth herein, and all electrical installations within the city shall comply with the adopted code. Electrical permits and fees and notices of violations and order shall all be pursuant to the adopted code. Fees shall be payable to the city. Violations of the adopted code constitute a violation of this Code and misdemeanors. 
(Code 1999, §§ 46A.010-46A.070) 
Sec. 8-24. - Occupancy permit required. 
    No building or structure hereafter erected, structurally altered, or moved shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy, as provided for herein, shall have been issued by the building official of the city stating that the building or structure complies with all pertinent provisions of the city zoning and building regulations. 
(Code 1999, § 40.010; Ord. No. 40, 3-13-1961) 
Sec. 8-25. - Records. 
    The city building official shall maintain a record of all occupancy permits and certificates issued. Copies of occupancy certificates shall be furnished to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in such building, upon the request of such person. 
(Code 1999, § 40.040; Ord. No. 40, 3-13-1961) 
Sec. 8-26. - Fees. 
(a)  Building permits. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be based on the value of the construction, as required in the adopted building code and as set forth in the city fee schedule. The building official shall make the determination of value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees which shall be the total value of all construction and building service equipment work for which the permit is issued. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this Code in accordance with state law. 
(b)  Plan review. A plan review fee shall be assessed when submittal documents are required by this article. The plan review fee shall be collected with the building permit fee, unless the building official determines that the scope of the project warrants the submittal of the plan review fee prior to incurring city review costs. The plan review fees shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee and is separate, and in addition to, any permit fee. When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal documents, an additional plan review fee shall apply. 
(c)  Investigation fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining the permit. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this chapter or from any applicable penalty. 
(d)  Reinspection fee. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not readily available, approved plans are not readily available, failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official. Reinspection fees shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(e)  Refunds. The building official may authorize fee refunds for any fee paid under this section that was erroneously paid or collected and may authorize refund of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under an issued permit. The building official shall not authorize refund of any fee paid except by written application, filed by the original applicant, not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
(Code 1999, § 46.030) 
Secs. 8-27-8-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL LOCAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-56. - Building permit for a manufactured home park. 
    The applicant for a building permit for the construction of a manufactured home park, or any part thereof, shall comply with all applicable city building and construction regulations. Each application shall be accompanied by four copies of detailed plans of the proposed construction and improvement of the site approved by the state department of health, showing that the applicant is complying with all department recommendations, suggestions and requirements. The council may refer applications for a manufactured home park building permit to the planning commission for recommendation. The building permit shall be issued by the building official after it has been approved by a majority vote of the council. 
(Code 1999, § 91.020) 
Sec. 8-57. - Dwelling dimensions. 
(a)  In every dwelling house hereafter erected, there shall be at least three livable rooms, and the overall dimensions shall contain an area of not less than 960 square feet, except that dwellings that have two full floors may contain a first floor area of not less than 768 square feet. No room, except bath, shall be less than seven feet wide. No livable room, except kitchen, shall have a floor area of less than 90 square feet. 
(b)  Basement areas are excluded in computing square footage except that 50 percent of the lower floor of a split-level dwelling may be included in computing square footage, so long as one-third or more of the lower level is above grade, is designed for at least 50 percent livable space, and otherwise meets all applicable code requirements for livable space. 
(Code 1999, § 47.010) 
Sec. 8-58. - Excavation damage. 
    The person causing any excavation to be made shall prevent the movement of earth in the adjoining property and the trees and natural objects thereon or therein and maintain or restore all public sidewalks, curbs, pavements and the property of public utilities located within the street line, which may be affected by the excavation. This shall include any damage which might be caused to the surface of the public street as a result of the loading or unloading of machinery to be used in connection with the excavation for or the construction of a building or the movement of such machinery on the surface of the street and the boulevards adjacent thereto in the delivery of building materials. 
(Code 1999, § 47.020) 
Sec. 8-59. - Limitations on excavating and grading. 
    No person shall excavate, fill or grade any property when such excavation, filling or grading would cause a harmful amount of drainage of stormwaters from the property being excavated, filled or graded on any surrounding property or on any public right-of-way. 
(Code 1999, § 47.030) 
Sec. 8-60. - Soil drainage. 
    In all cases where basements are constructed in ground which contains water, suitable provisions as determined by the building official, shall be made to properly carry off the moisture from such soil. 
(Code 1999, § 47.040) 
Sec. 8-61. - Debris removal. 
    The area surrounding any newly-constructed or newly-placed building promptly shall be cleaned up, and all debris shall be completely removed from the premises. 
(Code 1999, § 47.050) 
Sec. 8-62. - Filled ground. 
    No building shall be constructed upon filled ground until the fill has compacted sufficiently to support the contemplated load. The building official may call upon the applicant for any permit to furnish a report from a recognized engineering firm or laboratory in deciding whether or not any fill is compacted sufficiently. 
(Code 1999, § 47.060) 
Sec. 8-63. - Street numbers required. 
    Dwellings, businesses, and industrial structures shall conspicuously display an address number by attaching or painting the numerals to or on the structure in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property, with such numerals to be at least four inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inches. Street numbers shall not be displayed on a garage door. 
(Code 1999, § 47.120) 
Sec. 8-64. - Park fee for residential dwellings. 
(a)  The council recognizes that each additional residential dwelling creates a need for public park and recreation areas. Section 32-217 provides a method for funding such needs for newly-platted residential property and for multiple-occupancy dwellings. This section applies where a single-family dwelling is to be constructed on unplatted property or property that has been platted prior to adoption of the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Each applicant for a building permit on a single-family dwelling shall pay the required amount as provided in the city fee schedule, which money shall be placed in a special fund and used only for park and recreational acquisition and maintenance. 
(c)  This section shall not apply if the land on which such single-family dwelling is to be constructed was subject to payment as provided in the city fee schedule or was subject to dedication of land for park purposes per the parks, recreation and trails commission. 
(Code 1999, § 47.140) 
Sec. 8-65. - Site plans and staking of structures. 
    At the time of application for a building permit for any new construction pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall provide the city with a site plan detailing locations of buildings, driveways and parking spaces, with dimensions of the lot area and the minimum setbacks clearly defined. In addition, at the time of such application, all corners of the lot and the location of all structures shall be staked upon the lot in a manner so as to be clearly visible at an on-site inspection. 
(Code 1999, § 47.150) 
Sec. 8-66. - Certificate of survey. 
    Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a certified land survey indicating that permanent iron monuments are in place at each lot corner and on each side lot at the building setback line. Such certified land survey shall also show the following: 
(1)  All existing buildings with its dimensions and reference dimensions from the lot lines to the nearest point of each building. 
(2)  All proposed buildings with its dimensions and reference dimensions from the front and side lot lines to the nearest point of each building. 
(3)  Elevations to sea level datum of the centerline of the nearest street at points where the side line of proposed buildings extended intersect the street. 
(4)  Proposed elevations to sea level datum of the top of foundation and the lowermost floor. 
(5)  Proposed elevations to sea level datum of grade within five feet of foundation on all sides of proposed buildings. 
(6)  Proposed slope or grade of ground for a distance of not less than 25 feet in front of and in back of foundation. 
(7)  Elevation to sea level of sanitary sewer main, if existing, at point of connection to the sewer. Engineer to determine elevation of inverts to nearest manholes up and downstream of proposed building to determine elevation of sewer line. 
(8)  Any and all existing utilities, easements, drainageways, waterways and swampland on or within lot. 
(9)  Any and all variances that are requested or proposed. 
(10)  Proposed water and sewer service locations. 
The building official may waive any or all the above requirements when they would serve no useful purpose where the building permit is for an accessory building or an addition to an existing structure. 
(Code 1999, § 47.152) 
Sec. 8-67. - Unit fee for stormwater improvements. 
    For the reasons set forth in section 32-11: 
(1)  Each applicant for a building permit for a residential structure shall pay an amount as provided in the city fee schedule, to be used only for stormwater and drainage maintenance and improvements throughout the city. This unit fee shall not apply if the land upon which such residential dwelling is to be constructed was subject to payment of such unit fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(2)  Each applicant for a building permit for a nonresidential structure shall pay a unit fee as provided in the city fee schedule, to be used only for stormwater and drainage maintenance and improvements through the city. Such unit fee is applicable for both new construction and additions to existing structures. 
(3)  Applicants for land splits shall pay the unit fee set forth in subsection (1) of this section before the land split is approved by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 47.160) 
Sec. 8-68. - Foundation height. 
    All foundation height, including attached garage, shall be at least one foot above curb height or centerline of the street. 
(Code 1999, § 47.170) 
Sec. 8-69. - Building relocation; special requirements. 
    To maintain a high standard of residential development in the city and to protect such areas from deleterious effects, it shall be required that any buildings moved into the city or buildings moved from one location to another within the city limits shall conform with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each relocation of a building shall require a special permit from the council, and all such buildings shall conform with and be situated and properly-zoned in accordance with all the provisions of this article and the city building code. 
(2)  Application for a permit to move a building shall be accompanied by an abstractor's certificate of property ownership within 350 feet of the boundary lines of the lot or property upon which the building is to be located. The application must also be accompanied by a petition signed by at least 50 percent of the property owners within the 350 feet of the lot or property. 
(3)  The application and petition shall be accepted by the city clerk and shall be accompanied by the fee as provided in the city fee schedule. The city clerk shall refer the application and petition to the planning commission. The planning commission shall report to the council within 40 days after the petition for building relocation is referred to it. The council, after a public hearing, may grant or deny the application. In the event that the planning commission fails to report to the council within 40 days, the council may act without such report. 
(Code 1999, § 47.180) 
Sec. 8-70. - Special assessment deferral. 
    Pursuant to M.S.A. §§ 435.193 through 435.195, senior citizens and retired disabled homeowners may defer special assessments levied against their homestead property if the criteria set forth in sections 8-71 through 8-73 is met. 
(Code 1999, § 47.190) 
Sec. 8-71. - Eligibility. 
    Any owner of homestead property 65 years of age or older or totally and permanently disabled as determined by the Social Security Administration or similar governmental entity may defer special assessments levied against real property for public improvements if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Ownership. The applicant must be a fee simple owner of the property or must be a contract vendee for fee simple ownership. Such applicant must provide either a recorded deed or contract for deed with the application to establish his qualified ownership interest. 
(2)  Homestead. The property must be the applicant's principal place of domicile and classified on the county's real estate tax rolls as the applicant's homestead. 
(3)  Income. The total of all annual installments levied against the homestead property exceeds five percent of the adjusted gross income of the property owners. Adjusted gross income determination shall be made based upon the last federal income tax return of the above persons, or upon other information that the city may require. 
(4)  Amount. Only that amount of an assessment more than $4,000.00 will be eligible for deferral. 
(5)  Requirements. The owner seeking deferral must meet the age or disability requirements as of the date of the initial assessment hearing for the local improvement being assessed. 
(Code 1999, § 47.192) 
Sec. 8-72. - Interest. 
    All deferred special assessments shall be subject to and charged simple interest at the same rate charged on the assessment which was deferred. That interest shall be payable upon termination of the deferral status. 
(Code 1999, § 47.194) 
Sec. 8-73. - Termination of deferral status. 
    Special assessment payments that are deferred shall become payable upon the occurrence of any of the following events: 
(1)  The subject property is sold, transferred, subdivided, or in any way conveyed to another. 
(2)  The death of that fee owner qualified for deferral status unless a surviving joint tenant, tenant in common, or contract vendee is eligible for the same deferral. 
(3)  The property loses its homestead status for any reason. 
(4)  The council determines that there is no longer a hardship. 
(Code 1999, § 47.196) 
Secs. 8-74-8-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MULTIPLE-OCCUPANCY DWELLINGS 

Sec. 8-105. - Proposed multiple-occupancy dwellings, requirements for consideration. 
    Prior to the consideration of any proposal to build one or more multiple-dwelling structures, the following data must be furnished to the city: 
(1)  Site and building plans. 
a.  Details of the proposed site development on a topographical survey, including existing and proposed topography (minimum scale shall be one inch equals 20 feet, zero inches preferred, plus a filmed depiction of existing site conditions), locations of all buildings, recreation areas, driveways, parking spaces, dimensions of parking spaces, dimensions of the lot area and minimum setbacks drawn in, clearly defined. 
b.  Plans for proposed sidewalks to service parking, recreation and service areas within the proposed development at same scale as subsection (1)a of this section. 
c.  Suggested plans for proposed stormwater drainage system sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area, indication of sanitary sewer, water, gas, electric, etc., easements, and written notification that they have been reviewed by the city engineer for feasibility purposes. 
d.  Landscape plans including species, size of trees and shrubs proposed, plus budget allowance, at the same scale as subsection (1)a of this section. 
e.  Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed buildings, complete with exterior wall finishes and colors. These plans shall also indicate unit sizes, ratios of dwelling units to total lot size and parking space. 
f.  Any additional information which may be requested by the planning commission due to conditions peculiar to any particular site. 
(2)  Certification of plans required. All building and site plans shall be designed and certified by a registered architect or engineer. The site plans may be prepared by a professional site planner, but a registered architect must verify that they have personally reviewed the site and designed the proposed buildings in accordance with the site plans, the terrain and neighboring conditions and in accordance with all current Code requirements. 
(3)  Requirements for building permit. Prior to the issuance of a building permit and in addition to other requirements in this section, the following additional information shall be required: 
a.  Complete details of the proposed site development. 
b.  Complete details on the proposed drainage plan. 
c.  Complete details on the proposed landscape plans. 
d.  Complete plans and specifications for architectural, structural, electrical and mechanical services for the proposed buildings in accordance with city building and construction regulations. 
e.  Any additional information requested on forms furnished by the administrative staff. 
(4)  Certification of plans and specification required. 
a.  Similar to subsection (2) of this section. 
b.  All structural, electrical and mechanical systems shall be designed and certified by a registered engineer. 
c.  The plans and specifications submitted to the council shall conform to the plans and specifications submitted to the planning commission. A complete set of plans (stamped approved) shall be retained by the owner and the city for conformity to the approved submission. 
(Code 1999, § 48.010) 
Sec. 8-106. - Disposal of refuse and garbage. 
    All refuse, rubbish and garbage containers for multiple-occupancy dwellings shall be placed at the rear of the premises. In no event shall such containers be placed next to the street or curb, nor shall they be placed so as to interfere with use of adjoining property or cause a nuisance or annoyance to adjoining property occupants. Such containers shall be covered and contained so as to be inaccessible to insects, vermin or animals and shall be screened so as not to be visible from eye level height. 
(Code 1999, § 48.020) 
Sec. 8-107. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    Before any multiple-occupancy dwelling may be occupied by tenants, the owner or contractor shall first obtain from the building official a certificate of occupancy; and such document shall certify that all requirements, specifications, special treatments, screening, landscaping or any other prerequisite ordered or required by the planning commission or the council have been fully provided or complied with and that all work is complete. Any unauthorized deviation or omission from city-approved plans shall prevent the issuance of such certificate and thereby prevent the occupancy of the structures by any tenants or residents. 
(Code 1999, § 48.030) 
Sec. 8-108. - Sanitary sewer required. 
    No multiple-occupancy dwelling shall be built unless sanitary sewer is available and the determination of availability shall be made by the city engineer pursuant to demand requirements available or capable of being made available. No occupancy shall be permitted until hookup is made to the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1999, § 48.040) 
Sec. 8-109. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all multiple-occupancy dwellings: 
(1)  Parking areas shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete, and if bituminous, shall meet the specification requirements contained in section 30-54(4). 
(2)  For reasons of safety, fire protection and ordinance enforcement, the name of the owner or agent with power of attorney shall be posted in the boiler room and rear hall. 
(3)  A copy of the city-approved plan shall be onsite at all times during construction. 
(4)  All subcontractors requiring license in the city shall be listed at the city hall before a permit is issued. 
(5)  All apartments shall be connected to city water when available. 
(6)  The exterior of all multiple-occupancy dwellings shall be brick, stone or other approved similar quality material. Consideration shall be given towards maintaining architectural compatibility with surroundings. 
(Code 1999, § 48.050) 
Sec. 8-110. - Completion time. 
    Any multiple-occupancy dwelling for which a building permit has been issued shall be completed and ready for occupancy according to the approved plans and specifications in accordance with the completion date in the development agreement, unless within that time an extension is granted by the council. 
(Code 1999, § 48.060) 
Secs. 8-111-8-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - UTILITY CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 8-134. - Electrical distribution lines. 
    All new electrical distribution lines (excluding main line feeders and high voltage transmission lines), telephone service lines and services constructed within the confines of and providing service to customers in newly-platted residential areas shall be buried underground. Such lines, conduits or cables shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways, in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services. Transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be hazardous to the public. 
(Code 1999, § 50.010; Ord. No. 108, 2-17-1970) 
Sec. 8-135. - Certification. 
    The owner or developer of the proposed platted area shall submit to the planning commission a written certification from the utilities involved showing that the necessary arrangements with the utility involved with the installation of the facilities have been made. 
(Code 1999, § 50.020; Ord. No. 108, 2-17-1970) 
Sec. 8-136. - Multiple residential structures. 
    All the provisions of section 8-134 shall also apply to newly constructed apartments and other multiple residential structures, whether or not constructed on platted property. No building permit shall be granted for such an apartment or structure unless the owner has submitted to the city a written certification from the utilities showing that the necessary arrangements with the utility involved for the installation of the facilities have been made. 
(Code 1999, § 50.030; Ord. No. 108, 2-17-1970) 
Sec. 8-137. - Application and variations. 
    The council may waive the requirements of underground services as set forth in sections 8-134 through 8-136, if, after study and recommendation by the planning commission, the council establishes that such underground utilities would not be compatible with the planned development, or unusual topography, soil, or other physical conditions make underground installation unreasonable or impractical. 
(Code 1999, § 50.040; Ord. No. 108, 2-17-1970) 
Secs. 8-138-8-157. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 8-158. - Permit. 
(a)  A building permit shall be required for any swimming pool designed or capable of being used for human swimming, which has a capacity of over 5,000 gallons. 
(b)  An application for a building permit for a swimming pool shall show: 
(1)  The type and size of pool. 
(2)  A site plan indicating the following: location of the pool; location of house, garage, fencing, and other improvements on the lot; location of structures on all adjacent lots; location of filter unit, pump, and wiring indicating the type of such units; location of back-flush and drainage outlets; grading plan finished elevations and final treatment (decking, landscaping, etc.) around the pool; location of existing overhead or underground wiring, utility easements, trees, and similar features; location of any water heating unit. 
(Code 1999, § 52.010; Ord. No. 195, 7-6-1976) 
Sec. 8-159. - Conditions. 
(a)  Pools for which a permit is required shall not be located within ten feet of any side or rear lot line, nor within six feet of any principal structure or frost footing. Pools shall not be located within any required setback from any public street. 
(b)  Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines nor over underground utility lines of any type or within 15 feet of any such utility lines. 
(c)  Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility, walkway, drainage, or other easement. 
(d)  In the case of in-ground pools, due precautions shall be taken during the construction period to: 
(1)  Avoid damage, hazards, or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby property. 
(2)  Ensure that proper care shall be taken in stock piling excavated material to avoid erosion, dust, or other infringement onto adjacent property. 
(e)  To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool drainage shall be on the owner's property or onto approved public streets or other approved public drainageways. Water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private land. 
(f)  The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any other noise-making mechanical equipment shall be located at least 30 feet from any adjacent or nearby residential structure and not closer than ten feet to any lot line. In all cases, noise from such shall not be detectable at any property line, and, if detectable, shall be enclosed in an approved sound-resistant enclosure. 
(g)  Lighting for the pool shall be directed into or onto the pool and not onto adjacent property. 
(h)  A safety fence set back a distance of at least four feet from the edge of the water surface or pool side of a non-climbable type of at least four feet in height shall completely enclose the pool from ground level up to the minimum four-foot height. Aboveground pools are exempt from the above requirement in this subsection, provided that if any aboveground pool is capable of containing a water depth of three feet or more, the above requirement shall apply, or in lieu thereof, the pool shall have a removable ladder which shall be removed from the pool area when the same is unattended. 
(i)  Water in the pool shall be maintained in a suitable manner to avoid health hazards of any type. 
(j)  All wiring, lighting, installation of heating unit, grading, installation of pipes and all other installations and construction shall require appropriate permits and shall be subject to inspection by public inspectors. 
(k)  Climbable facilities of any kind which could be utilized in any way shall be kept set back a minimum of five feet from the outside edge of all safety fences or pool side walls surrounding swimming pools. 
(l)  Any proposed deviation from these standards and requirements shall require a variance in accordance with normal zoning procedures. 
(m)  Safety fencing during construction of in-ground pools shall be provided during all phases of construction. 
(n)  Required safety fencing shall be completely installed within three weeks following installation of the pool and prior to pool being filled or prior to final occupancy inspection. 
(o)  Nuisances such as undue noise, lighting onto adjacent property, health and safety hazards, damage to nearby vegetation, and the like shall not be permitted. 
(p)  Filling of pools via fire hydrants or other public means shall require public approval. 
(Code 1999, § 52.020; Ord. No. 195, 7-6-1976) 
Sec. 8-160. - Multiple-family dwelling areas. 
    Swimming pools for which a permit is required which are situated in multiple-family areas shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
(2)  No pump, filter, heating units, or other apparatus used in connection with or to service a swimming pool shall be located less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
(3)  All deck areas, adjacent patios, or other similar areas used in conjunction with the swimming pool shall be located not closer than 30 feet to any adjacent single-family lot line. Adequate screening, including both fencing and landscape treatment, shall be placed between the areas and adjacent single-family lot lines. 
(Code 1999, § 52.030; Ord. No. 195, 7-6-1976) 
Secs. 8-161-8-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL RENTALS 

Sec. 8-189. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city, particularly non-owner occupied dwellings, including: 
(1)  To protect the character and stability of residential areas. 
(2)  To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect, or are likely to adversely affect, the life, safety, general welfare and health, including the physical, mental and social well-being of persons occupying dwellings. 
(3)  To provide minimum standards for cooking, heating, and sanitary equipment necessary to health and safety. 
(4)  To provide minimum standards for light and ventilation necessary to health and safety. 
(5)  To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings by providing minimum space standards per occupant for each dwelling unit. 
(6)  To provide minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential buildings, and to thus prevent decay and blight. 
(7)  To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the city. 
(b)  With respect to rental disputes, except as otherwise specifically provided by this division, it is not the intention of the city council to intrude upon contractual relationships between tenant and landlord. The city council does not intend to intervene as an advocate of either party, nor to act as an arbiter, not to be receptive to complaints from tenant or landlord which are not specifically and clearly relevant to the provisions of this division. In the absence of such relevancy with regard to rental disputes, it is intended that the contracting parties exercise such legal sanctions as are available to them without the intervention of city government. 
(Code 1999, § 53.010) 
Sec. 8-190. - Application. 
(a)  Every building and its premises used in whole or in part as a rented home or residence, or as an accessory structure thereof, for a single family or person, and every building used in whole or in part as a rented home or residence of two or more persons or families living in separate units shall conform to the requirements of this division, irrespective of when such building may have been constructed, altered, or repaired. This establishes minimum standards for erected dwelling units, accessory structures and related premises. 
(b)  The following sections apply to all dwellings and dwelling units, including owner occupied: sections 8-192(3), (4), (9), (20), (23), (31), 8-195(a)(2), and 8-196. 
(Code 1999, § 53.012) 
Sec. 8-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a structure subordinate to the main or principal dwelling and which is not used, nor authorized to be used, for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on or partially on the premises. 
    Building means any structure erected for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel, or movable property of any kind. 
    Compliance official means the building official, code enforcement officer and their designated agents authorized to administer and enforce this division. 
    Dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed or used predominantly for residential occupancy of a continued nature, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels or motels. 
    Dwelling unit means a single residential accommodation which is arranged, designed, used or, if vacant, intended for use exclusively as a domicile for one family. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it shall be considered as part of the building in which the dwelling unit is located. 
    Family means any of the following: 
(1)  A person related by blood, marriage or adoption, together with his, her, or their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. 
(2)  Groups of foster care of not more than five wards or clients by an authorized person, related by blood, marriage, or adoption, together with his, her, or their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, all maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit approved and certified by the appropriate public agency. 
(3)  A group of not more than five persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. 
    Flush water closet means a toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water-sealed trap above the first level. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Habitable building means any building or part thereof that meets minimum standards for use as a home or place of abode by one or more persons. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished basements (those without floor covering, ceiling covering, wall finish, required ventilation, required electrical outlets and required exit facilities), pantries, utility rooms of less than 50 square feet of floor space, foyers, communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in parts of the structure below ground level or in attics. 
    Heated water means water heated to a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit measured at faucet outlet. 
    Kitchen means a space which contains a sink with counter working space, adequate space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and adequate space for the storage of cooking utensils. 
    Meaning of certain words. Whenever the terms "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "premises," or "structure" are used in this division, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Multiple-family dwelling means a dwelling or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units. 
    Occupant means any person, including owner or operator, living, sleeping, cooking and eating in a dwelling unit. 
    Operator means the owner or his agent who has charge, care, control, or management of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner means any person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care or control of, any dwelling, dwelling unit, or dwelling unit within the city as owner, employee or agent of the owner, or as trustees or guardian of the estate or person of the title holder. Any such person representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this division to the same extent as the owner. 
    Permissible occupancy means the maximum number of persons permitted to reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Plumbing means all of the following supplied facilities and equipment in a dwelling including gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar fixtures and the installation thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer and gas lines. 
    Premises means a platted lot or part thereof or unplatted parcel of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, including such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
    Public hall means a hall, corridor or passageway for providing egress from a dwelling unit to a public way and not within the exclusive control of one family. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible waste solids including garbage and rubbish. 
    Rental or rented dwelling or dwelling unit means a dwelling or dwelling unit let for rent or lease. 
    Repair means to restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation, serviceability or appearance. 
    Rodent harborage means any place where rodents can live, nest or seek shelter. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and eating purposes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and shrubbery clippings, wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Safety means the condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease. 
    Substandard dwelling means any dwelling which does not conform to the minimum standards established by this Code. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control of the owner, operator, or agent of a dwelling. 
(Code 1999, § 53.020) 
Sec. 8-192. - General requirements. 
    No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person occupy any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and in compliance with all applicable legal requirements of the state and the city, including the following requirements: 
(1)  Maintenance of shared or public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(2)  Maintenance of occupied areas. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that the owner occupies and controls. 
(3)  Maintenance of yards. Outside storage for dwellings, dwelling units or roominghouses shall be limited to equipment and materials for the care and maintenance of lawns and gardens, except as may be provided in this division. 
(4)  Pest extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of vermin or rodents on the premises. No occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate firewood, rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal or any other materials in such manner that may provide a rodent harborage in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. Stored materials shall be stacked neatly in piles elevated at least six inches above the ground or floor. No owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store, place or allow to accumulate any material that may serve as food for rodents in a site accessible to rodents. Firewood may be piled no higher than six feet. 
(5)  Sanitary fixtures and appliances. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(6)  Minimum heating and maintenance. In every dwelling unit or rooming unit where the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person other than the occupant, a temperature of a least 68 degrees Fahrenheit shall be maintained at a distance of three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments from September through May. 
(7)  Minimum exterior lighting. The owner of a multiple-family dwelling shall be responsible for providing and maintaining effective illumination in all exterior parking lots and driveways and walkways. 
(8)  Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities. No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Every dwelling unit shall have a space in which food may be prepared or cooked, which shall have adequate circulation area and which shall be equipped with the following: 
1.  A kitchen sink in good working condition, connected to an approved water supply including hot and cold water and also connected to an approved sewer system. 
2.  Cabinets or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking and cooking equipment and utensils. 
3.  A stove, or similar device, for cooking food. 
4.  A refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit but more than 32 degrees Fahrenheit under ordinary maximum summer conditions. 
(9)  Toilet facilities. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room which affords privacy to anyone within the room and which is supplied with a flush toilet in good working condition, connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
(10)  Lavatory sink. Within every dwelling there shall be a lavatory sink, the sink may be in same room with flush toilet or, if located in another room, the sink shall be placed in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room containing the flush toilet. The lavatory sink shall be connected to an approved water system with both hot and cold water and also connected to an approved sewer system. 
(11)  Bathtub/shower. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a person within the room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition. The tub/shower can be in same room with the flush toilet or in another room, shall be properly connected to an approved water system with hot and cold water and connected to an approved sewer system. 
(12)  Egress. Every dwelling unit in a one- or two-story dwelling shall have at least one approved means of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level. Every dwelling unit in a multiple-occupancy dwelling shall have immediate access to two or more approved means of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level. Egress must meet the state fire code. 
(13)  Handrails. Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps containing four risers or more. If steps are not enclosed, handrails and banisters spaced no greater than four inches apart shall be provided. Porches, decks and balconies located more than 30 inches from ground level on the floor below shall have approved handrails (34 inches to 38 inches high) on stairs, balconies and porches exceeding 30 inches from the ground level or lower floor shall have a protective railing 36 inches in height, and, if unenclosed, a banister spaced no greater than four inches apart. Alternate systems providing at least the same degree of protection, if approved by the building official, shall be acceptable. Access to or egress from each dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any other dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(14)  Door locks. No owner shall occupy nor let to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit unless all exterior doors of the dwelling or dwelling unit are equipped with safe, functioning locking devices, including at least one dead bolt locking device that cannot be retracted by end pressure; provided, however, that such door shall be operable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or training. 
(15)  Habitable room ventilation. Except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation approved by the building official every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly outdoors which can be opened easily. 
(16)  Non-habitable room ventilation. Every bathroom and water closet compartment and every laundry and utility room shall have at least 50 percent of the ventilation of habitable rooms, except that no window shall be required if the rooms are equipped with a ventilation system approved by the building official. 
(17)  Electric service, outlets and fixtures. Every dwelling unit and all public and common area shall be supplied with electric service, over-current protection device, electrical outlets, and electric fixtures which are properly installed, which shall be maintained in safe working condition, and shall be energized by an approved source of electric power and in compliance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and state, applicable now or at the time such outlets and fixtures were or are installed. The minimum capacity of the electric service and the minimum number of electrical outlets and fixtures shall be as follows: 
a.  Dwellings containing one or more dwelling units shall have at least 60 AMP, 115-230 volt service or feeder per dwelling unit. Main service to multifamily buildings shall have sufficient amperage to carry the load as computed in accordance with art. 230 of the National Electrical Code. 
b.  Internal wiring and outlets in single or multifamily dwellings shall conform to: 
1.  At least one 15 or 20 AMP branch circuit for each 600 square feet of dwelling unit floor area. 
2.  At least one duplex receptacle on a separate 20 AMP appliance circuit in the kitchen. 
3.  At least one duplex receptacle on a separate 20 AMP circuit for the laundry. Multifamily buildings may have a laundry area with duplex receptacles on a separate 20 AMP circuits that are not overloaded. 
4.  Every habitable room with 120 square feet of habitable floor space or less shall be provided with two separate floor or wall-type electric convenience outlets, and an additional electric convenience outlet shall be required for each additional 80 square feet, or fraction thereof, of habitable floor space. Required outlets shall, insofar as possible, be spaced equal distances apart. One ceiling-type or wall-type light fixture controlled by a remote switch may be supplied in lieu of one required electric convenience outlet in each habitable room. Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall contain at least one supplied electric light fixture. 
5.  Bathrooms shall have at least one receptacle. This receptacle may be in a wall light if readily accessible. 
6.  All hazardous and all discontinued wiring shall be removed. This includes wiring to and in garages and other accessory buildings. The inspections director may order hazardous electrical installations removed. 
c.  Every public hall and stairway in a multiple-family dwelling shall be adequately lighted by natural or electric lights at all times, so as to provide effective illumination in all parts thereafter. 
d.  The authority having jurisdiction may waive specific requirements in this Code or permit alternate methods, where it is ensured the equivalent objectives can be achieved by establishing and maintaining effective safety. 
(18)  Minimum thermal standards. No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not have heating facilities which are properly installed, and which are maintained in safe condition, and which are capable of adequately heating all rooms in every dwelling unit at a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a distance of three feet above floor level and three feet from any exterior wall at an outside temperature of 25 degrees Fahrenheit. Gas or electric appliances previously designed for cooking or water heating purposes shall not be considered as heating facilities for the meaning of this section. Portable heating equipment using flame and liquid fuel does not meet the requirements of this section and is prohibited. No owner or occupant shall operate or use a space heater/wood burning stove/fireplace that has not been approved by the city. 
(19)  Exterior; foundations/exterior walls/roofs. The foundation, exterior walls and exterior roof shall be substantially watertight and protected against vermin/rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. The foundation shall adequately support the building at all points. Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other thing that might admit rain or dampness to the interior portion of the walls. The roof shall be tight and have no defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness to interior walls. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective coverings or treatment. If 25 percent or more of the exterior surface of such a wood structure is unpainted or unprotected or as determined by the building official to be paint blistered and in need of protection, it shall be painted or protected. 
(20)  Windows, doors, screens. Every window and exterior door shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair; every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily opened. Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall as to completely exclude rain, wind, vermin and rodents from entering the building. Every window or other devices with openings to outside, which are used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall be supplied with 16 mesh screen during the insect season. 
(21)  Floors, interior walls, ceilings. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be adequately protected against the passage and harborage of vermin and rodents, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every floor shall be free of loose, warped, protruding or rotted flooring materials. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be free of holes and large cracks and loose plaster and shall be maintained in a tight, weather-proof condition. Toxic paints/materials shall not be used where readily accessible to children. Every toilet room and bathroom floor surface shall be capable of being easily maintained in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(22)  Rodent proof. Every dwelling and accessory structure and the premises upon which one is located shall be maintained in a rodent free and rodent proof condition. All openings in the exterior walls, foundation, basement, ground or first floors, and roofs which have a one-half inch diameter or larger opening shall be rodent proofed in approved manner. Interior floors or basements, cellars, and other areas in contact with soil shall be paved with concrete or other rodent-impervious materials. 
(23)  Safe buildings. Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior wall, interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stairway, every porch, balcony and every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting loads that would normally be placed on them. 
(24)  Facilities to function. Every supplied facility and every piece of equipment or utility and every chimney and flue shall be installed and shall be maintained and shall function effectively in a safe and working condition. 
(25)  Discontinuance of services or facilities. No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this division to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for temporary interruption as may be needed to make repairs or alterations or temporary emergencies. 
(26)  One family per dwelling unit. Not more than one family, except for temporary guests, shall occupy a dwelling unit. 
(27)  Ceiling heights. In order to qualify as habitable, rooms shall have a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet, calculated on the square feet floor area of the room. 
(28)  Occupancy of sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum floor area of 70 square feet. Egress window in a sleeping room must be a minimum of 5.7 square feet in size and have a minimum movable sash opening of 24 inches high and 20 inches wide, and the bottom of the window sash shall be no higher than 48 inches above the floor. 
(29)  Code requirements for detectors and alarms. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarms must meet the state fire code requirements. 
(30)  Fire alarm systems. If a rental housing unit is required by state fire code to have a fire alarm system, the system must be monitored by an approved central monitoring system. 
(31)  Siding. When ready for application or re-application of siding, no residential structure shall be without exterior siding for more than 14 days; provided, upon application to the city showing good cause for an extension, the city may extend the time limit to a specific date beyond the 14 days. 
(Code 1999, § 53.030) 
Sec. 8-193. - Licensing of rental units. 
    No person shall operate a rental dwelling without first having obtained an annual occupancy permit as per section 8-24. Every occupancy permit of a multiple-dwelling unit shall cause to be posed in a conspicuous place in the main entryway of each building. No occupancy permit shall be granted or renewed unless the applicant owner or operator agrees in his application to inspection as set forth in section 8-192. 
(Code 1999, § 53.040) 
Sec. 8-194. - Enforcement and inspection authority. 
(a)  Compliance officials shall enforce the provisions of this division and are hereby authorized to make inspections on a scheduled basis or when reason exists to believe that violation of this division has been or is being committed. 
(b)  Inspection access. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling or dwelling unit fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under his control for an inspection pursuant to this division, the official may seek a court order authorizing such inspections. 
(Code 1999, § 53.050) 
Sec. 8-195. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever a compliance official determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or the premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the requirements set forth in this division, they shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged failure and advising the owner, occupant, operator, or agent that such failure must be corrected. This notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Set forth the alleged violations of this division; 
(3)  Describe the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit or where the violations are alleged to exist or to have been committed; 
(4)  Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the correction of any alleged violations; and 
(5)  Be served on the owner, operator, agent, or occupant of the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit personally, or by certified mail, addressed to the last known place of residence of the owner, occupant, operator or agent, if upon attempt to locate the owner, occupant, operator and/or agent, none can be found, notice may be posted on or near dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or premises described in notice. 
(b)  Repairs and corrective action. Whenever an owner, operator, agent of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit neglects or refuses to make repairs or other corrective action called for by order or notice of violation issued by a compliance official, the city may undertake such repairs or action, when in its judgment the failure to do so will substantially endanger the public health, safety, or welfare. The cost of such repairs and actions shall be charged against the property in which the violations exist. 
(Code 1999, § 53.060) 
Sec. 8-196. - Secure unfit and vacated dwellings. 
    The owner, operator, or agent of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, which has been declared unfit for human habitation or which is otherwise vacant for a period of 30 days or more, shall make the same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit open at doors or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a hazard to health, safety or welfare of the public and a public nuisance within the meaning of this division. 
(Code 1999, § 53.070) 
Sec. 8-197. - Right of appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a notice of a compliance official issued in connection with any alleged violation of this division, or by any order requiring repair or demolition, may apply to the compliance official for a reconsideration of such notice or order within 21 days after it has been issued. The compliance official shall make a decision on the appeal within ten days after receipt of appeal and notify applicant of decision. 
(b)  Hearing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal of a compliance official may request a hearing before the city council for consideration of reversal of decision of a compliance official. 
(Code 1999, § 53.080) 
Secs. 8-198-8-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS 

Sec. 8-218. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people and property owners of the city, by, among other things: 
(1)  Protecting the stability and character of commercial-industrial buildings. 
(2)  Providing minimum standards for the maintenance of existing commercial-industrial buildings. 
(3)  To prevent blight and economic deterioration in commercial-industrial zones. 
(4)  To preserve the economic value of land and buildings in the commercial-residential zones. 
(5)  To enhance and preserve the real estate base for commercial-industrial zones. 
(Code 1999, § 54.010; Ord. No. 379, 3-7-1989) 
Sec. 8-219. - Commercial building occupation. 
    No owners shall occupy, or allow another to occupy any commercial-industrial building unless the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Exterior; foundation/exterior walls/roofs. The foundation, exterior walls and exterior roof shall be substantially watertight and protected against vermin/rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. The foundation shall adequately support the building at all points. Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other thing that might admit rain or dampness to the exterior portion of the walls. The roof shall be tight and have no defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness to interior walls. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay by paint or other protective coverings or treatment. If 25 percent or more of the exterior surface of such a wood structure is unpainted or unprotected or as determined by the building official to be paint blistered and in need of protection, it shall be painted or protected. 
(2)  Window, doors, screens. Every window and exterior door shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair; every window other than a fixed window shall be capable of being easily opened. Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall as to completely exclude rain, wind, vermin and rodents from entering the building. Every window or other devices with openings to outside which are used or intended to be used for ventilation shall be supplied with 16-mesh screen during the insect season. 
(3)  Rodent proof. Every commercial-industrial building and accessory structure and the premises upon which one is located shall be maintained in a rodent free and rodent proof condition. All openings in the exterior walls, foundation, basement, ground or first floors, and roofs which have a one-half inch diameter or larger opening shall be rodent proofed in an approved manner. Interior floors or basements, cellars, and other areas in contact with soil shall be paved with concrete or other rodent-impervious materials. 
(Code 1999, § 54.020; Ord. No. 379, 3-7-1989) 
Secs. 8-220-8-246. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-247. - Enforcement and inspection authority. 
(a)  Compliance officials shall enforce the provisions of this division and are hereby authorized to make inspections on a scheduled basis or when reason exists to believe that violation of this division has been or is being committed. 
(b)  Inspection access. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a commercial-industrial building or unit fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under his control for an inspection, pursuant to this chapter, the official may seek a court order authorizing such inspections. 
(Code 1999, § 54.030; Ord. No. 379, 3-7-1989) 
Sec. 8-248. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever a compliance official determines that any exterior of a commercial or industrial building fails to meet the requirements set forth in this division, they shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged failure and advising the owner, occupant, operator, or agent that such failure must be corrected. This notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Set forth the alleged violations of this division; 
(3)  Describe the building where the violation is alleged to exist or to have been committed; 
(4)  Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the correction of any alleged violation; and 
(5)  Notice to be served on owner, operator, agent, or occupant of the building, or by certified mail, addressed to the last-known place of residence of the owner, occupant, operator or agent. If upon attempt to locate the owner, occupant, operator, or agent none can be found, notice may be posted on or near the building. 
(Code 1999, § 54.040; Ord. No. 379, 3-7-1989) 
Sec. 8-249. - Right of appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a notice of a compliance official issued in connection with any alleged violation of this division, or by any order requiring repair or demolition, may apply to the compliance official for a reconsideration of such notice or order within 21 days after it has been issued. The compliance official shall make a decision on the appeal within ten days after receipt of appeal and notify applicant of decision. 
(b)  Hearing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal of a compliance official may request a hearing before the city council for consideration of reversal of decision of a compliance official. 
(Code 1999, § 54.050; Ord. No. 379, 3-7-1989) 
Secs. 8-250-8-276. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-277. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized agent means an individual with legal authority and capable of executing documents for the sale of the buildings and authority over the proceeds of such sale. 
    Building means any structure intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy, including the land surrounding the structure. If the building is a multi-unit residential dwelling, a hotel or motel, or a commercial or office building, the term "building" means only the portion of the building within or outside the structure in which a nuisance is maintained or permitted; such as a dwelling unit, room, suite of rooms, office, common area, storage area, garage, or parking area. 
    Commercial building means any nonresidential structure, the surrounding land and accessory use structures. 
    Dwelling means a building that contains one-, two- or multiple-dwelling units, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes. 
    Family means one or two persons or parents, with their direct lineal descendants and adopted or legally cared for children, together with not more than two persons not so related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping unit. 
    Fire certificate of occupancy means a document or emblem issued by the city fire chief indicating the existing structure complies with all state and local safety codes allowing its use as a commercial building or for residential occupancy. 
    Fire chief means the city fire chief and his designee, and shall include any enforcement officer under his supervision or direction, or other duly authorized representative. The fire certificate of occupancy program shall be issued under the authority of the fire chief. 
    Interested party means any known lessee or tenant of a building or affected portion of a building; or any known agent of an owner, lessee, or tenant; or any other known person. 
    Nuisance activity means acts constituting a nuisance under M.S.A. § 617.81, subd. 2, or two or more violations within a period of 12 months of nuisance provisions of this Code. 
    Owner means the person, firm, corporation or other entity listed in the records on file in the recorder's office as holding fee title to the building. For purposes of notice only, the term "owner" includes the owner's authorized agent or other person in control of the premises. 
    Owner-occupied means residential dwellings which are the principal residence of the owner of the building and in which the owner resides. 
    Partial fire certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the city fire department indicating that a portion of an existing structure complies with all state and local safety codes allowing its use as a commercial building or for residential occupancy. The partial fire certificate of occupancy shall describe specifically which portion of the building is approved for occupancy. 
    Property manager means an individual with the legal authority to make and act on decisions of tenancy, building maintenance and repairs relating to applicable safety codes. 
    Recorder's office means the county department of property records and taxation, or its division which maintains title and property records, and any successor agency or department thereof. 
    Rental dwelling unit means any room, or space, in any dwelling designed or used for residential occupancy by one or more persons who are not the owner. 
    Residential occupancy means occupancy in a building or portion thereof, for residential purposes, used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, or cooking or eating purposes. 
    Safety code includes any fire, housing, health, safety, zoning, property maintenance, or other similar code, law and ordinance, promulgated or enacted by the United States, the state, the county and the city, or any lawful agency or department thereof, which are applicable to a building in such city. 
(Code 1999, § 43.30; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-278. - Required; violations constitute misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, all buildings in the city are required to have and maintain a fire certificate of occupancy, issued by the fire chief. The certificate shall be an indication that the building meets, at the time of issuance and approval, all relevant safety codes to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the building's occupants and the general public. 
(1)  Owner-occupied single-family houses, owner-occupied portions of duplexes, and owner-occupied condominium units shall be exempted from the requirement to have and maintain a fire certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  A building or portion thereof which receives a certificate of occupancy from the city's building official upon completion of construction or major rehabilitation shall simultaneously receive a fire certificate of occupancy from the fire chief if their use or occupancy so requires. 
(3)  Buildings which have a change in use or occupancy shall become subject to the fire certificate of occupancy requirement. 
(4)  Commercial buildings and residential occupancies shall be subject to the ongoing requirement to maintain a fire certificate of occupancy. These buildings shall be issued fire certificates of occupancy and shall be subject to regular inspection, based on the date of the building's last complete certificate of occupancy inspection, subject to the terms of this article. 
It is a misdemeanor to rent or lease, or permit the occupancy of, a building or structure or portion thereof which does not have a fire certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1999, §§ 43.010, 43.020, 43.040(1); Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-279. - Illegal occupancy. 
    No person shall occupy any building which does not have a fire certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1999, § 43.110; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-280. - Other city licenses and permits. 
    An ongoing failure to comply with any requirement of this article shall provide a sufficient basis for the denial of any license or permit otherwise required under this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 43.120; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-281. - Appeal to legislative hearing office. 
    Orders of the fire chief relating to fire certificates of occupancy are subject to the procedures for appeal set forth in this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 43.140; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-282. - Applicability of other laws. 
    Nothing in this article is intended to waive, replace or amend the applicability or enforcement of any other law, ordinance or regulation applicable to commercial buildings and residential dwellings, including, but not limited to, zoning, nuisance abatement, or licensing ordinances. 
(Code 1999, § 43.150; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-283. - Issuance and renewal. 
(a)  Information and application. Owners or interested parties of all buildings subject to the fire certificate of occupancy requirement shall apply for a fire certificate of occupancy. The application shall be provided by the fire chief and includes, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  A description of the building; 
(2)  The name, address and 24-hour telephone numbers of the owners; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone numbers of the property managers and their 24-hour telephone numbers; and 
(4)  The fire chief may require such additional property and property management-related information as will promote effective enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Inspection. Prior to obtaining a fire certificate of occupancy, all buildings shall obtain a code compliance inspection to determine whether the building is in compliance with all safety codes. 
(c)  Issuance. Upon a finding of no violations of the provisions of state and local safety codes, the fire chief shall issue a fire certificate of occupancy that shall contain the following: 
(1)  The type of occupancy, including number of dwelling, rooming or guest units; 
(2)  The address of the building; 
(3)  The name and address of the owners and property managers; 
(4)  A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued; 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of state and local safety codes for the group and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified; and 
(6)  The name of the fire chief. 
(d)  Smoke and carbon monoxide alarms required. Where required, no fire certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless such building has a proper, adequate and operable smoke alarms and carbon monoxide alarms. 
(e)  Posting. The fire certificate of occupancy provided by the fire chief shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the building and shall not be removed except by the fire chief. 
(f)  Effect of issuance. Issuance of a fire certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
(g)  Renewal. All fire certificates of occupancy shall be renewed every calendar year. 
(Code 1999, §§ 43.040, 43.050; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-284. - Owner's duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  Notice. The owner or interested party for which a fire certificate of occupancy has been issued is under a continuing obligation to give written notice to the fire chief of any changes in the information supplied as part of the application for the certificate. This includes any changes or modifications of ownership of the building, and any change in use or occupancy status of the building. 
(b)  New owner. A new owner of a building with a fire certificate of occupancy shall file with the fire chief a written application for a modification of the certificate if such premises is still being used or occupied under an existing certificate. Such application shall be filed within 30 days after such new owner obtains new ownership in the building, whether or not such interest has been recorded. 
(c)  Change of use. Changes in the use of a building shall not be made without the approval of the fire chief, and the building may be occupied for other purposes provided the new or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing use. If the use or occupancy of a fire certificate of occupancy premises changes, it shall immediately be required to meet all requirements of law, including the requirement for a certificate of occupancy before being used for such new or changed use. No change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the fire chief has issued a fire certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Dwelling units occupied by an owner shall be exempted from this requirement if the residence contains three or more dwellings units. Properties occupied by an owner shall be exempted from this requirement if the residence contains one or two dwelling units. The term "owner" means a natural person, and does not include a corporation, partnership or other entity. 
(d)  Posting. The fire certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the fire chief. 
(Code 1999, § 43.80; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-285. - Fees. 
(a)  The city shall be entitled to collect its costs and assessed fee regarding fire certificate of occupancy inspections and reinspection. The fees associated with the fire certificate of occupancy program shall be a debt owed to the city, and unpaid costs shall be collected by special assessment under the authority in M.S.A. § 429.101 and as provided in this Code. Action under this section does not preclude any other civil or criminal enforcement procedure available to the city. 
(b)  If charges assessed under this article are not paid by the owner or interested party in a timely fashion, the city shall collect such costs by assessment against the real property receiving these inspections and reinspection services. 
(Code 1999, §§ 43.090, 43.100; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-286. - Inspections. 
(a)  Scope of inspection. The fire chief is authorized, in conformity with this chapter, to inspect all buildings, whether having a fire certificate of occupancy hereunder or not. The inspection may include the building or structure, the land upon which it is located and accessory uses or structures. All inspections authorized by this chapter shall be limited to those which are done for the purpose of seeking compliance with applicable safety codes, and shall take place only at reasonable hours or as may otherwise be agreed upon by the owner and the fire chief. 
(b)  Notice of violations. The fire chief shall give written notice to the owner, or any known interested parties, of any violations of the applicable safety codes which are discovered during any inspection. 
(c)  Administrative search warrant. Access during reasonable times shall not be denied by any owner, occupant or other person in charge of the premises. The fire chief may obtain a search warrant where probable cause exists to believe that the premises are in violation of this article; provided, however, that no search warrant is needed for entry where an emergency condition exists and sufficient time to obtain a warrant is unavailable. 
(Code 1999, § 43.70; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-287. - Notice of violation; reinspection; correction orders. 
(a)  When the fire chief conducts an initial inspection of a building and determines that violations of safety codes under the jurisdiction of the fire chief exist, the fire chief shall, in addition to any other action the fire chief may undertake, serve written notice of the violation in conformance with the requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  The fire chief may require an inspection following a complaint or referral. If the fire chief finds a violation of safety codes during a referral or complaint-related inspection, the fire chief will issue correction orders. If the violation is not corrected by the compliance date provided in the notice of violation, the building owners shall be assessed fees for any necessary reinspections. 
(c)  Fees for the fire certificate of occupancy inspection and associated reinspections are the responsibility of the building owner and shall be paid within the time periods identified in the notice of violation. 
(Code 1999, § 43.100; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-288. - Other penalties. 
    A violation of, or failure to comply with, any section, provision or requirement in this article shall be a misdemeanor. This article is a part of the city health, safety, housing, building, fire prevention and housing maintenance codes, and a violation shall be deemed to be a violation for purposes of state statutes allowing escrow of rent to remedy violations. 
(Code 1999, § 43.130; Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Secs. 8-289-8-309. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DENIAL OF ISSUANCE, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION 

Sec. 8-310. - Grounds for revocation. 
    The fire chief may, by written notice to the owners, and to interested parties known to the fire chief, deny, suspend or revoke a fire certificate of occupancy when: 
(1)  The certificate was issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied; 
(2)  The owners and/or interested parties have submitted a false, incomplete or inaccurate statement as a part of the application for certificate; 
(3)  The owner or interested party has failed or refused to pay fees to the city for inspections or certificates; 
(4)  It is found, upon inspection of the fire chief, that the building or occupancy is in violation of provisions of this or other applicable safety codes, ordinances, rules and regulations; 
(5)  The owner, in a material matter, fails to comply with the regulations in this chapter and with other applicable regulations in other chapters of this Code, or in situations where the fire chief, after a good faith effort, cannot identify an owner or interested party; 
(6)  The nonresidential building or structure becomes unoccupied; 
(7)  There is evidence of nuisance activity subject to the procedure provided below. 
(Code 1999, § 43.60(1); Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-311. - Form of notice of suspension, revocation or denial. 
    When the fire chief revokes, suspends or denies a fire certificate of occupancy for safety code violations, the notice issued by the fire chief shall include the following: 
(1)  The specific reasons for the city's suspension, revocation or denial of the fire certificate of occupancy; 
(2)  The effective date of the revocation, suspension or denial of the fire certificate of occupancy; 
(3)  A statement that the commercial building or residential occupancy, or portion thereof, shall not again be used or occupied until such time as the certificate is issued or renewed or suspension lifted following inspection and a determination by the fire chief that the commercial building or residential occupancy, or portion thereof, is in compliance with applicable safety codes under the jurisdiction of the fire chief; and 
(4)  A statement indicating that the suspension, revocation, or denial may be appealed to the legislative hearing officer within ten days of issuance. 
(Code 1999, § 43.60(1)(a); Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-312. - Nuisance activity prohibited; abatement procedure. 
(a)  When the fire chief determines, in consultation with the city attorney, that he has evidence of nuisance activity as described in M.S.A. § 617.81, subd. 2, or other violations of nuisance provisions of this Code are maintained or permitted in the jurisdiction he serves, the fire chief shall provide the written notice by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or interested parties known to the fire chief. Notice under this section shall: 
(1)  State that a nuisance is maintained or permitted in the building or structure and specify the kind of nuisance being maintained or permitted; 
(2)  Summarize the evidence that a nuisance is being maintained or permitted in the building or structure, including the dates on which the nuisance-related activity is alleged to have occurred; 
(3)  Inform the recipient that failure to abate the conduct constituting the nuisance or to otherwise resolve the matter with the fire chief by entering into an agreed upon abatement plan within 30 days of service of the notice will result in recommending the suspension or revocation of the fire certificate of occupancy to the city council, or referring the matter to the prosecuting attorney who serves in the jurisdiction for remedies in accordance with M.S.A. § 617.80 et seq. which could result in enjoining the use of the building or structure for any purpose for one year, or in the case of a tenant, could result in cancellation of the lease; and 
(4)  Inform the owner or interested party of the options available under M.S.A. § 617.85, which provides that the owner of the building which is subject to a district court abatement proceeding may file a motion before the court that has jurisdiction over the abatement proceeding to cancel the lease or otherwise secure restitution of the premises from the tenant or lessee who has maintained or conducted the nuisance. The owner or interested party may assign to the prosecuting attorney the right to file this motion. 
(b)  If the recipient of a notice under this section either abates the conduct constituting a nuisance or enters into an agreed upon abatement plan within 30 days of service of the notice and complies within the stipulated time period, the fire chief may not take action to suspend or revoke the fire certificate of occupancy on the specified property regarding the nuisance activity described in the notice. 
(c)  If the recipient fails to abate the nuisance within 30 days of service of the notice, or fails to comply with the agreed upon abatement plan, the fire chief will refer the matter to the city council recommending suspension or revocation of the fire certificate of occupancy or refer the matter to the prosecuting attorney in accordance with M.S.A. § 617.80 et seq. 
(Code 1999, § 43.60(1)(b); Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-313. - Effect of voluntary vacation of premises. 
    No suspension, revocation or denial of the fire certificate of occupancy shall be imposed upon any owner or interested party who serves written notice upon the legislative hearing officer stating an intent to permanently vacate the premises within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of suspension, revocation or denial. Written notice of intention to vacate, which must include the date of vacation, must be filed with the hearing officer within ten days from the receipt of the notice and shall include proof that notice of eviction was served upon the occupants of the premises if other than the owner. 
(Code 1999, § 43.60(2); Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-314. - Stay pending appeal. 
(a)  Enforcement proceedings on the suspension, revocation or denial of the fire certificate of occupancy, or orders to correct violations, shall be held in abeyance if the owner shall file an appeal to the legislative hearing officer within ten days of receiving the written order issued by the enforcement officer, except in the case of an order to vacate a structure which is deemed to be in an unsafe condition and dangerous to life or limb, the enforcement officer shall proceed to order the building vacated until it is made safe or a final determination is made by the legislative hearing officer allowing reoccupancy of the building. This decision shall be presented to the city council for ratification at its next available public hearing. 
(b)  Abeyance of enforcement proceedings shall continue until such time as the hearing officer shall have issued a final determination or in the event the owner should not prosecute the appeal in a timely fashion. 
(Code 1999, § 43.60(3); Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 8-315. - Reinstatement and occupancy following suspension or revocation. 
(a)  First suspension or revocation. If a fire certificate of occupancy is suspended or revoked for a building, or portion thereof, that building, or portion thereof, shall not be occupied until such time as the fire certificate of occupancy is reinstated. 
(b)  Second suspension or revocation. If a fire certificate of occupancy is suspended or revoked for a second time within a two-year time period under the same ownership, the building for which it was issued shall not again be occupied until such time as the fire chief has determined that the building is in compliance with applicable safety codes and the owner has posted a $5,000.00 performance deposit or bond to offset potential city expenses associated with abating nuisance conditions. The deposit shall be returned to owner upon completion of two years with no code violations requiring city abatement. 
(c)  Third suspension or revocation. If a fire certificate of occupancy is suspended or revoked for a third time within a three-year time period under the same ownership, the building for which it was issued shall not again be occupied until a nuisance abatement plan is developed by the property owner, reviewed by the legislative hearing officer and approved by the city council. If a nuisance abatement plan is not developed and approved, the premises for which the fire certificate of occupancy was issued shall not again be used or occupied for a period of six months. 
(Code 1999, § 43.60(4)-(6); Ord. No. 683, 11-4-2015) 
Secs. 8-316-8-333. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUILDING ALARMS 

Sec. 8-334. - Scope and purpose. 
    This article provides regulations for the use of fire, burglary and safety alarms, establishes users, fees and a system of administration for the purpose of protecting the public safety services of the city from misuse of public safety alarms and provides for the maximum possible service to alarm users. 
(Code 1999, § 56.010) 
Sec. 8-335. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means an alarm installation designed to be used for the prevention or detection of burglary, robbery or fire and located in a building, structure or facility. 
    Alarm user means the person whose premises an alarm system is maintained. 
    Calendar year means the period from January 1 through December 31. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system when there is no fire or threat of fire, no burglary or other unauthorized entry, and which results in unnecessary response of police or fire departments. 
(Code 1999, § 56.020) 
Sec. 8-336. - Specifications for alarms for rental housing units. 
    If the state fire code requires that a rental housing unit have a fire alarm system, the system must be monitored by an approved central monitoring system. All facilities must meet applicable building codes and fire alarm codes. 
(Code 1999, § 56.025) 
Sec. 8-337. - False alarm reports and notice to alarm users. 
    The county sheriff's department and city fire department shall file a written report of each false alarm with the city clerk, who shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 56.030) 
Sec. 8-338. - False alarm fee. 
    There is no charge for the first two false alarms in a calendar year. For the third and subsequent false alarms in a calendar year, the alarm user shall pay a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule to the city. 
(Code 1999, § 56.040) 
Secs. 8-339-8-364. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INDUSTRY-RELATED LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-365. - Construction industry licenses. 
(a)  License and fee payment required. No person shall engage in the business of doing or performing any of the various types of work listed in this section without first obtaining a license therefor and paying the applicable license fee: 
(1)  Asphalt construction. 
(2)  Cement work, cement block work, cement block laying or brick work. 
(3)  Cesspool construction. 
(4)  Elevator installation. 
(5)  Fence installation. 
(6)  Landscaping. 
(7)  Sprinkler installation. 
(8)  General construction including erection, alteration or repair of building. 
(9)  Pipe laying. 
(10)  Plastering, outside stucco work or lathing and dry wall. 
(11)  Heating. 
(12)  Gas installation including heating, appliances, devices or machinery, etc. 
(13)  Well drilling. 
(14)  Roofing. 
(15)  Sign and billboard erecting. 
(16)  Excavators (for basements, foundations, grading of lots, etc.). 
(17)  The wrecking of buildings. 
(18)  Plumbing. 
(b)  Fee exemption for plumbers and well drillers. Plumbers and well drillers shall be exempt from license fees. 
(c)  License application. Application for licenses shall be filed with the clerk forms furnished by the city. 
(d)  Scope of general contractor license. A license granted to a general contractor shall include the right to perform all the work included in his general contract. Such license shall include any or all the persons performing the work which is classified and listed in section 32-215, providing that each person performing such work is in the regular employ of such general contractor and qualified under state law and the provisions of this Code to perform such work. In these cases, the general contractor shall be responsible for all the work so performed. Subcontractors on any work shall be required to comply with the sections of this Code pertaining to license, bond, qualifications and other regulations for his particular type of work. 
(e)  Additional requirements for building movers. Building movers must possess a state license as required by state law. Building movers using city roads shall apply for a permit from the city. The city may impose reasonable restrictions on the hours, routing, movement, and parking pertaining to the moving. 
(f)  Suspension and revocation. The city may suspend or revoke the license of any person licensed under this article for violations of this chapter or when it finds that the work of the licensee is defective, or so unsafe as to jeopardize life or property. The following shall apply to suspensions and revocations under this article: 
(1)  The person holding the license shall be given 20 days' notice and granted the opportunity to be heard before such action is taken. If, after notice sent to the legal address of the licensee, the licensee fails or refuses to appear at the hearing, the license will be automatically suspended or revoked five days after the date of hearing. 
(2)  When a license is suspended, the period of suspension shall be not less than 30 days, nor more than one year, such period being determined by the council. 
(3)  When any person holding a license has been convicted for the second time by a court of competent jurisdiction for violation of any of the provisions of this Code, the council shall revoke the license of the person so convicted. Such person may not make application for a new license for a period of one year. 
(4)  The failure to pay within 60 days any legitimate claim the city may have against a contractor shall constitute a cause for revocation of license. 
(g)  Workers' compensation insurance required. Any person holding a license under this section that employs any persons in the performance of such work shall be and is required to carry workers' compensation insurance on such employees. 
(Code 1999, § 112.010) 
Sec. 8-366. - Lawn, garden and hardware stores, season garden centers, Christmas tree sales lots. 
(a)  License required. No person shall, within the city, operate or engage in the following business activities without first obtaining a license therefore and paying the applicable license fee: 
(1)  Trading, bartering or selling any cut evergreen, fir, spruce or other tree of like kind for what is generally known and described as a Christmas tree; 
(2)  Operating a seasonal garden center. 
(b)  Condition of premises. Every licensee shall keep the place of sale in a clean and orderly condition, and unsaleable trees shall be promptly removed therefrom. Upon termination of business, all the unsold trees shall be removed from the place of business. All unsaleable trees removed from the place of business shall be taken to an authorized dump or removed from the city. 
(Code 1999, §§ 107.010, 107.020) 
Secs. 8-367-8-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MANUFACTURED HOME LOT AND MOBILE VENDOR LICENSES 

Sec. 8-391. - Manufactured home sales lot. 
(a)  Defined. The term "manufactured home sales lot" means that part of a manufactured home park maintained and operated for the parking or storing of unoccupied manufactured homes for the purposes of inspection and sale and conducted as an accessory use to a manufactured home park and located within, or immediately adjacent to, and adjoining a manufactured home park. 
(b)  License required; fee. No person shall establish, maintain, or operate a manufactured home sales lot without first obtaining a license therefore and paying the license fee. 
(c)  Special permit required for accessory use; fee. Applications for a special permit to establish, construct and maintain a manufactured home sales lot as an accessory use to a manufactured home park shall, to the extent appropriate or applicable, be subject to the provision set forth herein relating to applications for special permits for a manufactured home park. Each application for a special permit shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fee. 
(d)  Premises to be properly graded and drained. Every manufactured home sales lot shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or other waters. 
(e)  Limitation on sales area and number of sales units. The area utilized and maintained for the manufactured home sales lot shall not exceed ten percent of the total area of the manufactured home park within which or adjacent to which it is located and shall not exceed a gross area of 2.5 acres. Such sales lot shall not contain more manufactured homes therein than ten percent of the number of units authorized for such manufactured home park. 
(Code 1999, §§ 91.010, 91.020) 
Sec. 8-392. - Mobile vendors. 
(a)  Defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "mobile vendor" means any vehicle designed to facilitate the sale of any product on the public streets within the city. 
(b)  License required; fee. No person shall operate as a mobile vendor, as herein defined, within the city without first obtaining a license and paying the applicable license fee. 
(c)  Liability insurance required. Any applicant for a mobile vendor license shall place on file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, certifying that the operator has public liability insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 for injuries to any one person arising out of any one accident, $300,000.00 maximum coverage for bodily injury and exposure, and $50,000.00 for property damage. 
(Code 1999, §§ 104.010-104.030) 
Secs. 8-393-8-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LAND EXCAVATION AND GRADING 

Sec. 8-411. - Permit required. 
    No person shall excavate or regrade any property, public or private, within the city without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. 
(Code 1999, § 126.010) 
Sec. 8-412. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Excavation means the removal of more than six cubic yards of any natural material, including earth, black dirt, peat, sand, rock, gravel, or sod, from any property. 
    Regrading means the redistribution of more than six cubic yards upon the same lot of any natural materials including earth, black dirt, peat, sand, rock, gravel, or sod. 
(Code 1999, § 126.020) 
Sec. 8-413. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license or permit hereunder shall present an application in duplicate with the city clerk on such form as the clerk provides, such application to contain the name of the applicant, the address of the applicant, and the address and legal description of the place where such excavation or removal is to take place. Such application shall also indicate the kind and quantity of material to be removed, the depth to which it is to be excavated, and the condition in which the property is to be left after removal of such materials. 
(b)  Each application for permit shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in the city fee schedule. In addition, the applicant shall pay for all engineering and legal expenses incurred by the city to process and consider the application, not to exceed the maximum provided in the city fee schedule. The applicant shall tender with a fee, a cash deposit in accordance with the city fee schedule, to guarantee payment of the expenses, and the clerk shall refund any portion of the deposit in excess of the expenses. 
(Code 1999, § 126.030) 
Sec. 8-414. - Duration of license. 
    The license for excavating and regrading, as provided for herein, shall run for a period of one year, commencing on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1999, § 126.040) 
Sec. 8-415. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application with the fee, the clerk shall forthwith forward the application to the city engineer, who shall investigate the property and prepare a report for the council. The engineer's report shall indicate the effect upon the land as to drainage, future use, possible effect upon adjoining properties and any other data related to these factors. If the city engineer deems it necessary to obtain services of a recognized engineering laboratory, he shall obtain such services after first notifying the applicant, and the applicant shall be responsible for the expense of such laboratory services. 
(Code 1999, § 126.050) 
Sec. 8-416. - Council to prescribe conditions. 
    The application, together with the engineer's report, shall be submitted to the council. The council shall grant or deny the permit and, if granted, the council shall specify the nature and extent of the excavation or regrading and prescribe conditions for carrying on such work. If the council deems it necessary to require a bond to guarantee performance of any conditions imposed, the amount and duration of such bonds shall be prescribed, and the applicant shall furnish the required bond before the permit is granted. This section shall not apply to grading permits issued under section 30-185. 
(Code 1999, § 126.060) 
Sec. 8-417. - Criteria for administrative issue of permit. 
    The city clerk may issue a grading permit based upon the city engineer's report approving the grading operation and finding that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Grading area is less than one acre in size; 
(2)  Drainage patterns are not altered; 
(3)  Stormwater runoff is not increased; 
(4)  The topography of the land is altered less than four inches in elevation; and 
(5)  All standard erosion control practices are met. 
(Code 1999, § 126.062) 
Sec. 8-418. - Exceptions. 
    This article is intended to cover the excavation and regrading of natural materials from lands, but shall not apply to basement excavation or other excavation or earth removal activities which are already covered by city building and construction regulations applicable in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 126.070) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Application. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall govern the application for and the issuance of business licenses and permits in the city, except as may otherwise be specifically provided in other chapters in regard to particular licenses or permits. 
(Code 1999, § 90.010) 
Sec. 10-2. - Application for licenses and permits. 
    Application for licenses and permits shall be filed in writing with the clerk. Each such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address (or registered office in the case of a corporation) of applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the location or business for which the license or permit is required, and the kind of business to be carried on at the address. 
(3)  Such other information as any applicable code provision or the clerk shall require. 
(Code 1999, § 90.020) 
Sec. 10-3. - Fees. 
    Except as otherwise or additionally required by this Code, fees assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be as provided in the city fee schedule, available for inspection and copying at the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1999, § 90.030) 
Sec. 10-4. - Investigations. 
    Before granting or denying any license application, the city may order such investigation of the applicant, his business or proposed business and the premises on which it is to be conducted as it shall deem necessary. 
(Code 1999, § 90.040) 
Sec. 10-5. - Criminal history review. 
(a)  Purpose. This section establishes regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state's computerized criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks. 
(b)  Criminal history license background investigations. The county sheriff's office shall conduct a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses within the city: 
(1)  Liquor license; 
(2)  Tobacco license; 
(3)  Lawful gambling license; 
(4)  Soliciting, peddling and canvassing license; 
(5)  Massage therapy establishment and massage therapist licenses. 
(c)  Access of data. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license applicants, the sheriff's office is authorized to access data maintained in the state bureau of criminal apprehension's (BCA) computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is acquired shall be maintained at the sheriff's office under its care and custody. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be released by the sheriff's office to the licensing authority, including the city council, the city administrator, or other city staff involved in the license approval process. 
(d)  Authorization. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the sheriff's office by written consent to undertake the investigation, which must fully comply with the provisions of state law regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except as set forth in M.S.A. § 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: 
(1)  The reasons for the denial. 
(2)  The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S.A. § 364.06. 
(3)  The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license. 
(4)  That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. 
(Code 1999, § 234.200; Ord. No. 607, 1-20-2009) 
Sec. 10-6. - Duration. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the case of a particular license or permit, all licenses shall be on an annual basis, commencing January 1. 
(Code 1999, § 90.050) 
Sec. 10-7. - Revocation of license. 
    The council may revoke any license for violation of any provision of this Code or any applicable state or federal statute or regulation. 
(Code 1999, § 90.060) 
Sec. 10-8. - Change of operation. 
    The licensee shall inform the city of any significant changes or operation subsequent to the initial license. 
(Code 1999, § 90.090) 
Secs. 10-9-10-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-35. - Tree removal contractors. 
    No person shall engage in the business of removing trees without first obtaining a license. 
(Code 1999, § 110.010; Ord. No. 127; Ord. No. 164; Ord. No. 182; Ord. No. 598, 4-3-2008) 
Secs. 10-36-10-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAWFUL GAMBLING 

Sec. 10-59. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
    The provisions of M.S.A. ch. 349, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful gambling are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this division as if set out in full. It is the intention of the council that all future amendments of M.S.A. ch. 349, are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this division was adopted. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.010), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-60. - City may be more restrictive than state law. 
    The council is authorized by the provisions of M.S.A. § 349.213, as it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this division, additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained in M.S.A. ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.020), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-61. - Law enforcement and administrative costs. 
    A local gambling tax may be imposed on all organizations licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city, subject to the requirements of this section. No local gambling tax will be imposed in 2018. In future years, the city council shall determine annually in January whether or not such gambling tax will be charged in that year. The tax may not exceed three percent of the organization's gross profit from gambling activities within the city. Proceeds of the tax shall be placed in a special fund to be administered by the city to be utilized solely for the purpose of regulating all gambling activities within the city, including, but not limited to, the reimbursement of the city's administrative, legal, law enforcement and consulting costs. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.030), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-62. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions contained in M.S.A. § 349.12, as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this division: 
    Board means the State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board. 
    City means the City of Vadnais Heights. 
    Council means the city council of the City of Vadnais Heights. 
    Gross profits means the gross receipts less prizes paid. 
    Licensed organization means an organization licensed by the board. 
    Local permit means a permit issued by the city. 
    Net profits means gross sales less prizes paid and expenses. 
    Trade area means the corporate boundaries of the City of Vadnais Heights and the boundaries of each city and town contiguous to the City of Vadnais Heights, which include, White Bear Lake, White Bear Township, Gem Lake, Maplewood, Little Canada, Shoreview, and North Oaks. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.040), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-63. - Applicability. 
    This division shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling within the city except bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen housing project or by a senior citizen organization if the prizes for a single bingo game do not exceed $10.00, total prizes awarded at a single bingo occasion do not exceed $200.00, only members of the organization, residents of the nursing home or housing project, and their guests, are allowed to play in a bingo game, no compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo, and a manager is appointed to supervise the bingo. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.050), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-64. - Lawful gambling permitted. 
    Lawful gambling is permitted within the city provided it is conducted in accordance with M.S.A. §§ 609.75-609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; and this division. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.060), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-65. - Council approval. 
    Lawful gambling authorized by M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved by the council, subject to the provisions of this division and state law. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.070), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-66. - Application and local approval of premises permits. 
(a)  Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit from the board shall file with the city administrator an executed, complete duplicate application, together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as will be filed with the board. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for issuance of a premises permit, the city administrator shall transmit the application to the Ramsey County Sherriff for review and recommendation. 
(c)  The Ramsey County Sheriff shall investigate the matter and make the review and recommendation to the city council as soon as possible, but in no event later than 45 days following receipt of the notification by the city. 
(d)  The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the council will consider the recommendation. 
(e)  The council shall receive the Ramsey County Sheriff's report and consider the application within 45 days of the date the application was submitted to the city clerk. 
(f)  The council shall by resolution approve or disapprove the application within 60 days of receipt of the application. 
(g)  The council shall deny an application for issuance of a premises permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule, or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three years. 
(2)  Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule, or city ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three years. 
(3)  Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other than those for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued. 
(4)  Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.080), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-67. - Local permits. 
(a)  No organization shall conduct lawful gambling exempted from state licensure requirements by M.S.A. § 349.166, as it may be amended from time to time, without a valid local permit. This section shall not apply to lawful gambling exempted from local regulation by section 10-63. 
(b)  Applications for issuance or renewal of a local permit shall be on a form prescribed by the city. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the organization requesting the permit. 
(2)  Name and address of the officers and person accounting for receipts, expenses, and profits for the event. 
(3)  Dates of gambling occasion for which permit is requested. 
(4)  Address of premises where event will occur. 
(5)  Copy of rental or leasing arrangement, if any, connected with the event, including rent to be charged to the organization. 
(6)  Estimated value of prizes to be awarded. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a local permit, the city clerk shall transmit the notification to the Ramsey County Sheriff for review and recommendation. 
(d)  The Ramsey County Sheriff shall investigate the matter and make review and recommendation to the city council as soon as possible, but in no event later than 45 days following receipt of the notification by the city. 
(e)  The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the council will consider the recommendation. 
(f)  The council shall receive the sheriff department's report and consider the application within 45 days of the date the application was submitted to the city clerk. 
(g)  The council shall deny an application for issuance of a local permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule, or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three years. 
(2)  Violation by the on-sale establishment, or organization leasing its premises for gambling, of any state statute, state rule, or city ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment including, but not limited to, laws relating to the operation of the establishment, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three years. 
(3)  The organization has not been in existence for at least three consecutive years prior to the date of application. 
(iv)  The organization does not have at least 13 active and voting members. 
(v)  Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
Otherwise the council shall approve the application. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.090), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-68. - Number of permits. 
(a)  Premise permits. Lawful gambling permits for premises are limited to ten permits within the city limits. 
(b)  Organization permits. An organization would be permitted to conduct lawful gambling activities at a no more than two premises in the city. 
(c)  Number of organization permits per premises. No more than two licensed organizations are permitted to conduct lawful gambling activities at one premise. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.100), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-69. - Revocation and suspension of local permit. 
(a)  A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule, or city ordinance relating to gambling. 
(b)  A license shall not be revoked or suspended until written notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the permitted person. The notice shall be personally served or sent by certified or registered mail. If the person refuses to accept notice, notice of the violation shall be served by posting it on the premises. Notice shall state the provision reasonably believed to be violated and shall also state that the permitted person may demand a hearing on the matter, in which case the permit will not be suspended until after the hearing is held. If the permitted person requests a hearing, the council shall hold a hearing on the matter at least one week after the date on which the request is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the council finds that an ordinance violation exists, then the council may suspend or revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.200), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-70. - License and permit display. 
    All permits issued under state law or this division shall be prominently displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.210), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-71. - Notification of material changes to application. 
    An organization holding a state-issued premises permit or a local permit shall notify the city within ten days in writing whenever any material change is made in the information submitted on the application. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.220), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-72. - Local gambling tax. 
(a)  If the city chooses to impose a local gambling tax of three percent per year, pursuant to section 10-61, that tax will be on the gross receipts of a licensed organization from all lawful gambling less prizes actually paid out by the organization. 
(b)  The tax shall be paid by the organization on a monthly basis and shall be reported on a copy of the monthly gambling activity summary and tax return filed with the Minnesota Department of Revenue. The report shall be an exact duplicate of the report filed with the department, without deletions or additions, and must contain the signatures of organization officials as required on the report form. 
(c)  The tax return and payment of the tax due must be postmarked, or, if hand-delivered, received in the office of the city clerk, on or before the last business day of the month following the month for which the report is made. 
(d)  An incomplete tax return will not be considered timely filed unless corrected and returned by the due date for filing. 
(e)  Interest shall be charged at a rate of eight percent on all overdue taxes owed by the organization under this section. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.230), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-73. - Contribution of net profits to fund administered by city. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city pursuant to M.S.A. § 349.16, as it may be amended from time to time, shall contribute ten percent of its net profits derived from lawful gambling in the city to a fund administered and regulated by the city without cost to the fund. The contribution is to be calculated separately for each location if an organization has more than one premises permit within the city. Losses from one location cannot be netted against net profits from a different location. The city shall disburse the funds for charitable contributions as defined by M.S.A. § 349.12, subd. 7a, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Payment under this section must be postmarked, or, if hand-delivered, received in the office of the city clerk, on or before the last business day of the month following the month for which the report is made. 
(c)  The city's use of such funds shall be determined at the time of adoption of the city's annual budget or when the budget is amended. 
(d)  The contribution required in subsection (a) of this section shall be considered in addition to the lawful purposes expenditures of gross profits derived from lawful gambling conducted on a premise within city corporate limits. The percentage required to be expended within the Vadnais Heights Trade Area or corporate limits may be lowered for an individual organization by council resolution on an annual basis if determined by the city council to be in the best interest of the greater community. 
(e)  At the end of each organization's fiscal year, each organization must file with the city a report prepared by an independent certified public accountant documenting compliance with the requirements of this section. In addition, each organization must submit monthly to the city all forms which are submitted to the gambling control board, as well as any forms the city may require as directed by the city council or designee. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.240), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-74. - Designated trade area. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall expend 100 percent of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted or located within the city's trade area. 
(b)  This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross profits derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the city's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.250), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-75. - Records and reporting. 
(a)  Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the city clerk one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the board, pursuant to M.S.A. ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time. The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required to be filed with the board. 
(b)  Organizations shall submit an audit by an independent certified public accountant on an annual basis. The audit shall be delivered to the city no later than six months from the end of the organization's fiscal year, or the date of filing of the audit with the gambling control board, whichever is sooner. 
(c)  On or before the one year anniversary of the issuance of a premises permit the city council may hold a formal review of the licensee's or permit holders' compliance with this chapter, Minnesota Statutes and Rules. 
(d)  Organizations licensed by the board shall file a report with the city proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed by section 10-74. 
(e)  The report of operating costs must specify which expenses are attributable to lawful gambling conducted within the city. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.260), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-76. - Hours of operation. 
    Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.270), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 10-77. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this division; M.S.A. §§ 609.75-609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; or M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.21, as they may be amended from time to time; or any rules promulgated under those sections, as they may be amended from time to time, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, plus in either case the costs of prosecution. In addition, violations shall be reported to the board and recommendation shall be made for suspension, revocation, or cancellation of an organization's license. 
(Ord. No. 727, § I(127.280), 5-1-2018) 
Secs. 10-78-10-94. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS AND THERAPISTS 

Sec. 10-95. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accredited institution means an educational institution holding accredited status from the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools (NCA) or another regional accrediting agency approved by the United States Department of Education presently or at the time the applicant obtained his diploma or certificate of graduation. 
    Accredited program means a professional massage program presently or at the time the applicant obtained his diploma or certificate of graduation accredited by the commission on massage therapy accreditation (COMTA), or a comparable national or regional organization which is approved by the Federal Department of Education for its accrediting program for compliance with quality and competency standards through a process of periodic review and self-study. 
    City officials means any representative of the city, or its designees on behalf of the city, inspecting massage therapy establishments for license and code enforcement, zoning, building inspections, etc. This includes, but is not limited to, fire technician, code enforcement, building official, sheriff department, etc. 
    Massage therapist means a person who practices or provides therapeutic massage to another for a fee paid either directly or indirectly. A person licensed as a medical doctor, chiropractor, osteopath, podiatrist, licensed nurse, physical therapist, athletic director or trainer, or beautician (cosmetologist) or barber who confines his treatment to the scalp, face, and neck, or the lower leg and feet in the case of a pedicure, shall not be deemed as a massage therapist. 
    Massage therapy or therapeutic massage means a scientific health care or health maintenance technique or procedure carried out by a massage therapist involving the rubbing, tapping, pounding or kneading of a person's skin, muscles, and tissues or the stretching of body limbs (e.g., Thai massage) for the purpose of easing mental and physical tension, the breaking up of fatty tissues, relaxing muscles, or alleviating muscle spasms, and the improvement of circulation through the body. 
    Massage therapy business means: 
(1)  Any enterprise, establishment, or operation, whether under control of an individual or legal entity, providing or offering to provide massage therapy services within the city for a fee or other consideration paid either directly or indirectly, that: 
a.  Has one or more massage therapists, including the owner, employed or contracted to provide massage therapy services for the massage therapy business; or 
b.  Is located in a fixed location in a nonresidential district within the city wherein massage therapy services are provided. 
(2)  Any health or medical facility, office, or clinic operated by state-licensed medical professionals or any health or medical-related business operated by state-licensed medical professionals, which provides therapeutic massage to its patients, shall not be deemed as a massage therapy business. 
    Student of massage therapy means a person who is enrolled in and attends classes at a school, college, university, or other institution that is approved by the American Massage Therapists Association (AMTA) or other similar reputable massage association or accredited by a recognized educational accrediting association or agency or is licensed by the state or local government agency having jurisdiction over the school. 
(Code 1999, § 93.10; Ord. No. 680, 7-1-2015) 
Sec. 10-96. - Prohibited establishments or operations. 
    Any use, establishment, operation or business whose massage therapy services include sessions offered to adults, conducted in private by members of the same or the opposite sex, and employing personnel with no specialized training and susceptible to operation in a manner contravening, subverting or endangering the morals of the community by being the site of acts of prostitution, illicit sex and occasions of violent crimes are prohibited. 
(Code 1999, § 93.20; Ord. No. 680, 7-1-2015) 
Sec. 10-97. - Massage therapy establishment license. 
(a)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a massage therapy establishment within the city without obtaining an annual license therefore from the city, which shall expire on December 31 of each year. It is unlawful for any person to practice therapeutic massage therapy in any place except upon a licensed premises, unless a temporary off-site permit is issued in accordance with the temporary off-site permit provisions of this division. 
(b)  License application and fee. 
(1)  All initial applications for licenses to operate massage therapy establishments shall be on a form provided by the city and contain all information requested thereon and shall contain such other information as the city may require. Any massage therapy business that is existing and operational within the city as of the effective date of ordinance from which this division is derived shall be required to be licensed beginning January 1, 2016, with application submitted no later than November 15, 2015. 
(2)  The initial application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee,as provided in the city fee schedule, which covers the licensing fee of one individual massage therapist. 
(3)  The county sheriff's department shall conduct an investigation of the licensee of the establishment and all persons proposed to be licensed before consideration by the city. 
(c)  License renewal and fee. A license may be annually renewed, provided the license complies with the renewal application process as follows: 
(1)  The licensee shall complete the renewal application on a form provided by the city and contain all information requested thereon and shall contain such other information as the city may require. 
(2)  The completed renewal application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as provided in the city fee schedule and shall be filed with the city clerk no later than November 15 of each year. This fee shall cover the licensing fee of one individual massage therapist. 
(3)  The massage therapy establishment licensee shall provide all information regarding ownership interest if different than the prior application. If ownership interests have changed, an additional background investigation fee may be required. 
(d)  License amendment. Individual massage therapists are licensed for a particular establishment. A business name listed on an individual's massage therapist license may be amended at no cost to the therapist if the establishment changes the business name during the license year. 
(e)  Exception. This section shall not apply to, and no massage therapy establishment license shall be required for: 
(1)  A health care facility: 
a.  Owned by a city corporation organized under the laws of the state; 
b.  Owned by the state or any of its agencies; 
c.  A health care facility licensed by the state. 
(2)  Any business or entity owned and operated by a state-licensed medical professional through whom therapeutic massage is provided to its patients as a secondary health care treatment by the business or entity; 
(3)  A school, college, university or other accredited institution which provides an accredited program of study or course work in massage therapy or therapeutic massage, provided that: 
a.  The school, college, university or institution meets the criteria set forth in the definition of student of massage therapy herein; 
b.  The massage therapy is provided during and as part of a course or clinical component of the school's program or course work; and 
c.  The person is supervised by an instructor while providing or performing massage therapy. 
(f)  Restrictions and regulations. 
(1)  Licenses shall be granted only for operation at a fixed location or premises, which shall be located in a district as permitted by this division. Massage therapists shall not be allowed to operate as a home occupation business. 
(2)  Licenses shall be granted only upon a showing of compliance with all laws of sanitation. 
(3)  No beer, liquor, narcotic drug or controlled substances, as such terms are defined by state statutes or this Code, shall be permitted on licensed premises. 
(4)  Violation of any law or regulation relating to building, safety or health shall be grounds for revocation of any license. 
(5)  No doors of massage rooms, when occupied by one or more persons, shall be locked. All locks, if any, shall be keyed only from the exterior of the massage rooms. 
(6)  Massage therapists shall, at all times, be fully clothed. 
(7)  Clients shall be properly covered and draped with non-transparent material, except for the body part being worked on. 
(8)  Massage therapy establishments shall not be open between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
(9)  Only massage therapists who are licensed by the city shall practice or provide therapeutic massage services for a licensed massage therapy business or within the licensed massage therapy business premises as identified in its license. 
(10)  No massage therapy establishment shall discriminate between persons on the basis of race, color, creed, sex or national origin or ancestry. 
(11)  All premises licensed under this section shall, during all operating hours, be open to city inspection to determine whether or not this section and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to such inspections by such officials and without a warrant for searches and seizures. It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee to hinder or prevent a city official from making such inspection. 
(12)  The licensee shall post its valid establishment license and have available, upon request, the valid license and photo of each massage therapist providing massage therapy at the licensed establishment on the licensed premises. 
(13)  The requirements of sections 38-634 through 38-637 shall apply. 
(14)  All massage therapy establishment licensees shall comply with any and all provisions of and amendments to this division. Failure to do so shall be grounds for revocation of any license. 
(g)  Manager or agent. Before a license is issued under this section to an individual who is a nonresident of the city, to more than one individual whether or not they are residents of the city, or to a corporation, partnership, or association, the applicant shall appoint in writing a natural person as its on-premises manager or agent. Such on-premises manager or agent shall, by the terms of his written consent, take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises, and serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the license. Such manager or agent shall be a person who, by reason of age, character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee. If such manager or agent ceases to be located at the licensed premises or ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor, the license issued pursuant to such appointment shall be subject to revocation or suspension. 
(h)  Proof of local residency required. The licensee, managing partner, or manager of the licensed premises shall be required to show proof of residency in one of the following counties: Anoka, Carver, Chisago, Dakota, Hennepin, Isanti, Ramsey, Scott, Sherburne, Washington, and Wright in Minnesota, and St. Croix or Pierce in Wisconsin. 
(Code 1999, § 93.30; Ord. No. 680, 7-1-2015) 
Sec. 10-98. - Massage therapist license. 
(a)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to provide or practice therapeutic massage within the city without obtaining an annual license therefor from the city, which shall expire on the anniversary date of the individual's original licensure date each year. It is unlawful for any person to provide or practice therapeutic massage therapy in any place except upon a licensed premises, unless a temporary off-site permit or a mobile permit is issued in accordance with sections 10-99 or 10-100. 
(b)  License application and fee. 
(1)  All initial applications for a license to provide therapeutic massage shall be on a form provided by the city and contain all information requested thereon and shall contain such other information as the city may, from time to time, require. Any massage therapist that is practicing therapeutic massage within the city as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be required to be licensed beginning January 1, 2016, with application submitted no later than November 15, 2015. 
(2)  The initial application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(3)  The county sheriff's department shall conduct an investigation of the person proposed to be licensed before consideration by the city. 
(c)  License renewal and fee. A license may be annually renewed, provided the license complies with the renewal application process as follows: 
(1)  The licensee shall complete the renewal application on a form provided by the city and contain all information requested thereon and shall contain such other information as the city may require. 
(2)  The completed renewal application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as provided in the city fee schedule and shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the end of the calendar year. 
(d)  Exception. A massage therapist license shall not be required for a massage therapist if the therapist is hired or employed by, and exclusively provides treatment on the premises of, a medical professional licensed under M.S.A. ch. 147 or 148, or a dental professional licensed under M.S.A. ch. 150A; or any student of massage therapy provided: 
(1)  The massage therapy is provided during and as part of a course or clinical component of the school's program or course work; 
(2)  The massage therapy student is supervised by an instructor while providing or performing massage therapy services. A notice, which advises the public that the person who may provide massage therapy services is a student of massage therapy and is not licensed by the city, shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the room in which the massage therapy is provided; 
(3)  The massage therapist is registered in a state registration or licensure program. 
(e)  Restrictions and regulations. 
(1)  A massage therapist license shall not be issued unless the applicant provides proof of the following: 
a.  A diploma or certificate of graduation from a school approved by the American Massage Therapist Association (AMTA) or other similar reputable massage association; 
b.  A diploma or certificate of graduation from a school, which is either accredited by a recognized educational accrediting association or agency or is licensed by the state or local government agency having jurisdiction over the school; 
c.  A certificate of National Certification for Therapeutic Massage and Body Work by the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Body Work, an affiliate of the American Massage Therapy Association; or 
d.  Completion of a minimum of 500 credit hours of certified therapeutic massage training/course work. 
(2)  A licensed massage therapist shall have available, upon request, his valid license and photo on the licensed premises where he provides massage therapy or therapeutic massage. 
(3)  Massage therapists shall not be allowed to operate as a home occupation business. 
(4)  Proof of local residency required. The licensee shall show proof of residency in one of the following counties: Anoka, Carver, Chisago, Dakota, Hennepin, Isanti, Ramsey, Scott, Sherburne, Washington, and Wright in Minnesota, and St. Croix or Pierce in Wisconsin. 
(Code 1999, § 93.40; Ord. No. 680, 7-1-2015) 
Sec. 10-99. - Temporary off-site permit. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions regulating a massage therapy establishment license hereunder, a massage therapist licensed by the city may provide massage therapy at a location within the city other than a licensed premises in connection with a special event or function whereby the massage therapist provides massage therapy to attendees of the event or function, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A temporary off-site permit is issued by the city and the applicable fee, as provided in the city fee schedule, is paid. If applicable, a permit may be issued to an establishment for up to three licensed massage therapists for one event. 
(2)  A massage therapist shall not operate off-site for more than seven days throughout the year. 
(3)  A separate permit shall be issued for separate events. 
(4)  All massage therapy permitted under this provision shall comply with all the provisions of this division governing licensed massage therapy establishments and licensed massage therapists. 
(Code 1999, § 93.50; Ord. No. 680, 7-1-2015) 
Sec. 10-100. - Mobile permit. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions regulating a massage therapy establishment license hereunder, a massage therapist licensed by the city may provide in-home massage therapy services within the city, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A mobile permit is issued by the city and the applicable fee, as provided in the city fee schedule, is paid. 
(2)  The mobile permit shall be valid for one year. 
(3)  All massage therapy permitted under this provision shall comply with all the provisions of this division governing licensed massage therapy establishments and licensed massage therapists. 
(Code 1999, § 93.60; Ord. No. 680, 7-1-2015) 
Sec. 10-101. - Grounds for denial of a license. 
(a)  A massage therapy establishment shall not be issued a massage therapy establishment license upon the following grounds: 
(1)  The proposed fixed location or premises of the massage therapy establishment is not a permitted or special use for the property as established by the zoning regulations in this Code; 
(2)  The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent or more financial interest in the proposed licensed massage therapy establishment or the appointed on-site manager or agent of the applicant has a conviction for, or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge of, a crime involving a violation of any massage therapy related regulation in any other jurisdiction, any prostitution-related offense, criminal sexual conduct, indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, stalking, harassment, disorderly house as defined by state law, theft, felony drug offense, any crime of violence as defined by state law or any other similar crime or offense within ten years of the date of application; 
(3)  The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent or more financial interest in the proposed licensed massage therapy establishment had a massage therapist or massage therapy business-related license in another jurisdiction suspended or revoked within ten years preceding the date of application; 
(4)  The application failed to identify the full name, address, and date and place of birth of the natural person designated by the applicant as the massage therapy establishment's on-site manager or agent, along with the notarized written consent of such a person to: 
a.  Take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises and operation; and 
b.  Serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the license. 
(5)  The applicant provided false or misrepresented information in the application; 
(6)  The applicant has been denied a license within the preceding 12 months; 
(7)  Failure to provide proof of liability insurance; or 
(8)  Any other basis as provided in this division. 
(b)  A massage therapist shall not be issued a massage therapist license upon the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant has a conviction for or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge, a crime involving a violation of any massage therapy related regulation in any other jurisdiction, any prostitution-related offense, criminal sexual conduct, indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, stalking, harassment, disorderly house as defined by state law, theft, felony drug offense, any crime of violence as defined by state law, or any other similar crime or offense within ten years of the date of application; 
(2)  The applicant had a massage therapist or massage therapy business-related license in another jurisdiction that was suspended or revoked within ten years preceding the date of application; 
(3)  The applicant is not 18 years of age or older; 
(4)  The applicant has not provided proof of education or training as required elsewhere in this section; 
(5)  The applicant provided false or misrepresented information on the application; 
(6)  The applicant has been denied a license within the preceding 12 months; or 
(7)  Any other basis as provided in this division. 
(Code 1999, § 93.70; Ord. No. 680, 7-1-2015) 
Sec. 10-102. - Suspension or revocation of a license; appeal. 
(a)  Reasons for suspension or revocation. The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any massage therapist or massage therapy establishment for violation of any of the following: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the application form; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity; 
(3)  Conviction of any offense for which the granting of a license could have been denied under this division; or 
(4)  Violation of any provision of this Code. 
(b)  Initial determination. City officials shall be responsible for initially determining whether a massage therapy establishment or massage therapist has violated any provision of this division. The initial determination shall be conclusive unless the owner appeals the initial determination as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Notice of initial determination. The notice of initial determination shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent address listed on the license application. The notice of initial determination shall describe the violation; shall identify the official making the initial determination; and shall inform the owner or massage therapist of his right to appeal the initial determination. 
(d)  Request for administrative hearing. An owner of a massage therapy establishment or massage therapist may appeal the initial determination by filing a request for administrative hearing with the city administrator within five days of the owner or massage therapist's receipt of the notice of initial determination. 
(e)  Administrative hearing. An administrative hearing shall be held within seven days after the city's receipt of the request for administrative hearing. The city administrator shall assign a hearing officer who shall not be the person who made the initial determination. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider the reports and comments of the city officials, the testimony of any witnesses, witness statements, comments of the employees, comments of the owner, and findings from the initial determination. 
(f)  Final determination. After considering all the evidence submitted, the hearing officer shall make written findings and shall determine the suspension or revocation of the license (final determination). The final determination shall be conclusive unless the owner appeals the final determination. 
(g)  Notice of final determination. The notice of final determination and findings shall be made within five days of the date of the hearing and shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent address listed on the license application. The notice of final determination shall describe the violation; shall identify the hearing officer making the final determination; and shall inform the owner or massage therapist of his right to appeal the final determination. 
(h)  Request for public hearing. An owner of a massage therapy establishment or massage therapist may appeal the final determination by filing a request for a public hearing with the city administrator within five days of the owner's receipt of the notice of final determination. 
(i)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held within 20 days after the city's receipt of the request for public hearing. The city council shall conduct the public hearing, and it shall be publicized in the city's official newspaper. The city council shall consider the reposts and comments of the city officials, the testimony of any witnesses, witness statements, comments of the owner and employees, findings from the initial determination and final determination. 
(j)  Emergency. If, in the discretion of the city council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a massage therapist or establishment licensed under this division, the council may immediately suspend the therapist's or establishment's license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 93.80; Ord. No. 680, 7-1-2015) 
Secs. 10-103-10-132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS 

Sec. 10-133. - Definitions and interpretation. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser means a person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place for the purpose of soliciting funds. 
    Nonprofit organization means a person who is not peddling, soliciting or canvassing for the purpose of making a profit. 
    Peddler means a person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property, that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. 
    Regular business day means any day during which the city hall is normally open for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays, defined by state law, shall not be counted as regular business days. 
    Solicitor means a person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place for the purpose of attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property, or services, of which they may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. 
(Code 1999, § 118.010) 
Sec. 10-134. - Licensing. 
(a)  County license required. No person shall conduct business as a peddler, or solicitor within the city limits without first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S.A. ch. 329. 
(b)  City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this division, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler, solicitor or canvasser without first having obtained a license from the city. 
(c)  Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall be made at least 30 regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. Applications for licenses shall be on a form provided by the city and shall contain all information requested thereon and such other information as the city may require. 
(d)  Investigation. The county sheriff's department shall conduct an investigation of the licensee and all persons proposed to be licensed before consideration by the city. 
(e)  Fee. License fees shall be established pursuant to the city fee schedule. The fee shall be waived for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser which is a nonprofit organization. 
(f)  Duration. An annual license granted under this division shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted under this division shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the license. 
(Code 1999, § 118.020) 
Sec. 10-135. - Ineligibility for license. 
    The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this division: 
(1)  The failure of the applicant to obtain or show proof of having obtained any required county license. 
(2)  The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the application. 
(3)  The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the date of application, for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner or that will not adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. Such violations shall include, but not be limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical or sexual harm against another person. 
(4)  The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or canvasser. 
(5)  The existence of more than five complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the state attorney general's office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency within the preceding 12 months or 25 such complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five years. 
(Code 1999, § 118.030) 
Sec. 10-136. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Violations leading to suspension or revocation of license. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the city council for violation of any of the following: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the application form. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity. 
(3)  Conviction of any offense for which the granting of a license could have been denied under section 10-135. 
(4)  Violation of any provision of this division. 
(b)  Each such authorized user also suspended. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers, solicitors or canvassers on behalf of the licensee, shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each such authorized person's authority to conduct business as a peddler, solicitor or canvasser on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked. 
(c)  Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this division, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license application. 
(d)  Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the clerk within ten regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the day of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular business days of the hearing, the city council shall notify the licensee of its decision. 
(e)  Emergency. If, in the discretion of the city council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler, solicitor or canvasser licensed under this division, the council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed above. 
(f)  Appeal. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court. 
(Code 1999, § 118.040) 
Sec. 10-137. - Transferability. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferred to any other person other than the person to whom the license was issued. 
(Code 1999, § 118.050) 
Sec. 10-138. - Registration. 
    Canvassers not soliciting or accepting funds shall be required to register with the city. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be required. The city shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 1999, § 118.060) 
Sec. 10-139. - Prohibited activities. 
    No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall conduct business in any of the following manners: 
(1)  Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way. 
(2)  Conducting business in such a way as to create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of any individual or the general public. 
(3)  Conducting business before 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. or dusk, whichever is earlier. 
(4)  Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and identification, when requested, or using the license or registration of another person. 
(5)  Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to that person. 
(6)  Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating, or abusive. 
(Code 1999, § 118.070) 
Sec. 10-140. - Exemption from licensing and registration. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to apply to farmers selling the products of his own farms or dairy and farm products that are otherwise authorized by state law. 
(Code 1999, § 118.080) 
Sec. 10-141. - Exclusion by owner. 
    No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another when the property is marked with a sign at least 33/4 inches long and 33/4 inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating "No Peddlers, Solicitors or Canvassers," or other comparable statement. 
(Code 1999, § 118.090) 
Secs. 10-142-10-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC OUTDOOR EVENT 

Sec. 10-166. - Defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public outdoor event means any outdoor event or a non-sporting related event at the Vadnais Sports Center where the general public is invited to attend, held by any persons, business, or organization, including, but not limited to, parades, races, walks, bike rides, markets, live performances, demonstrations, contests, exhibits, pyrotechnics, light and image projection, festivals, concerts, tournaments, and parties. 
(Code 1999, § 119.010) 
Sec. 10-167. - Permit required. 
    Any persons, business, or organization shall be required to obtain a permit for any outdoor public event. Such permit shall be obtained on a form available from city hall. Public outdoor event permits must be applied for at least 30 days prior to the event. The city may waive the minimum filing period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the event, the anticipated number of attendees, and the city services required in connection with the event, it is determined that the waiver will not adversely impact the public health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city. Public outdoor event permit applications will be reviewed by the fire department. The permit application has the following requirements that shall be completed to include the following information: 
(1)  The name and phone numbers of at least two persons in charge of the event and phone numbers they can be reached at on the day of the event. 
(2)  The date and hours of the event. 
(3)  The address where the event will be conducted or a map of the planned route or path of the event with starting and finishing points. 
(4)  A signed letter of authorization from the property owner, if applicable. 
(5)  A proposed event layout plan, including locations of any temporary structures/portable restroom facilities. 
(6)  A proposed parking plan with authorization letters for parking areas owned or controlled by others. 
(7)  A security plan. 
(8)  A cleanup plan. 
(9)  The purpose of the event. 
(10)  The estimated number of attendees. 
(11)  Any other information which the city may require. 
(Code 1999, § 119.020) 
Sec. 10-168. - Alcohol. 
    If alcohol is to be served at the event, a temporary liquor license must be applied for and approved by the city council at least 30 days prior to the event. The hours of outdoor consumption shall be determined on the permit. The permit holder shall comply with all provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 119.030) 
Sec. 10-169. - Permit fee. 
    The cost of the outdoor event permit shall cover the cost of the city's review of the event. The fee shall be set forth as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 119.040) 
Sec. 10-170. - Bond or cash payment in lieu of bond. 
    As a condition of the permit, applicants holding events on public property, parks, or streets must post a surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00, or a cash payment of $1,000.00 in lieu of the bond. Such bond or cash payment is conditioned upon compliance with state and local laws, ordinances, and the outdoor event permit. In the event the applicant violates any such conditions, either the bond will be payable to the city, or the cash payment will be forfeited to the city, in an amount equal to the city's costs and expenses related to such a violation. 
(Code 1999, § 119.050) 
Sec. 10-171. - Days and hours allowed. 
    No event shall occur before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m., unless otherwise approved by council after consideration of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 1999, § 119.060) 
Sec. 10-172. - Level and testing of sound. 
(a)  All noise levels shall be in accordance with section 22-36(a). 
(b)  Testing. A city-designated official may measure the noise levels shortly into the event, and during the event. Rules for measuring noise shall be issued by the city-designated official prior to the event. Testing may be conducted on a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency decibel reading device. A warning shall be issued if noise is above the allowable limit, and the source of the noise generation shall have to cease upon the issuance of a second warning. 
(Code 1999, § 119.080) 
Sec. 10-173. - Security. 
    If deemed necessary after review of the security plan, security shall be present at the event. Security shall be easily identifiable by a uniform, shirt, etc. 
(Code 1999, § 119.090) 
Sec. 10-174. - Clean up. 
    Housekeeping of the event area shall be performed continuously during the event to remove excess and fallen trash and litter. The final clean up should be done immediately after the event or the next morning. The cleanup shall be done for an area surrounding the event, to remove all waste generated by event participants, which takes into account utilized parking areas and public streets including any properties impacted by windblown trash. If any event impinges on public property, the applicant shall be held accountable and responsible for the costs. 
(Code 1999, § 119.090) 
Sec. 10-175. - Notice. 
    If the event will have amplified sound or adversely impact city streets or traffic, the city shall give notice of where the event is being held or its starting point to property owners within 350 feet in all directions of the event site a minimum of seven days in advance of a city council meeting when the permit application will be considered. The notice shall include the date, time, location, and type of the event. 
(Code 1999, § 119.100) 
Sec. 10-176. - Exemptions. 
    A private party held on private property in which members of the general public are not invited and typical residential activities, including, but not limited to, garage sales, estate sales and/or open houses are excluded from regulation under this division unless otherwise regulated by other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 119.110) 
Secs. 10-177-10-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SEWER CONTRACTOR 

Sec. 10-206. - Defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sewer contractor includes any person engaged in the business of building or repairing that portion of the house or building sewer extending from the house or building, upon the building, to the main sewer or other outlet. 
(Code 1999, § 60.010) 
Sec. 10-207. - Eligibility. 
    Any person who has had at least three years' experience in responsible charge of minor sewer work involving a knowledge of trenching, bracing, tunnel work, pipe laying in public streets and all other matters pertaining to and incidental to such sewer work is eligible to receive a license. 
(Code 1999, § 60.020) 
Sec. 10-208. - Application to city building department. 
    Any person desiring to become a sewer contractor shall make application to the city building department and shall, if necessary, be required to submit to an examination as to his qualifications before the city engineer or building official. 
(Code 1999, § 60.030) 
Sec. 10-209. - Examination and licensing; fee and bond required. 
    The council may approve or reject the application or may refer the same to the city engineer or the building official for examination as to the applicant's qualifications. If the council approves the application, a license authorizing the applicant to engage in the business of house sewer contracting shall be issued, but only after the execution and filing of the bond and insurance requirements and payment of the fee provided. 
(Code 1999, § 60.040) 
Sec. 10-210. - No license required. 
    No license shall be required for a homeowner performing work on his own premises in the construction of a house sewer, nor shall a license be required of a plumber holding a plumber's license issued by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 60.050) 
Sec. 10-211. - Bond and insurance. 
    Before any required permit is issued, the licensee applying therefor shall file with the city building department and the following bond and insurance certificate: 
(1)  A bond in favor of the city, as obligee, with an approved corporate surety, in the penal sum of $5,000.00, the conditions of which bond shall be that the licensee shall keep the obligee harmless from all costs and charges that may accrue on account of the doing of any work authorized or permitted in this Code, that the licensee shall save the obligee harmless from any loss or damage by reason of improper or inadequate work performed by the licensee within the city, and further, that the licensee shall save the obligee harmless from any damage to utility lines, curbs, streets, street surfaces or sidewalks. 
(2)  A certificate that insurance is in force covering the licensee for the period covered by the licensee in the following minimum amounts: property damage, $100,000.00; public liability, $250,000.00 each person, $500,000.00 each accident. The certificate shall state that the policies covering the licensee shall not be cancelled without ten days' written notice to the city. 
(3)  A certificate that worker's compensation insurance is in force covering any employee of the licensee for the period covered by the license. 
(Code 1999, § 60.060) 
Sec. 10-212. - Re-examination. 
    Should the applicant not be approved by the council, they may file a second application for subsequent consideration by the council, with such examination as to qualifications as the council may require, but no applicant shall file more than two applications within a period of one year. 
(Code 1999, § 60.070) 
Sec. 10-213. - Fees. 
    The annual license fee shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. Any person allowing his license to expire shall not be permitted to do any of the work authorized under the license during the time between expiration and the issuance of a new license. 
(Code 1999, § 60.080) 
Sec. 10-214. - License not transferable. 
    A sewer contractor's license shall not be transferable. No person holding a license shall allow his name to be used by any other person for the purpose of obtaining permits or to do any of the work for which the license is issued. 
(Code 1999, § 60.090) 
Sec. 10-215. - Revocation of license; failure to pay claim. 
    The council shall have the power to revoke any license upon satisfactory proof that the holder of the license has willfully violated any of the provisions of this division. A revoked license shall not be reinstated in any manner for a period of six months. The failure to pay, within 60 days, any legitimate claim the city may have against a sewer contractor shall constitute cause for revocation of license. 
(Code 1999, § 60.100) 
Secs. 10-216-10-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - TOBACCO PRODUCT SELLERS 

Sec. 10-239. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This division is enacted because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, and the sales, possession, and use are violations of both state and federal laws; and because studies, which the city hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of 18 years and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government. 
(b)  This division shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, and to further the official public policy of the state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in M.S.A. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  In making these findings, the city council accepts the conclusions and recommendations of the Center for Disease Control in their study "Selected Cigarette Smoking Initiation and Quitting Behaviors Among High School Students, United States, 1997," and of the following medical professionals in these medical journals: Khuder SA, et al., "Age at Smoking Onset and its Effect on Smoking Cessation," Addictive Behavior 24(5):673-7, September-October 1999; D'Avanzo B, et al., "Age at Starting Smoking and Number of Cigarettes Smoked," Annals of Epidemiology 4(6):455-59, November 1994; Chen, J & Millar, WJ, "Age of Smoking Initiation: Implications for Quitting," Health Reports 9(4):39-46, Spring 1998; Everett SA, et al., "Initiation of Cigarette Smoking and Subsequent Smoking Behavior Among U.S. High School Students," Preventive Medicine, 29(5):327-33, November 1999, copies of which are adopted by reference. 
(Code 1999, § 92.010) 
Sec. 10-240. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child-resistant packaging means packaging that meets the definition set forth in 16 CFR 1700.15(b)(1), as in effect January 1, 2015, when tested in accordance with the methods described in 16 CFR 1700.20, as in effect January 1, 2015. 
    Compliance checks means the system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices are following and complying with the requirements of this division. Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this division. The term "compliance checks" shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices. 
    Individually packaged means the practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container, as described in this definition, shall not be considered individually packaged. 
    Indoor area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50 percent of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. 
    Loosies means the common term used to refer to a single- or individually-packaged cigarette or any other tobacco product that has been removed from its packaging and sold individually. The term "loosies" does not include individual cigars with a retail price, before any sales taxes, of more than $2.00 per cigar. 
    Minor means any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years. 
    Moveable place of business means any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions. 
    Nicotine or lobelia delivery devices means any product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a product, that is not tobacco, as defined in this section, not including any product that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco use cessation, harm reduction, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
    Retail establishment means any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices are available for sale to the general public. The term "retail establishment" includes, but shall not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, restaurants, and drug stores. 
    Sale means any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration. 
    Self-service merchandising means open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service sales are interpreted as being any sale where there is not an actual physical exchange of the product between the clerk and the customer. 
    Smoking means inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product. The term "smoking" also includes carrying a lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation. 
    Tobacco or tobacco products includes cigarettes and any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco. The term "tobacco" excludes any tobacco product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
    Tobacco-related devices includes any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, ashtray, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products. 
    Vending machine means any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device. 
(Code 1999, § 92.020) 
Sec. 10-241. - License. 
(a)  License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city. 
(b)  Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. If the city administrator or his designee shall determine that an application is incomplete, he shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete. 
(c)  Action. The city may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the city approves the license, the city administrator or his designee shall issue the license to the applicant. If the city denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the city council's decision. 
(d)  Term. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid for the calendar year. 
(e)  Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this section may be revoked or suspended as provided in section 10-250. 
(f)  Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the city council. 
(g)  Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this section. 
(h)  Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premise. 
(i)  Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days, but no more than 60 days, before the expiration of the current license. 
(j)  Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license issued under this section shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license. 
(k)  Smoking. Smoking shall not be permitted, and no person shall smoke within the indoor area of any establishment with a retail tobacco license. Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco and tobacco-related products is prohibited. 
(Code 1999, § 92.030) 
Sec. 10-242. - Fees. 
    No license shall be issued under this division until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this division shall be as provided in the city fee schedule, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1999, § 92.040) 
Sec. 10-243. - Basis for denial of license. 
(a)  Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this division include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices. 
(3)  The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application. 
(4)  The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false or misleading information. 
(5)  The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular grounds for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license. 
(c)  If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this division. 
(Code 1999, § 92.050) 
Sec. 10-244. - Prohibited sales. 
    It shall be a violation of this division for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device: 
(1)  To any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  By means of any type of vending machine. 
(3)  By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to a make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device between the licensee, or the licensee's employee, and the customer. 
(4)  By means of loosies. 
(5)  Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes or other tobacco products. 
(6)  By any other means, to any other person, on in any other manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation. 
(Code 1999, § 92.060) 
Sec. 10-245. - Self-service sales. 
    It is unlawful for a licensee under this division to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to those items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device between the licensee or his clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices at the time the ordinance from which this division is derived is adopted shall comply with this section within 90 days following the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Code 1999, § 92.070) 
Sec. 10-246. - Responsibility. 
    All licensees under this division shall be responsible for the actions of his employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this division, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation. 
(Code 1999, § 92.080) 
Sec. 10-247. - Compliance checks and inspections. 
    All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the county sheriff or other authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of his parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than the age of 18 years to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices when those items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law. 
(Code 1999, § 92.090) 
Sec. 10-248. - Other illegal acts. 
    Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this division: 
(1)  Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this division for any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device to any minor. 
(2)  Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this division for any minor to have in his possession any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device. This subsection shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check. 
(3)  Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this division for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device. 
(4)  Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this division for any minor to purchase, or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain, any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device, and it shall be a violation of this division for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain those items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce, or attempt to coerce, a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device. This subsection shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check. 
(5)  Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this division for any minor to attempt to disguise his true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person. 
(6)  Child-resistant packaging of liquid used in electronic delivery devices. It shall be a violation of this section for any licensee to sell any liquid used in electronic delivery devices, whether or not such liquid contains nicotine, that is intended for human consumption and use in an electronic device, that is not in child-resistant packaging. 
(Code 1999, § 92.100) 
Sec. 10-249. - Exceptions and defenses. 
    Nothing in this division shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this division for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law. 
(Code 1999, § 92.110) 
Sec. 10-250. - Administrative violations; suspension; revocation; fine. 
(a)  Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this division. 
(b)  Any violation of the city's regulations relating to the issuance of a tobacco products license or of any conditions/restrictions attached to the issuance of such license shall be cause for the imposition of an administrative fine, the suspension of the license or the revocation of the license pursuant to the procedures described in section 10-7. 
(c)  If the violation relates to the sale of tobacco products to minors by licensee or licensee's employees, the following administrative fines, suspensions or revocations shall be imposed: 
(1)  The first such violation within 24 months shall subject the licensee to the payment of an administrative fine of $250.00, plus an additional compliance check; 
(2)  The second violation within 24 months shall subject licensee to the payment of an administrative fine of $500.00, plus an additional compliance check; 
(3)  The third violation within 24 months shall subject the licensee to the payment of an administrative fine of $1,000.00, and to a minimum seven business day suspension of the license; 
(4)  The fourth violation within 24 months shall subject the licensee to the payment of an administrative fine of $1,500.00, and to a minimum 15 business day suspension of the license; 
(5)  The fifth violation within 24 months shall subject the licensee to the payment of an administrative fine of $2,000.00, and to a minimum of 30 business day suspension of the license; 
(6)  The sixth violation within 24 months shall be cause for revocation of the license for up to one year. 
(d)  The imposition of an administrative fine and a suspension of license or to a license revocation pursuant to this section shall be preceded by a hearing before the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 92.130) 
Sec. 10-251. - Administrative fine; individuals. 
(a)  An individual who sells tobacco to a person under the age of 18 years will be charged an administrative penalty. No penalty may be imposed until the individual has received notice, served personally or by mail, of the alleged violation and an opportunity for a hearing before the city council. A decision that a violation has occurred must be in writing. The following administrative fines shall be imposed: 
(1)  First violation within 24 months: $50.00. 
(2)  Second violation within 24 months: $100.00. 
(3)  Third violation within 24 months: $150.00. 
(4)  Fourth violation within 24 months: $200.00. 
(5)  Fifth violation within 24 months: $250.00. 
(b)  Failure to pay this penalty by an individual who sells tobacco to a person under the age of 18 years will result in a misdemeanor violation for the first offense. Additional offenses within five years of a previous conviction will result in a gross misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 92.140) 
Sec. 10-252. - Administrative penalties procedures. 
    The following procedure should generally be followed for council review of tobacco license violations that are subject to the administrative penalties established in sections 10-250 and 10-251: 
(1)  The city administrator or his designee will contact the licensee/seller asking if the licensee/seller will sign an admission of the facts of the alleged violation and an acceptance of the administrative penalty listed in sections 10-250 and 10-251. Licensees/sellers have the right to request a hearing before the city council if not in agreement with the violation or the administrative penalty. The city administrator or his designee may also schedule a hearing before the council if he believes there is a valid reason to deviate from the administrative penalty. 
(2)  If a hearing is requested, it will be conducted in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, M.S.A. §§ 14.57 through 14.70. The council will issue written findings on the alleged violation and an order imposing sanctions, if any. 
(3)  If the licensee/seller and the city administrator or his designee agree on the violation and the administrative penalty, a written admission will be provided to the council with a proposed order. For first and second violations, the matter will be scheduled as part of the consent agenda, and it is expected that the council will generally issue the proposed order without discussion. Nevertheless, the council may choose to schedule the matter for special council review and action. The city must provide at least ten days' notice to the licensee/seller before this review is conducted. Any violations beyond the second violation must be scheduled for a hearing before the council. 
(Code 1999, § 92.150) 
Sec. 10-253. - Billboards. 
    No billboard, as defined in section 38-689, shall promote the sale or use of tobacco or tobacco products. 
(Code 1999, § 92.160) 
Secs. 10-254-10-274. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL WASTE COLLECTORS 

Sec. 10-275. - License required. 
    No person or entity shall collect refuse or waste without a license to do so as required by this chapter and payment of the license fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 122.010) 
Sec. 10-276. - Bond required. 
    There shall be, in addition to such fees as provided in the city fee schedule, a bond in the amount of $3,000.00 which shall be posted with the clerk before such license required by this article shall issue. 
(Code 1999, § 122.020) 
Sec. 10-277. - Application and license fee. 
    Any person desiring a license to operate a refuse or other waste material collection service, shall file an application on a form provided by the city. The application shall be submitted to the city clerk or his designee for determination of whether the applicant is a responsible collector and has proper equipment to perform properly. 
(Code 1999, § 122.030) 
Sec. 10-278. - Liability insurance. 
    The applicant shall file, together with the application, a policy or policies of insurance, acceptable to the city, insuring the applicant in the sum of $500,000.00 against liability, imposed by law on account of injuries to persons, and in the sum of $100,000.00 against liability, imposed by law on account of damage to property by reason of the ownership or operation of the vehicle to be used by the applicant under the terms of this article, and the policy shall be and remain continuously in force during the period of the license and shall contain a provision that they shall not be revoked or cancelled except upon ten days written notice to the city. 
(Code 1999, § 122.040) 
Sec. 10-279. - Change in collection procedure. 
    Any collector that intends to change collection procedures and practices from those stated in application, including customer rules, shall notify and obtain approval of city clerk or his designee 45 days prior to instituting the proposed change and notify all affected customers by letter 30 days prior to change. 
(Code 1999, § 122.050) 
Sec. 10-280. - Interruption of service. 
    Any collector who cannot provide service to customers for reasons beyond his control, shall notify the city clerk or his designee and the customers immediately. The city clerk or his designee may arrange for other means of refuse or other waste material collection in order to restore and maintain sanitary conditions until the collector can commence regular service. 
(Code 1999, § 122.060) 
Sec. 10-281. - Collection of other waste materials. 
    Each collector shall provide, upon notice, service for the prompt removal of all other waste material except earth, concrete, and toxic or hazardous materials, by special arrangements and fees with the person requesting such service. The collector may provide the service or arrange for the service with any other person licensed by the city that can responsibly provide the requested service. 
(Code 1999, § 122.070) 
Sec. 10-282. - Collection service. 
    Collectors shall notify the city clerk or his designee of discontinuance of collection service to any person by written notice within three days after the service is discontinued. 
(Code 1999, § 122.080) 
Sec. 10-283. - Regulations for licensed collectors. 
(a)  Every vehicle operated by a collector shall be kept well painted, clean, and in good repair and steam cleaned at least every week to prevent persistent odors. 
(b)  All vehicles operated by a collector shall be clearly marked with the owner's name and phone number. 
(c)  All vehicles operated by a collector shall be loaded so that material cannot jar loose or fall to the ground or street. When the vehicle is in motion, loose paper, trash, or other material shall be secured so that they cannot be dispensed by the wind or fall out of the vehicle. 
(d)  When containers are corroded or otherwise become defective, the licensed collector shall notify owner to replace same. 
(e)  Every licensed collector is required to provide the means to recycle as set forth in the contract between the city and a waste collector chosen by it from time to time and this article. 
(Code 1999, § 122.090) 
Sec. 10-284. - Violations. 
    Violation of any provision of this chapter by a collector shall be cause for revocation of the collector's license. Whether a violation exists shall be decided by the city council, with notice of hearing to the collector. 
(Code 1999, § 122.100) 
Sec. 10-285. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall apply to obtaining a license for the collection of refuse or waste from a single-family residential unit or from any residential structure containing eight units or less. 
(Code 1999, § 122.110) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT AND FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 12-19. - Establishment. 
    The city has established an emergency management department to provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies. 
(Code 1999, § 225.010) 
Sec. 12-20. - Coordination with other agencies. 
    The emergency management functions of the city shall be coordinated to the extent practicable with comparable functions of the federal, state and other local governments, as well as private agencies. 
(Code 1999, § 225.020) 
Sec. 12-21. - Personnel. 
    Emergency management forces shall consist of personnel employed by the city or any other volunteer or paid member of any local emergency or disaster service agency engaged in carrying on emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 225.030) 
Sec. 12-22. - Emergency management director. 
    The emergency management department is under the supervision and control of an emergency management director, who shall be appointed by the mayor for an indefinite term and who may be removed by him at any time. The director shall be paid his ordinary and necessary operating expenses and such salary as the council shall, from time to time, provide by resolution. The director shall have direct responsibility for the administration of the emergency management department, subject to the direction and control of the mayor. The director shall file an annual plan to be approved by the council. 
(Code 1999, § 225.040) 
Sec. 12-23. - Studies and surveys. 
    The director shall make such studies and surveys of the manpower, industries, resources and facilities of the city as he deems necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency. 
(Code 1999, § 225.060) 
Sec. 12-24. - Preparation of general plan. 
    The director shall prepare a comprehensive all hazard plan for the city and shall present such a plan to the council for approval. When the council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and all emergency management forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. 
(Code 1999, § 225.070) 
Sec. 12-25. - Training and information. 
    In accordance with the state and the city emergency management plans, the director shall institute such other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency management resources in advance of actual disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the city emergency management plan in time of an emergency. He may, from time to time, conduct such training exercises as he may deem necessary. 
(Code 1999, § 225.080) 
Sec. 12-26. - Cooperation with other agencies. 
    The director shall utilize the personnel, services and equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable and cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the local emergency management department and to the state governor upon request. 
(Code 1999, § 225.090) 
Sec. 12-27. - Expenditures. 
    All expenditures for emergency management shall be approved by the council. The director shall not purchase any material or property or enter into any contract requiring expenditures without prior council approval. 
(Code 1999, § 225.170) 
Sec. 12-28. - Emergency management constitutes governmental function. 
    All functions hereunder and all other activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The city and its agents, except in cases of willful misconduct, its officers, agents, employees or representatives engaged in any emergency management activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with state law or with this chapter or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder, shall not be liable for the death of or injury to persons or damage to property as a result of such activity. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which they would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the Workers' Compensation Law, nor the right of any such person to receive benefits or compensation under any act of Congress. 
(Code 1999, § 225.180) 
Chapter 14 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire service means any deployment of firefighting personnel or equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to protect equipment, life, or property in an area of or threatened by fire. The term "fire service" also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel or equipment to provide fire suppression, rescue, extrication, and any other services related to fire and rescue as may occur. 
    Fire service charge means the charge imposed by the city for receiving fire service. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle designed and manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, including semitrailers. 
(Code 1999, § 210.210) 
Secs. 14-2-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-21. - Established. 
    The city shall provide a fire department for the benefit of its citizens, whose mission is to respond to fire, rescue, medical, hazardous material and other emergencies, to investigate the cause of fires, and to prevent fires and promote safety in the community. 
(Code 1999, § 210.010) 
Sec. 14-22. - Administration, staffing and operating guidelines. 
(a)  The fire department shall be administered by a fire chief who shall have subordinate officers to assist in management of fire department duties and functions. The fire department chain of command shall be defined in the fire department standard operating guidelines (SOGs). The fire chief and city human resource officer shall develop administrative policies for determining qualified personnel which shall be submitted to the city council for approval and recommend to the city council appointment to fire department officer positions. 
(b)  The fire department shall have sufficient staff to respond to fires and other emergencies that may occur within the city. The fire chief shall annually recommend to the city administrator for consideration and approval by the city council a staffing plan for the fire department. 
(Code 1999, § 210.010) 
Sec. 14-23. - Fire chief and acting fire chief. 
    The fire chief shall be appointed by the city council upon recommendation of the city administrator. The fire chief shall be responsible to the city council, under the direction of the city administrator, for general policymaking and administrative control, budgeting, staffing, directing, evaluating, reporting, planning, and coordinating all activities of the fire department, including, but not limited to, fire protection, emergency rescue, emergency medical services, fire prevention and safety educational services, training and safety of personnel, and fire station facilities, vehicles, and equipment assigned to the fire department. 
(1)  Specific duties of the fire chief shall be prescribed in a job description prepared by the city human resource officer in consultation with the city administrator and adopted by the city council. 
(2)  For periods of absence from the city of up to 60 days, the fire chief shall appoint an acting fire chief. For periods of absence longer than 60 days, the city council shall approve the appointment of an acting fire chief. 
(Code 1999, § 210.020) 
Sec. 14-24. - Appointment and duties of firefighters and other personnel. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint, promote or remove firefighters of the fire department. The council may consider the recommendations of the fire chief in these matters. 
(b)  All employees of the fire department shall perform such duties and functions as are prescribed in job descriptions which shall be prepared for each position by the fire chief in coordination with the city human resource officer, and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 210.040) 
Sec. 14-25. - Management positions. 
    The following are special positions within the fire department: chief, assistant chief, safety officer, captain, and engineer. No person shall hold more than one of these positions. Special positions do not include relief association positions. 
(Code 1999, § 210.040) 
Sec. 14-26. - Standard personnel policies applicable; conflicts. 
    The city's standard personnel policies, as approved and amended from time to time by the city council, shall apply to all fire department personnel, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article or in the personnel policies. In the event of conflict between the standard city personnel policies and the fire department standard operating guidelines, the standard personnel policies shall control. 
(Code 1999, § 210.040) 
Sec. 14-27. - Standard operating guidelines. 
    The fire chief shall recommend to the city administrator a set of SOGs for operation and administration of the fire department for consideration and approval by the city council. The SOGs detail the organization and administration of the fire department and establish procedures for efficiently and effectively handling operations while maintaining sufficient flexibility to allow for deviation from the guidelines when necessary. 
(Code 1999, § 210.050) 
Sec. 14-28. - Authority at emergency scenes. 
(a)  The fire chief, or any fire officer or firefighter in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or property, shall have the authority to direct such operation as may be necessary to limit or mitigate the threat of injury to persons, or damage to property or the environment, extinguish or control any fire, perform any rescue operation, investigate the existence of suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of duty. 
(b)  In the exercise of such power, the fire chief or any other fire officer or firefighter is authorized to prohibit any person, vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or thing from approaching the scene and is authorized to remove or cause to be removed, towed, or kept away from the scene any person, vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or thing which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(c)  The fire chief, or any fire officer or firefighter in charge at the scene of an emergency, is authorized to place ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across any street, highway, alley, place or private property in the vicinity of such operation so as to prevent accidents or interference with the lawful efforts of the fire department to manage or control the situation. 
(Code 1999, § 210.060) 
Sec. 14-29. - Investigation of emergency incidents. 
    The fire chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires occurring within the city pursuant to state law and rule. 
(Code 1999, § 210.070) 
Sec. 14-30. - Mutual aid. 
    The fire chief, or his designee, is authorized to respond to requests for mutual aid assistance in the form of fire department resources from any political subdivision, agencies of the state, and federal agencies, provided the emergency response needs of the city are not compromised, and the city administrator or his respective designee is notified when fire department personnel or resources shall be committed to the mutual aid response in excess of 12 hours. 
(Code 1999, § 210.080) 
Sec. 14-31. - Fire department relief association. 
(a)  There is a Vadnais Heights Firefighters' Relief Association whose function is to manage service pension benefits for paid-on-call firefighters and to provide other services to paid-on-call firefighters of the city as deemed appropriate by members of the association. 
(b)  The affairs of the relief association are governed by its bylaws. The bylaws provide rules for matters such as membership, meetings, election and duties of officers and trustees, investments, eligibility for benefits, and benefit amounts. 
(c)  Any proposed change to the association's bylaws or articles of incorporation which will affect the benefits paid from the association's special fund shall not be effective in the city until ratified by the city council. 
(d)  No association member who is also a non-firefighter city employee shall be paid or accumulate service pension benefits when responding to a fire call during their normal hours of employment for the city. Persons who are already both non-firefighter city employees and association members shall not be affected by this section with regard to their status as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Code 1999, § 210.090) 
Secs. 14-32-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE FEES 

Sec. 14-51. - Established; scope. 
(a)  Generally. The city council shall establish fees for fire protection service or emergency response, which are not otherwise specified by contract. Fees may be established at a fixed rate for certain specific types of incidents or for actual costs incurred by the fire department in responding to the incident. The fire chief shall make a recommendation annually to the city administrator for approval by the city council the fee to be charged for each service fee noted in this section. False alarm fees are not included as service fees under this section. 
(b)  Chemical spill cleanup. Fees incurred by the city for response to chemical spills on roadways, and at fixed private facilities within the city, or in other cities that personnel and equipment from the city may be requested to respond, will be charged to the owner of the chemical, the owner of the vehicle in which the chemical is being shipped, or to the owner of the facility where the spill occurred. 
(c)  Types of fees. Fees shall include, but shall not be limited to, actual costs for all personnel who respond to the incident for a minimum of one hour and the cost on a per-hour basis for each piece of city apparatus and equipment that responds to the incident for a minimum of one hour. Vehicle and equipment costs shall conform to the most recent cost schedules published by the federal emergency management agency for disaster recovery, or in the event a piece of equipment is not listed on the schedule, it shall be billed at a reasonable rate to be determined by the city using industry standards. 
(d)  Cleanup and replacement of equipment and supplies. In addition, the bill for service shall include any cost of cleanup of any contaminated equipment or repair of any equipment damaged during the incident or its replacement, along with replacement of any disposable equipment, supplies, or communication equipment, and administrative costs to be established at ten percent of the total bill. 
(e)  Liens upon nonpayment. Each owner of the premises receiving fire department service for a hazardous materials spill shall be deemed to have agreed to pay for the services and any delinquencies in the payment for the fire department service to the premises shall be a lien and charged against the premises so served regardless of whether the same be a homestead or not. In case of a delinquency, the amount owed shall be collected in the same manner provided for in section 36-192(a). 
(f)  Impounding vehicles and property authorized. The fire chief or his designee is authorized to impound vehicles or property related to a fire or hazardous materials release and to be held in a secure location until such time as payment is received for fire department response to the incident or the vehicle or property may be transported without further risk of injury to the public or damage to the environment. 
(Code 1999, § 210.100) 
Sec. 14-52. - Applicability, purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of the city to authorize and establish in this article charges to residents and any nonresident of the city for certain fire services as authorized by M.S.A. § 415.01. Any party who receives fire service involving a motor vehicle accident or motor vehicle fire shall pay for such fire service as provided in this division. 
(Code 1999, §§ 210.200, 210.220) 
Sec. 14-53. - Billing and collection. 
(a)  A party receiving fire service will be billed directly by the city. 
(b)  Additionally, if the city is aware of the insurance company covering the involved vehicle, the city will send a copy of such billing directly to the insurance company. 
(c)  A party billed for fire service will have 30 days from the time of notice to pay, and, if not paid by that time, it will be considered delinquent and an additional charge of ten percent will be added to the amount due. Additionally, such party shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by the city including reasonable attorney's fees and cost. 
(d)  If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice of delinquency is sent, the city council may also, on or before October 15 of each year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the county auditor in which the recipient of the services owns real property for collection with property taxes. The county auditor is responsible for remitting to the city all charges collected on behalf of the city. The city must give the property owner notice of its intent to proceed in this manner by September 15 of the year in which it certifies the unpaid charge to the appropriate county auditor. 
(Code 1999, § 210.230) 
Sec. 14-54. - Hardship and waiver of fees. 
    When the city determines that imposition of a fee would impose an extreme economic hardship, as determined by the city, the city may reduce or waive the fee as deemed appropriate by the city administrator. Any party may appeal the determination by the city administrator to the city council for consideration. Economic hardship may be established where a party is totally disabled and receiving social security benefits or railroad similar fixed income, retirement or disability benefits, and whose total household income is less than the annual low income level established by the federal department of housing and urban development low income level. 
(Code 1999, § 210.300) 
Sec. 14-55. - Service charge on public entity property. 
    All property within the city owned by a public entity which is exempt from property taxation shall pay a service charge for emergency services rendered by the city on the public entity property, including fire, rescue, and medical services. The amount of such charge shall be as established by agreement or as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 210.400) 
Secs. 14-56-14-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-87. - State uniform fire code adopted; enforcement. 
    The city adopts the current Minnesota State Fire Code published by the International Code Council as though fully set forth in this article. The fire chief, fire marshal or their authorized designees shall enforce the adopted code within the city, including performing any necessary inspections. 
(Code 1999, §§ 51.010, 51.020) 
Sec. 14-88. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the adopted fire code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the adopted fire code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire chief to the city council within 30 days from the date of decision appealed. 
(Code 1999, § 51.080) 
Sec. 14-89. - Open flame fire on apartment balconies. 
(a)  This section applies to multiple-dwelling units two or more stories in height or multiple-dwellings containing more than eight units, except those of all masonry construction with deck and balconies of non-combustible materials. This section shall not apply to gas or electric grills of a kind approved by the fire department. 
(b)  No resident or person shall set, kindle, maintain or permit any fire or open flame or use any barbecue, torch or similar heating, cooking or lighting equipment or device on any balcony of a dwelling unit that is subject to this section. 
(Code 1999, § 51.090) 
Sec. 14-90. - Automatic sprinkling of existing structures. 
(a)  This section applies to structures which did not require or which could not utilize automatic sprinkling when built. 
(b)  Owners of structures not having automatic sprinkling shall install automatic sprinkling if required by the adopted state fire code within three years after the availability of city water to such structure. The three-year requirement shall commence to run from the time written notice is given to the record owner of such structure. 
(c)  If the owner believes there is sufficient reason to not require adherence to this section, he shall notify the fire marshal in writing within 60 days after receiving such written notice. The fire marshal shall determine whether the requirements of this section may be waived. 
(Code 1999, §§ 51.090, 51.100) 
Secs. 14-91-14-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 14-109. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Control equipment means any device, approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, which has the function of controlling or abating the emission of air contaminants to the atmosphere. 
    Open fire means any fire, except a recreational fire, from which the products of combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through any control equipment. 
    Recreational fires means small fires started for cooking or other recreational purposes and not for the purpose of disposing of any refuse or other material. 
(Code 1999, § 146.020) 
Sec. 14-110. - Recreational fires restricted. 
(a)  Recreational fires shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  They shall be located no closer than 35 feet from a principal structure, 25 feet from any other structure, and ten feet from a lot line; 
(2)  They shall be located within a fire pit surrounded by rocks, concrete, or metal; 
(3)  They shall not exceed three feet in diameter or three feet in height; 
(4)  They shall not be allowed if wind is causing smoke to blow into other homes; 
(5)  The fire shall be constantly attended by a responsible adult; 
(6)  A supply of water (such as a garden hose) shall be readily available; 
(7)  A five foot clear zone around the fire shall be maintained from any combustible material; 
(8)  Recreational fires are limited to one location per parcel of property. 
(b)  The fire chief or his designee will have the authority to place a ban on recreational fires when, in his discretion, circumstances warrant such restriction. 
Sec. 14-111. - Open fires prohibited. 
    No person shall start or maintain any open fire within the city without a permit, except for supervised recreational or cooking fires contained within approved fire rings, pits or barbecue grills. 
(Code 1999, § 146.030) 
Sec. 14-112. - Burning permits. 
    The fire chief or his designee is authorized to issue permits under this division and may establish reasonable permit conditions for open burning, consistent with the rules adopted herein. 
(Code 1999, § 146.040) 
Chapter 16 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 18 - HUMAN RELATIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 22 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Prohibited, generally. 
    Whoever, by his act or failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance: 
(1)  Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable number of members of the public; 
(2)  Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or 
(3)  Depreciates the value of the property of the inhabitants of the city or of a considerable number thereof. 
(Code 1999, § 180.010; Ord. No. 9; Ord. No. 388, 5-15-1990) 
Sec. 22-2. - Public nuisances affecting health, safety, comfort or repose. 
    The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances, affecting health, safety, comfort or repose. 
(1)  Diseased animals at large. All diseased animals running at large. 
(2)  Animal carcasses. Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Weeds and excess grass growth. All noxious weeds or grass in excess of ten inches in height. 
(4)  Trash accumulations. An accumulation of tin cans, bottles or trash or debris of any nature or description and the throwing, dumping, or depositing of any dead animals, manure, garbage, waste, sewage, decaying matter, ground, sand, stones, ashes, rubbish, tin cans or other material of any kind on private property. 
(5)  Offensive trades. Offensive trades and businesses as defined by statute or not licensed as provided by law. 
(6)  Smoke, fumes and other emissions. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities. 
(7)  Portable privies. Portable privies are prohibited except at construction sites, in public parks and at the scene of weather-related and other emergencies where regular plumbing is inoperative upon issuance of a permit by the code enforcement officer setting forth location, screening, if deemed necessary, and other reasonable restrictions. 
(8)  Other acts. All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of property which are a menace to the health of the inhabitants of the city or a considerable number thereof. 
(Code 1999, §§ 181.010-181.080) 
Sec. 22-3. - Public nuisances affecting morals and decency. 
    The following are prohibited and declared to be public nuisances affecting public morals and decency: 
(1)  Gambling devices. All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards. 
(2)  Betting and bookmaking. Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatus used in such occupations. 
(3)  Bawdy houses. All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution and promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses. 
(4)  Illegal liquor. All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered or given away in violation of law, or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors as a beverage contrary to law, or where intoxicating liquors are kept for sale, barter or distribution in violation of law and all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other property kept at and used for maintaining such a place. 
(5)  Vehicles for immoral purposes. Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor or any immoral purpose. 
(6)  Obscene literature. All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and newspapers or billboards. 
(Code 1999, §§ 182.010-182.070; Ord. No. 9, 6-9-1958) 
Sec. 22-4. - Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. 
    The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety: 
(1)  Low wires. All wires which are strung above the surface of the ground or any public street, alley or railway must comply with the minimum vertical ground clearance as described by the city's electrical regulations. 
(2)  Dangerous buildings. All buildings, walls or other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half of its original value or which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public. 
(3)  Explosives. All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances or materials stored or accumulated in any manner or in any amount other than that provided by law. 
(4)  Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by law. 
(5)  Noises. An unnecessary amount of noise and vibrations. 
(6)  Street obstructions. The use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk, or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of public streets or sidewalks. 
(7)  Radio aerials. Radio aerials strung or erected in any manner except that provided by law. 
(8)  Junk accumulations. The piling, storing or keeping of old machinery, wrecked or junked vehicles and other junk or debris. 
(9)  Dangers attractive to children. All dangerous, unguarded machinery, equipment or other property in any public place, or so situated or operated on private property as to attract minor children. 
(10)  Airborne material. Throwing, dropping or releasing printed matter, paper or any other material or objects over and upon the city from an airplane, balloon or other aircraft, or in such a manner as to cause materials to fall on land in the city. 
(11)  Drainage interference. Placing entrance culverts, or doing any act which may alter or affect the drainage of public streets or alleys or the surface or grade of public streets, alleys or sidewalks without the proper permit. 
(12)  Vehicle repairs in street. Making repairs to motor vehicles or tires in public streets or alleys, excepting only emergency repairs when it will not impede unduly or interfere with traffic. 
(13)  Littering. Throwing, placing, depositing or burning leaves, trash, lawn clippings, weeds, grass or other material in the streets, alleys or gutters. 
(14)  Unauthorized signs. Erecting, painting or placing of unauthorized traffic signs or advertising signs in streets, alleys or on sidewalks. 
(15)  Electronic signal interference. All unnecessary interference and disturbance of radios and TV sets caused by defective electrical appliances and equipment or improper operating thereof. 
(16)  Obstructions and excavations. Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under such conditions as are provided by law and any other excavation left unprotected or uncovered indefinitely or allowed to exist in such manner as to attract minor children. 
(17)  Snow accumulations. All snow and ice not removed from a public sidewalk by the owner or occupant of property adjoining a public sidewalk within 12 hours after the snow and ice has ceased to accumulate thereon, provided that this requirement does not apply to those sidewalks designated as part of the bikeways/trail system as shown on the city's official bikeways/trail plan. 
(18)  Refuse on business parking lots. Allowing trash, paper or other refuse to remain on the ground on or around parking lots, sidewalks or grounds adjacent to or serving businesses, for an unreasonable period of time which is presumed to be more than 24 hours for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1999, §§ 183.010-183.210) 
Sec. 22-5. - Outside storage, display or sale. 
(a)  Prohibited in certain districts. Outside storage, display or sale of miscellaneous materials, such as, but not limited to, clothing, appliances, signs, equipment, lumber, non-operative motor vehicles, tires, refuse, barrels and cans, in a R-1, R-2 or R-3 district is prohibited and declared a public nuisance. This shall not apply to garage, estate, or craft sales as permitted by this chapter. 
(b)  Exception for garage, estate and craft sales. Garage, estate or craft sales are limited at any one address to no more than three times for not more than four consecutive days in a calendar year, except that garage, estate or craft sales in excess of that number or the state duration may be allowed by special permit approved by the city council. 
(Code 1999, §§ 181.090-181.092) 
Sec. 22-6. - Nuisances in operating service stations. 
(a)  No person shall operate a service station in a manner so as to create a public nuisance. The term "service station" means a place of business engaged in the sale of motor fuels and a place of business engaged in the repair of motor vehicles. 
(b)  Because of the peculiar problem in the operation of a gasoline filling station in achieving compatibility with nearby land users, the following are detrimental to the community and are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  The use of any gasoline filling station premises for the sale or for display in aid of sale of any motor vehicle, unless the premises are also used by an authorized dealer in the sale of motor vehicles. 
(2)  The use of a gasoline filling station premises for storage of abandoned or damaged motor vehicles in excess of seven days. 
(3)  Storing of or the allowing of accumulation of used containers, discarded auto parts, discarded tires or other similar debris on a gasoline service station premises in view of any adjacent land. 
(4)  Operating a gasoline filling station that does not have its entire area covered by a building, concrete or bituminous paving and grass well maintained, or other well-maintained shrubbery. 
(Code 1999, §§ 185.010-185.030) 
Sec. 22-7. - Enforcement and abatement. 
(a)  Violations. Whoever causes, allows, maintains or otherwise creates a public nuisance under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. This penalty is in addition to any enforcement procedure authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever, in the judgment of the officer charged with enforcement, it is determined, upon investigation, that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists within the city, such officer shall notify, in writing, the person committing or maintaining such public nuisance and require them to terminate and abate the nuisance and to remove such conditions or remedy such defects. The written notice shall be served on the person committing or maintaining the nuisance in person or by registered mail. If the premises are not occupied and the address of the owner is unknown, service on the owner may be had by posting a copy of the notice on the premises. The notice shall require the owner or occupant of such premises, or both, to take reasonable steps within a reasonable time to abate and remove the nuisance, the steps and time to be designated in the notice, but the maximum time for the removal of the nuisance after service of the notice shall not, in any event, exceed 30 days. Service of notice may be proved by filing an affidavit of service in the office of the city clerk setting forth the manner and time thereof. 
(c)  Failure to correct abatement after notice. When an order so given is not complied with, such noncompliance shall be reported forthwith to the council for such action as may be necessary and deemed advisable in the name of the city to abate and enjoin the further continuation of the nuisance. 
(d)  Abatement by council; costs. If, after such service of notice, the person served fails to abate the nuisance or make the necessary repairs, alterations or changes in accordance with the direction of the council, the council may cause such nuisance to be abated and recover such expenditure, plus an additional 25 percent of such expenditures by civil action against the person served; or, if service has been made upon the owner or occupant, by ordering the clerk to extend such sum, plus 25 percent thereof, as a lien against the property upon which the nuisance existed and to certify the same to the county auditor for collection in the same manner as ad valorem taxes and special assessments are certified and collected. 
(Code 1999, §§ 184.005-184.020) 
Secs. 22-8-22-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 22-33. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air circulation device means a mechanism designed and used for the controlled flow of air used in ventilation, cooling or conditioning, including, but not limited to, central and window air conditioning. 
    L+10 means the sound level expressed in decibels (DBA) which is exceeded ten percent of the time for a one-hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American National Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the noise control officer. 
    L+50 means the sound level expressed in decibels (DBA) which is exceeded 50 percent of the time for a one-hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having characteristics as specified in the latest standards, Sl.4, of the American National Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the noise control officer. 
    Noise control officer means the law enforcement agency or person designated by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 186.010; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-34. - Noises prohibited. 
    No person shall make, or cause to be made, any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of the following subdivisions: 
(1)  Motor vehicles. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the city in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of the state pollution control agency. 
(2)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. No person shall sound any signaling device on any vehicle except as a warning of danger. 
(3)  Exhaust discharge. No person shall discharge the exhaust or permit the discharge of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationery internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle or snowmobile except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations. 
(4)  Social gatherings. No person shall participate in any party or other gatherings of people giving rise to noise which disturbs the peace, quiet or repose of the occupants of adjoining or other property. When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer shall order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. Every owner or tenant of such premises shall cooperate with the police officer and shall make every reasonable effort to abate the disturbance. 
(5)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, etc. No person shall operate or permit the use or operation of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure, except as may be licensed by the city. 
(6)  Animals. No person shall keep any animal that disturbs the comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity by its frequent or continual noise. 
(7)  Schools, churches, hospitals, etc. No person shall create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any school, institution of learning or church or hospital when it unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such institution. 
(Code 1999, § 186.020; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-35. - Hourly restrictions on certain operations. 
(a)  Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in any residential district except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Wednesday of each week. The date may vary during a week with a holiday. 
(b)  Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power mower, edger, power device for bug eradication, drill or other similar domestic power equipment except between the weekday hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays unless the noise level of equipment is within the sound level set forth in section 22-36(a). 
(c)  Construction activities. No person shall engage, permit or allow construction activities involving the use of electric, gas or diesel powered machines or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends or holidays unless the noise level of equipment is within the sound level set forth in section 22-36(a). 
(d)  Recreational vehicles. No person shall, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., drive or operate any mini bike or other recreational vehicle not licensed for travel on public highways. 
(e)  Snow removal equipment. Snow removal equipment is exempt from the above hourly restrictions. 
(Code 1999, § 186.030; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-36. - Land use standards. 
(a)  Maximum noise levels by land use districts. No person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of noise in such manner as to create a noise level exceeding the limit set in Table I for the land use category specified when measured at or within the property line of the land use. 
Table I Sound Levels by Land Use District 
Day (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.) Night (7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) Zoning districts L10-L50 L10-L50 Residential/wetlands 65-60 55-50 Commercial/office 70-65 70-65 Industrial 80-75 80-75  
The limits of the most restrictive district shall apply at the boundaries between different land use categories. 
(b)  Exemptions. The levels prescribed in Table I do not apply to noise originating on public streets and alleys, but such noise shall be subject to other applicable sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 186.040; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-37. - Air circulation devices. 
    No person shall permanently install or place any air circulation device, except a window air conditioning unit, in any outdoor location until the noise control officer determines that the device in that location will comply with the noise level standards prescribed in Table I and issues a permit for the installation. 
(Code 1999, § 186.050; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-38. - Exception for emergency work. 
    Noise created exclusively in the performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety or welfare, or in the performance of emergency work necessary to restore public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for a period not to exceed 24 hours after the work has commenced. Persons responsible for such work shall inform the noise control officer of the need to initiate such work. All persons responsible for such emergency work shall take all caution to minimize the amount of noise. 
(Code 1999, § 186.060; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-39. - Testing procedures. 
(a)  Guidelines. The noise control officer shall adopt guidelines establishing the test procedures and instrumentation to be used in enforcing the provisions of Table I of the land use districts imposing noise standards. A copy of such guidelines shall be kept on file in the office of the noise control officer and shall be available to the public for reference during office hours. 
(b)  Research. The noise control officer shall conduct such research, monitoring and other studies related to sound as necessary to properly enforce this chapter and to reduce noise in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 186.070; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-40. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  Application. Any person seeking a variance shall file an application with the city clerk on a form prescribed by him. 
(b)  Noise control officer. The noise control officer shall have the authority consistent with this chapter to grant variances from the requirements of any section of this chapter. 
(c)  Appeals. Either the applicant or any party aggrieved may, within 20 days of the decisions of the noise control officer, appeal to the city council for a review and public hearing of the decision. The city clerk shall give a seven-day notice to all affected property owners within 150 feet of the proposed variance. Within 30 days of the receipt of the proposed variance application, the city council shall approve or deny the application. 
(Code 1999, § 186.080; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-41. - Enforcement. 
    When the noise control officer determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, he shall give written notice of the violation, ordering the owner or occupant or persons of the premises where the noise originates to correct or remove each specified violation within a reasonable time as prescribed in the notice. 
(Code 1999, § 186.090; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 22-42. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any violation of this chapter involving a motor vehicle is a petty misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. All other violations are subject to section 1-14. 
(Code 1999, § 186.100; Ord. No. 300, 7-19-1983) 
Secs. 22-43-22-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES 

Sec. 22-73. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to reduce public exposure to health risks associated with hazardous chemicals or residue from a clandestine drug lab site. Professional testing and investigations show that chemicals used in the production of illicit drugs can condense, penetrate, and contaminate surfaces, furnishings, and equipment of surrounding structures. The city council finds that such sites, and the personal property within such sites, may contain suspected chemicals and residues that place people, particularly children or adults of child-bearing age, at risk when exposed through inhabiting or visiting the site or being exposed to contaminated personal property. 
(Code 1999, § 188.010; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-74. - Interpretation and application. 
    The provisions of this article must be construed to protect the public health, safety and welfare. When the conditions imposed by this article conflict with comparable provisions imposed by another law, ordinance, statute, or regulation, the regulations that are more restrictive or that impose higher standards will prevail. 
(Code 1999, § 188.020; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-75. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chemical dump site means a place or area where chemicals or other waste materials used in a clandestine drug lab operation have been located. 
    Clandestine drug lab operation means the unlawful manufacture or attempt to manufacture a controlled substance. 
    Clandestine drug lab site or site means a place or area where law enforcement personnel have determined that conditions associated with an unlawful clandestine drug lab operation exist. A clandestine drug lab site may include dwellings, accessory buildings, structures or units, a chemical dump site, a vehicle, boat, trailer, or other appliance. 
    Controlled substance means a drug, substance or immediate precursor specified in M.S.A. § 152.01, Schedules I through V, as may be amended. The term "controlled substance" does not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco. 
    Manufacture , in places other than a pharmacy, includes the production, cultivation, quality control, or standardization, by mechanical, physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means, and the packing, re-packing, tableting, encapsulating, labeling, relabeling, or filling of drugs. 
    Owner means a person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which owns, in whole or in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle, boat, trailer or other location associated with a clandestine drug lab site. Unless information is provided to prove otherwise, the owner of real property is deemed to be the property taxpayer of record in the county files, and the owner of a vehicle, boat or trailer is deemed to be the person listed as the owner on the most recent title to the vehicle, boat or trailer. 
(Code 1999, § 188.030; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-76. - Declaration of public health nuisance. 
    All dwellings, accessory structures, buildings, vehicles, boats, trailers, personal property, adjacent property or other locations, associated with a clandestine drug lab site are potentially unsafe due to health hazards and are declared to be a public health nuisance. 
(Code 1999, § 188.040; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-77. - Law enforcement action. 
(a)  Law enforcement authorities who identify conditions associated with a clandestine drug lab site that may place the public or occupants at risk for exposure to harmful contaminants and other associated conditions may: 
(1)  Promptly notify the city code enforcement officer, county child protection division, the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, and the site owner about the site and the conditions found; 
(2)  Treat, store, transport or dispose of all waste generated from the clandestine drug lab operation and found at the site in a manner consistent with the state department of health and state pollution control regulations; 
(3)  Issue a temporary declaration of public health nuisance for the affected site and post a copy of the declaration on all doorway entrances to the site or, in the case of bare land, in several conspicuous places on the property. This temporary declaration will expire after the city code enforcement officer inspects the site and determines the appropriateness of issuing a permanent declaration of public health nuisance; 
(4)  Notify all people occupying the site that a temporary declaration of public health nuisance has been issued; 
(5)  Require all people occupying the site to immediately vacate the site, remove all pets from the site, and not return without written authorization from the city code enforcement officer; 
(6)  Notify the occupants vacating the site that the personal property at the site may be contaminated with dangerous chemical residue; and 
(7)  Put locks on each doorway entrance to the site to prohibit people from entering the site without authorization. 
(b)  The notification of the people and organizations mentioned above may be delayed to accomplish appropriate law enforcement objectives. 
(Code 1999, § 188.050; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-78. - Seizure of property. 
    When a clandestine drug lab site is inside a vehicle, boat, trailer or other form of moveable personal property, law enforcement authorities must immediately seize it and not allow it to be transported except to a more secure location. All other requirements of this article must be followed as closely as possible given the specific type of property in which the site is discovered. 
(Code 1999, § 188.060; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-79. - Inspection and declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  Drug lab site determination. Within 48 hours of notification that law enforcement authorities have determined the existence of a clandestine drug lab site, the city code enforcement officer must inspect the site. Such officer may then promptly issue a permanent declaration of public health nuisance and a do not enter, unsafe to occupy order for the affected site to replace the temporary declaration. A copy of the permanent declaration and order must be posted on all doorway entrances to the site or, in the case of bare land, in several conspicuous places on the property. 
(b)  Abatement order. After issuing the permanent declaration, the city code enforcement officer must send written notice to the site owner ordering abatement of the public health nuisance. The abatement order must include the following: 
(1)  A copy of the declaration of public health nuisance and do not enter, unsafe to occupy order; 
(2)  Information about the potentially hazardous condition of the site; 
(3)  A summary of the site owner's and occupant's responsibilities under this section; and 
(4)  Information that may help the owner locate appropriate services necessary to abate the public health nuisance. 
(c)  Notice to other parties. The code enforcement officer must also mail a copy of the permanent declaration of public health nuisance and a copy of this section to the following parties at their last-known addresses: 
(1)  Occupants or residents of the site if known; 
(2)  Neighbors in proximity to the site who may be reasonably affected by the conditions found; 
(3)  The appropriate enforcement division of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration; and 
(4)  Other city, state and local authorities, such as the city public works department, the state pollution control agency, the state department of health, and the department of natural resources, that are known to have public and protection responsibilities applicable to the situation. 
(d)  Modification or removal of declaration. The city code enforcement officer may modify or remove the declaration of public health nuisance after the code enforcement officer receives documentation from a city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm stating that the suspected health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and potential occupants, either do not exist or have been sufficiently abated or corrected to justify amendment or removal of the declaration. 
(Code 1999, § 188.070; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-80. - Site owner's responsibility to act. 
(a)  Within ten business days after the abatement order is mailed to the site owner, the owner must accomplish the following: 
(1)  Provide the city code enforcement officer, in writing, with: 
a.  Confirmation that all persons and their pets have vacated the site; 
b.  The names of all children who the owner believes were residing at the site during the time period the clandestine drug lab is suspected to have been at the site; and 
c.  Confirmation that the site will remain vacated and secured until the public health nuisance is completely abated as required by this article. 
(2)  Contract with one or more city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firms to conduct the following work in accordance with the most current state guidelines: 
a.  A detailed on-site assessment of contamination at the site, including the personal property in the site; 
b.  Soil testing of the site and testing of all property and soil in proximity to the site which the environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm determines may have been affected by the conditions found at the site; 
c.  A complete cleanup of the site (including the cleanup or removal of plumbing, ventilation systems, fixtures and contaminated soil) or a demolition of the structures on the site and a complete cleanup of the demolished site; 
d.  A complete cleanup or disposal at an approved dump site of all personal property in the site that is found to have been affected by the conditions at the site; 
e.  A complete cleanup of all property and soil in proximity to the site that is found to have been affected by the conditions at the site; and 
f.  Remediation testing and follow-up testing, including testing of the ventilation system and plumbing, to determine that all health risks are sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy and use of the site, the personal property in it, and all property and soil in proximity to the site. 
(3)  Provide the city code enforcement officer with the identity of the testing and cleaning firm with which the owner has contracted for abatement of the public health nuisance as required above. 
(4)  Sign an agreement with the city establishing a cleanup schedule. The schedule must establish reasonable deadlines for completing all actions required by this section for abatement of the public health nuisance. The city will consider practical limitations and the availability of contractors in approving the cleanup schedule. 
(b)  The owner must meet all deadlines established in the cleanup schedule. The owner must provide the city code enforcement officer written documentation of the cleanup, including a signed statement from a city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm that the site, all personal property in it, and all property and soil in proximity to the site is safe for human occupancy and use and that the cleanup was conducted in accordance with the most current state guidelines. 
(Code 1999, § 188.080; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-81. - Site owner's responsibility for costs. 
    The site owner is responsible for all costs of dealing with and abating the public health nuisance, including contractor's fees and the city's costs for services performed in connection with the clandestine drug lab site cleanup. The city's costs may include: 
(1)  Posting of the site; 
(2)  Notification of affected parties; 
(3)  Securing the site, providing limited access to the site, and prosecution of unauthorized persons found at the site; 
(4)  Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the special assessment process; 
(5)  Laboratory fees; 
(6)  Cleanup services; 
(7)  Administrative fees; 
(8)  Legal fees; and 
(9)  Other associated costs. 
(Code 1999, § 188.090; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-82. - City action and recovery of costs. 
(a)  If the site owner fails to comply with any of the requirements of this article, the city code enforcement officer is authorized to take all reasonable actions necessary to abate the public health nuisance, including contracting with a city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm to conduct the work outlined in section 22-80. Such officer is also authorized to provide a copy of the declaration of public health nuisance to the holders of mortgage or lien interests in the affected site. 
(b)  If the costs to clean the site or to clean the personal property at the site are prohibitively high in relation to the value of the site or the personal property, the city is authorized to remove or demolish the site, structure or building and dispose of the personal property in it. These actions must be taken in accordance with the provisions of M.S.A. ch. 463. 
(c)  If the city abates the public health nuisance, the city is entitled to recover all its actual costs, plus an additional 25 percent of such costs for administrative and legal expense, in addition to any other legal remedy. The city may recover costs by civil action against the site owner or by assessing the costs against the site as a lien against the property and certifying the same to the county for collection in the same manner as ad valorem taxes and special assessments. 
(Code 1999, § 188.100; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-83. - Recovery of costs from persons causing damage. 
    Nothing in this article limits the right of the site owner or the city to recover cleanup costs from the tenant or operators of the clandestine drug lab. 
(Code 1999, § 188.110; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-84. - Entry into or onto the site. 
    While a declaration of public health nuisance for a site is in effect and has been posted at the site, no person, other than a law enforcement officer or a person authorized by the city, is permitted to be inside or on a site. 
(Code 1999, § 188.120; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-85. - Removal of personal property from the site. 
    While a declaration of public health nuisance for a site is in effect and has been posted at the site, no personal property may be removed from the site without prior written consent from the city code enforcement officer. Consent to remove personal property may be granted at the reasonable discretion of the code enforcement officer, and only in cases of hardship after the following: 
(1)  A city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm has advised the city, in writing, that the items of personal property can be sufficiently cleaned to remove all harmful contamination; and 
(2)  The owner of the personal property agrees in writing that the owner: 
a.  Is aware of the danger of using the contaminated property; 
b.  Will thoroughly clean the property to remove all contamination before the property is used; and 
c.  Releases and agrees to indemnify the city from all liability to the owner and third parties for injuries or damages alleged to have been caused by the contaminated property. 
(Code 1999, § 188.130; Ord. No. 560, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 22-86. - Air pollution controls adopted by reference. 
    Air pollution control rules, regulations and air quality standards of the state pollution control agency are adopted by reference into this article as if fully set forth. 
(Code 1999, § 146.010) 
Secs. 22-87-22-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC TREES AND OTHER VEGETATION 

Sec. 22-113. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  A variety of trees within the city limits are threatened by fatal diseases. The loss of trees growing upon private and public property would substantially depreciate the value of property within the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. The city wishes to control and prevent the spread of tree diseases and has enacted this article for that purpose. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to permit a public tree nuisance that is unsafe to remain on any premises owned or controlled by that person. Such nuisances may be abated in the manner prescribed by this article. 
(Code 1999, §§ 149.010, 149.050) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - State misdemeanor statutes adopted. 
    All state statutes regarding crimes and offenses considered as misdemeanors are incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter as though completely set forth herein, including any variations, changes, amendments or additions thereto. 
(Code 1999, § 147.010) 
Sec. 24-2. - Lurking. 
    No person shall lurk, lie in wait or conceal himself in any house or other building, or in any yard or upon any premises within the limits of the city with intent to commit any offense prohibited by the laws of the state or by this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 147.020) 
Sec. 24-3. - Discharging firearms. 
    No person shall discharge any firearm of any type within the city unless lawfully authorized to do so. 
(Code 1999, § 147.040) 
Sec. 24-4. - Targeted residential picketing. 
(a)  Defined. For the purpose of this article, the term "targeted residential picketing" means standing, marching, patrolling, or picketing by one or more persons focused in front of or about a particular residential dwelling without the consent of the dwelling's occupants. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The city has an interest in safeguarding the rights of its residents to enjoy, in their home and dwelling, a feeling of well-being, tranquility and privacy. 
(c)  Findings. The city council finds that targeted residential picketing in front of or about a residential dwelling causes emotional distress to the dwelling occupants, obstructs and interferes with the free use of public rights-of-way and has as its object the harassment of the dwelling occupants. The city council further finds that, without resorting to targeted residential picketing, ample opportunities exist for those otherwise engaged in targeted residential picketing to exercise constitutionally protected freedom of speech and expression. 
(d)  Prohibited. No person shall engage in targeted residential picketing within the city. 
(Code 1999, §§ 150.010-150.030; Ord. No. 392, 8-21-1990) 
Sec. 24-5. - City employees prohibited from carrying concealed weapons. 
    No city employee, including part-time members of the city fire department, shall carry or have in their possession any handgun or pistol, as that term is defined in M.S.A. § 624.712, subd. 2, while on city property, in city vehicles or while in the scope and course of their employment with the city. This section shall not apply to peace officers or law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1999, § 145.060) 
Sec. 24-6. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play in or upon, or be in or upon public streets or other public property, public places of entertainment, amusement or refreshment, vacant lots, and other unsupervised places in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any minor who is 16 or 17 years of age to loiter, wander, play in or upon, or be in or upon public streets or other public property, public places of entertainment, amusement or refreshment, vacant lots, and other unsupervised places in the city between 10:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply when a minor is accompanied by their parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, when a minor is on an emergency errand or other legitimate business directed by their parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the presence of the minor in the place is connected with and required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged. 
(Code 1999, § 148.010) 
Secs. 24-7-24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEXUAL PREDATORS 

Sec. 24-31. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to public safety. Current information indicates that such predatory offenders are likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most predatory offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. The cost of predatory offender victimization to society at large, while not precisely calculable, is steep. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain predatory offenders are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residences. 
(Ord. No. 714, § II(152.010), 11-15-2017) 
Sec. 24-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult use business means a business that is part of the sex industry as defined in section 38-655. 
    City park means an improved or unimproved public park owned by the city. 
    Designated predatory offender means any person who has been convicted, adjudicated delinquent, or convicted as an extended jurisdiction juvenile of an offense identified in M.S.A. § 243.166, subd. 1b, or a similar offense under the laws of another state, requiring the offender to register with the state department of corrections and who has been assigned a level III predatory offender, pursuant to M.S.A. § 244.052, or any person who otherwise is required to register with the state department of corrections and has been assigned a risk level of level III predatory offender. 
    Library means any public library as defined in M.S.A. § 134.001. 
    Licensed childcare center means an in-home or other group childcare center currently licensed by the state or county. 
    Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
    Religious facility means a church or other place of worship where programming is provided for minors, or is improved with an outdoor area designed, equipped, and set aside primarily for children's play. 
    School means a public or nonpublic preschool, elementary school, secondary school, high school or college. 
    School bus stop means a place where a bus regularly stops for the pickup and drop-off of school children. 
    State licensed residential facility housing minors means a licensed residential care or housing facility that houses persons under the age of 18 years. 
    Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not a person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not a person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 714, § II(152.020), 11-15-2017) 
Sec. 24-33. - Sexual predator residence prohibition; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any designated offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 500 feet of any school, licensed child care center, library, city park, religious facility, bus stop, state licensed residential facility housing minors, or adult use business. 
(b)  Measurement of distance. 
(1)  For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to nearest outer property line of a school, licensed child care center or city park. 
(2)  The city administrator shall maintain an official map showing prohibited locations as defined by this article. The city administrator shall update the map at least annually to reflect any changes in the location of prohibited zones. 
(c)  Penalties and enforcement. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by confinement for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and confinement. Each day a person maintains a residence in violation of this article constitutes a separate violation. In addition, the city may enforce this section by mandamus, injunction, and other appropriate remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Exceptions. A designated offender residing within a prohibited area under this section does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S.A. § 243.166 or 243.167 prior to November 15, 2017. 
(2)  The person was a minor when he committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person is a minor. 
(4)  The school or licensed child care center, within 500 feet of the person's permanent residence, was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S.A. § 243.166 or 243.167. 
(5)  The residence is also the primary residence of the person's parents, grandparents, siblings, spouse, or children. 
(6)  The residence is a property owned or leased by the state department of corrections. 
(Ord. No. 714, § II(152.030), 11-15-2017) 
Sec. 24-34. - Renting real property; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this article, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance is located within a prohibited location zone described in section 24-32. 
(b)  A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall subject the property owner to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in this Code. 
(c)  If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a designated offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to let the offender reside on the property, the owner or property manager may evict the offender. 
(Ord. No. 714, § II(152.040), 11-15-2017) 
Secs. 24-35-24-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 24-57. - Purpose. 
    Administrative offense procedures, established pursuant to this article, are intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of certain ordinance provisions. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with administrative offenses. 
(Code 1999, § 44.010; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-58. - Administrative offense defined. 
    An administrative offense is a violation of a provision of this Code and is subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1999, § 44.020; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-59. - Violator or city may pursue criminal charges in lieu of administrative procedure. 
    At any time prior to the payment of the administrative penalty, the individual may withdraw from participation in the procedures in which event the city may bring criminal charges in accordance with the law. Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may choose not to initiate an administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance. 
(Code 1999, § 44.010; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-60. - Notice. 
    Any employee or agent of the city having authority to enforce this Code shall, upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator, or, in the case of a vehicular violation, attach to the vehicle a notice of the violation. The notice shall set forth the nature, date and time of the violation, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the amount of the scheduled penalty. 
(Code 1999, § 44.030; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-61. - Payment. 
    Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may, within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the violation, or may request a hearing in writing as provided in this article. The penalty may be paid in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation. 
(Code 1999, § 44.040; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-62. - Hearing. 
    Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this article may, within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, request a hearing by a hearing officer who shall conduct an informal hearing to determine if a violation has occurred. The hearing officer shall have authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the penalty. If the violation is sustained by the hearing officer, the violator shall pay the penalty imposed. 
(Code 1999, § 44.050; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-63. - Hearing officer. 
    A city employee designated in writing by the city administrator shall be the hearing officer for all administrative offenses except traffic offenses. The hearing officer is authorized to hear and determine any controversy relating to administrative offenses provided for in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 44.060; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-64. - Failure to pay. 
(a)  In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes. If the penalty is paid or if an individual is found to not have committed the administrative offense by the hearing officer, no such charge may be brought by the city for the same violation. 
(b)  In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay the monetary penalty which may be imposed, the city will seek to collect costs of the administrative offense procedures as part of a subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty of the criminal violation. 
(Code 1999, §§ 44.010, 44.070; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-65. - Disposition of penalties. 
    All penalties, collected pursuant to this article, shall be paid to the city's finance director and may be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Code 1999, § 44.080; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-66. - Offenses and penalties. 
    Offenses which may be charged as administrative offenses and the penalties for such offenses shall be set forth in a fine schedule on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 44.090; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 24-67. - Subsequent offenses. 
    In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative offense (except speeding) within a 12-month period of paying an administrative penalty for the same or substantially similar offense, the subsequent administrative penalty shall be increased by 25 percent above the previous penalty except as otherwise provided by resolution. 
(Code 1999, § 44.100; Ord. No. 645, 1-18-2012) 
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-19. - Prohibited conduct in parks or recreation areas. 
    The following acts or conduct shall be prohibited in any park or recreation area owned or maintained by the city or any other governmental subdivision: 
(1)  Possession and discharge of firearms. No persons shall possess or discharge any firearm, BB gun, bow and arrow or any kind of fireworks within a park or other recreational area without a permit from the council. 
(2)  Climbing on or damaging property. No person shall climb any tree or remove, damage or deface any statue, ornament, cultivated tree, plant, flower, flowerbed, turf or any structure. 
(3)  Domestic animals at large. No domestic animals shall be allowed unless on an adequate leash and accompanied by a person capable of controlling such animal. 
(4)  Posting written material. No person shall post or affix any printed or written material or other paper or sign upon any tree, structure or other object without a permit of the council. 
(5)  Presence in park after hours. No person shall be present in any park or recreational area, unless otherwise posted, from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise unless prior written approval has been obtained from the city engineer, with consent of the council, except as provided in subsection (13) of this section. These hours shall also apply to parks owned by the board of water commissioners of the City of St. Paul. No person shall allow a motor vehicle or boat to be within a park or recreational area within the times prohibited above. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages. Regarding alcoholic beverages: 
a.  No person shall drink or consume any beverage having any alcoholic content in a parking area, in a motor vehicle, roadway or playground area. 
b.  No person shall drink or consume any beverage having any alcoholic content within the confines of any park area owned by the city from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., except by special permit granted by the council. Prior to considering such permit, the council shall receive the recommendation from the policing authority. 
c.  No person shall drink or consume any beverage having any alcoholic content within any park or recreation area owned by the board of water commissioners of the City of St. Paul between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except by special permit granted by the board. Prior to considering such permit, the board shall receive the recommendation from the policing authority. 
(7)  Littering. No person shall discard any bottles, paper, food, or other debris except in a designated container. 
(8)  Excess vehicle speed. No person shall drive a motor vehicle or motorcycle in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(9)  Parking outside designated parking areas. No person shall park a motor vehicle or motorcycle except in designated parking areas. No motor vehicle or motorcycle shall be driven or parked on any grass area. 
(10)  Heavy vehicles. No vehicles over a gross vehicle weight of 9,000 pounds or horses are allowed within the boundaries of any park. 
(11)  Camping. Camping is not permitted. 
(12)  Fires outside designated areas. Fires shall be built only in allowed, designated areas. 
(13)  Soliciting business; exception. No person shall engage in or solicit any business except from licensed mobile refreshment vehicles. 
(14)  Glass beverage containers. No person shall bring into a park or recreation area any glass beverage container. 
(Code 1999, § 147.070) 
Sec. 26-20. - Evening ball games permitted. 
    Evening ball games at Community Park, with lights as necessary, are permitted until 10:30 p.m. Monday through Friday, until 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays and until 10:30 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays with a permit from the public service director. 
(Code 1999, § 147.070) 
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bundle means a number of loose items securely tied together, such as magazines, newspapers and tree branches. 
    Collection rules means rules stipulated by the city and collector, including, but not limited to, type of waste container, placement for collection and day and hours of collection. 
    Collector means any person licensed to collect refuse and other waste material from residential and nonresidential properties. 
    Other waste materials means all other discarded combustible or noncombustible, organic or inorganic materials frequently accumulated in the operation of residential or nonresidential properties, including, but not limited to, vehicle parts, major appliances, furniture, building materials, tree limbs, metal scraps and other materials that cannot be temporarily stored in a waste container or bundle because of its size or shape, but excluding toxic and hazardous materials. 
    Person means any occupant or owner (or agent of owner) of any dwelling consisting of greater than eight units in a single building, boardinghouse, townhouse, apartment building, industrial or commercial establishment that accumulates refuse or other waste material. 
    Refuse means putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, market and industrial solid wastes. 
    Toxic and hazardous materials means poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological wastes, radioactive materials, flammable explosive materials and similar harmful chemicals and wastes which require special handling and which must be disposed of in a manner to conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety. 
    Vat means a waterproof and fly-tight receptacle of not less than one cubic yard in volume equipped with attachments for lifting into a refuse collection vehicle. A vat shall be primarily used for storage of refuse and other waste materials between collection by a nonresidential enterprise. 
    Waste container means a nondisposable receptacle that is waterproof and fly-tight, used primarily for storage of refuse and other waste materials between collections by those accumulating small quantities of refuse or other waste materials. 
(Code 1999, § 121.010) 
Secs. 28-2-28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-21. - Residential dumpster restrictions. 
    No person shall maintain a dumpster on residential property for more than 14 days. Dumpsters must be removed within 14 days. Dumpsters must be maintained on bituminous surfaces, not on a residential yard. A person who wishes to maintain a dumpster for greater than 14 days must obtain a permit showing good cause for the need to have a dumpster greater than 14 days. 
(Code 1999, § 121.102) 
Sec. 28-22. - Pods/storage containers. 
    No person shall maintain a Pod or other storage unit on residential property for more than 30 days. A person who wishes to maintain a Pod or storage unit on residential property for greater than 30 days must obtain a permit showing good cause for the need to have a Pod or other storage unit for more than 30 days. 
(Code 1999, § 121.104) 
Secs. 28-23-28-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND LARGE MULTIFAMILY UNITS 

Sec. 28-48. - Applicability. 
    This division shall not apply to the pick-up and disposal of garbage, rubbish, or trash from single-family residential structures or any residential structure containing eight units or less. 
(Code 1999, § 121.090) 
Sec. 28-49. - Duty of residents to provide. 
    Every person shall arrange for the collection and disposal of accumulated refuse by a collector at least once a week. 
(Code 1999, § 121.020) 
Sec. 28-50. - Refuse and waste containers. 
(a)  Refuse shall be accumulated in one or more fly-tight containers with a maximum capacity of 32 gallons. A container shall be tightly covered to prevent exposure to potential fly, insect or vermin infestations. 
(b)  Any person owning or operating an apartment house greater than eight dwelling units, manufactured home park, commercial or industrial establishment, or a restaurant that accumulates more than three 32-gallon containers of refuse a week shall provide vats for storage of refuse. Vats shall be no more than one cubic yard capacity and designed with proper attachments for lifting into refuse trucks. 
(c)  Each container, other than vats, shall have a capacity of not more than 32 gallons and a gross weight of not more than 75 pounds and shall have handles for ease of lifting. 
(d)  Automated pick-up containers are exempt from this section with regard to the size of container. Automated containers shall be of a size not exceeding 90 gallons in capacity and must be supplied by the licensed hauler serving that customer or be compatible with the collector's lifting and pick-up equipment. 
(Code 1999, § 121.030) 
Sec. 28-51. - Refuse containers; exceptions; Christmas tree disposal. 
    All refuse must be deposited within the containers except nonrefuse items, tree limbs, leaves or grass, city-approved recyclable materials, and Christmas trees up to seven feet in length may be placed next to the containers on pick-up day. 
(Code 1999, § 121.040) 
Sec. 28-52. - Placing of the containers. 
    Containers shall be kept in the rear of the premises, in the garage located on premises, or the side yard, provided that it is adequately screened from the street and neighbor views, except on the designated collection day, containers, bundles and all other refuse and recycling material shall be placed at the point designated by the collector. Containers must be removed from designated points no later than 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection and returned to their regular location on premises. Containers shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. 
(Code 1999, § 121.050) 
Sec. 28-53. - Frequency and manner of collection. 
    The contents of containers and other waste material shall be collected at least once a week at every dwelling of greater than eight units in a single building, commercial or industrial establishment or apartment house. Collection day can vary in a week where a holiday occurs. 
(Code 1999, § 121.060) 
Sec. 28-54. - Spillage or leakage to be prevented during transport. 
    Containers used to carry waste or refuse in any vehicle shall be enclosed to prevent spillage or leakage of contents. 
(Code 1999, § 121.080) 
Sec. 28-55. - Recycling. 
    Recyclables are reusable or re-processible materials approved by the city and its waste collector from time to time. Recyclables specifically exclude refuse and yard waste. The licensed collector shall provide separate containers for collection of recyclables. Recyclables shall be collected bi-weekly. A record of recyclables collected and their weight must be provided to the city on a regular basis, at least every three months, and such record shall include where the recyclables were disposed of. 
(Code 1999, § 121.082) 
Secs. 28-56-28-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SINGLE-FAMILY AND SMALL MULTIFAMILY UNITS 

Sec. 28-84. - Collection and disposal from residential properties. 
    Refuse and recyclables collection and disposal from residential property (defined as single-family and residential structures containing eight units or less), shall be done in accordance with the contract between the city and VHG, Inc. (a consortium of waste contractors) and any amendment thereto, a copy of which is available for inspection at the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1999, §§ 121.100, 121A.010) 
Sec. 28-85. - Fee for refuse and recycling collection. 
    Each owner or occupant of a residential dwelling under this division shall pay the fee specified in the contract for refuse and recycling collection. 
(Code 1999, § 121A.020) 
Sec. 28-86. - Action to collect charges. 
    If any two quarters of refuse or recycling charges have not been paid when due, or if over $50.00 of charges are overdue, then a late fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be added to the amount due. Such charge may then be collected in an action for that purpose in the name of the city, or the city clerk may certify to the county the amounts due (with penalty), together with a legal description of the premises served, and the county shall thereupon enter such amount as part of the tax levy on the premises to be collected during the ensuing year. 
(Code 1999, § 121A.040) 
Sec. 28-87. - Placing of the containers. 
    Containers shall be kept in the rear of the premises, in the garage located on premises, or the side yard, provided that it is adequately screened from the street and neighbor views except on the designated collection day, containers, bundles and all other refuse and recycling material shall be placed at the point designated by the collector. On collection day, all containers shall be placed at the end of the driveway but not in the street. Containers must be removed from designated points no later than 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection and returned to their regular location on premises. Containers shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. 
(Code 1999, § 121A.050) 
Secs. 28-88-28-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 28-118. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aluminum cans means disposable containers fabricated primarily of aluminum, commonly used for soda, beer, juice, water or other beverages. 
    Collection means the aggregation of recyclable materials from the place at which it is generated and includes all activities up to the time when it is delivered to the facility designated by the owner of the multiple-family dwelling. 
    Corrugated cardboard means cardboard material with double wall construction and corrugated separation between walls but not plastic-coated cardboard. 
    Designated recyclables means the following recyclable materials: aluminum cans, steel cans, glass jars and bottles, paper recyclables, plastic bottles, and corrugated cardboard. 
    Glass jars and bottles means unbroken jars and bottles and containers (lids/caps and pumps removed) which are primarily used for the packing and bottling of food and beverages. 
    Multiple-family dwelling means a building or a portion thereof containing nine or more dwelling units. 
    Paper means newspapers, household office paper and mail, boxboard, and magazines/catalogs. 
    Plastic bottles means all disposable bottles (lids/caps and pumps removed) fabricated from plastic. 
    Steel cans means all disposable containers fabricated primarily of steel or tin used for food and beverages. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(1)) 
Sec. 28-119. - Collection services required. 
    The owner of a multiple-family dwelling shall make available to the occupants of all dwelling units on the premises services for the collection of designated recyclables. The collection services shall be available on the premises and shall be provided on a regularly scheduled basis of at least twice a month for collection of at least four broad types of designated recyclable materials. The collection schedule and recycling container's capacity shall provide for regular removal of the recyclables such that there is adequate storage capacity available in the recyclable containers to avoid overflowing containers. The owner must contract with a collector licensed by the city to provide the services. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(2)) 
Sec. 28-120. - Recycling information required. 
    The owner of a multiple-family dwelling shall provide information to the occupants of each dwelling unit which notifies the occupants of the availability of collection services, describes the procedures required to prepare the designated recyclables for collection, and identifies the dates and times of collection. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(3)) 
Sec. 28-121. - Container requirements. 
    The owner of a multiple-family dwelling shall provide containers for the collection of designated recyclables and shall maintain the containers in a clean and sanitary condition. The containers shall be sufficient in number and size to meet the demands for recycling services created by the occupants. The owner shall replace stolen or broken containers and purchase additional containers as needed. Containers shall be placed in a location on the premises which permits access for collection purposes, but which does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and shall comply with chapter 38. Containers shall be equipped with self-closing lids. Containers shall be equipped with standardized labels identifying the type of material to be deposited. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(4)) 
Sec. 28-122. - Transportation and disposal. 
    Upon collection by the licensed collector, that person shall deliver the designated recyclables to a recyclable material processing center, an end market for sale or reuse, or to an intermediate collection center for later delivery to a processing center or end market. It is unlawful for any person to transport for disposal or to dispose of designated recyclables in a mixed city solid waste disposal facility. Designated recyclables shall be transported in a covered vehicle so that the recyclables do not drop or blow onto any public street or private property during transport. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(5)) 
Sec. 28-123. - Reports. 
    Each owner of a multiple-family dwelling shall file a semi-annual report (twice per year) with the city on a form to be provided by the city recycling coordinator. The report shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name of the owner; 
(2)  The address of the multiple-family dwelling; 
(3)  The number of dwelling units; 
(4)  A description of collection services made available to occupants, including the location of containers, dates of collection and whether collection services are provided by the owner, owner's employees, or a licensed collector; 
(5)  A description of methods used to inform occupants of availability of services, including a copy of any notice sent to occupants or posted on the premises and a record of the dates such notice was sent and locations posted; 
(6)  The tonnage for each type of material recycled; 
(7)  The name and address of the licensed collector who provides collection services. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(7)) 
Sec. 28-124. - Administrative penalties. 
    Violation of this division shall be charged as an administrative fine as follows: a fine of $200.00 for the first offense; a fine of $300.00 for the second offense at the same location within a 12-month period; or a fine of $500.00 for the third offense at the same location within a 24-month period. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(8)) 
Sec. 28-125. - Misdemeanor prosecution. 
    Nothing in this division shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this division. If the city elects to seek misdemeanor prosecution, then no administrative fine will be imposed under this article. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(9)) 
Sec. 28-126. - Applicability. 
    This division does not apply to the extent that the city council contracts to provide recycling collection services to some or all multiple-family dwellings. 
(Code 1999, § 121.110(10)) 
Sec. 28-127. - Unlawful removal of recyclable materials. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This section is designed to prevent the unauthorized collections of recyclables. Unauthorized collection or scavenging may reduce the volumes of materials collected as part of a designated program and thereby threaten the economic viability of the authorized program. Scavenging may also cause confusion among participating residents and thereby disrupt the publicity and educational processes of an authorized program. This section is also designed to ensure that a designated recycling program will be implemented in an orderly fashion to avoid adverse effects on the public health, welfare, safety and environment. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized recycling program means a program for the collection and recycling of recyclable materials which is instituted, sponsored, authorized or controlled by the city or the county. 
    Recyclable materials means all items of refuse designated by the city or county environmental health division to be part of an authorized recycling program and which are intended for transportation, processing and remanufacturing or reuse. 
    Scavenging means the unauthorized collection of recyclable materials that have been set out by residents of the city specifically for participating in recycling programs. 
(c)  Designation of items. Items designated for recycling shall be listed by the city's public works director or the county environmental health division to be part of an authorized recycling program. 
(d)  Ownership of recyclable materials. Ownership of recyclable materials set out for the purpose of participating in recycling programs shall remain with the person who set out the materials until removed by the authorized collector. Until the recyclable materials are removed by the authorized collector, the person who set out the materials is totally responsible for their proper preparing, handling and storage. Ownership and responsibility for the proper handling of the recyclable materials shall vest in the authorized collector upon removal thereof by the collector. 
(e)  Unauthorized collection. It is unlawful for any person who is not authorized by the city or county to take or collect recyclable material set out for authorized collection programs within the city. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-14. 
(Code 1999, §§ 124.040, 124.050; Ord. No. 390, 7-3-1990) 
Secs. 28-128-28-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DUMPS, SANITARY LANDFILLS AND FILLING OF LAND 

Sec. 28-153. - License required. 
    No person shall fill any land or establish or engage in land filling operations within the city without first securing a license and paying the license fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 123.010) 
Sec. 28-154. - Application for license and permit. 
(a)  Application for licenses shall be filed in writing with the city designee, for presentation to the council. Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  A legal description of land to be filled. 
(3)  The time of filling operations. 
(4)  The route to be taken by trucks bringing in the material to be used as fill. 
(5)  The final contour and elevation to which the applicant will leave the land at the completion of the filling operation. 
(6)  The kind of fill to be used. 
(b)  Before such license is granted, the applicant shall file a bond, cash deposit or letter of credit, calculated by the city designee, sufficient to provide for earth cover as provided in section 28-156(4). 
(Code 1999, § 123.020) 
Sec. 28-155. - Recommendation for license. 
    The city designee shall inspect the premises and recommend to the council whether such license shall be issued. 
(Code 1999, § 123.030) 
Sec. 28-156. - Conditions for filling operations. 
    Filling operations shall, at all times, be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The use of fill containing wood, paper, leaves, etc., or other organic material which may decompose or burn shall be restricted to sites designated by the city council for recreational use. No lands to be used for building shall be filled with this material. 
(2)  No dangerous conditions shall be permitted on the premises desired to be filled. 
(3)  No fires will be permitted in the area of land to be filled. 
(4)  The area to be filled must be covered and graded with three inches of earth at least once each week, and covered with 12 inches of earth graded smooth, seeded and mulched as per city engineer requirements, at the completion of filling operations. 
(5)  An unreasonable amount of dust shall not be permitted as a result of the filling operation. 
(6)  Natural drainage shall not be adversely affected during and upon completion of the filling operation. 
(7)  No garbage or other obnoxious material which would attract rodents or insects shall be used as fill. 
(Code 1999, § 123.040) 
Sec. 28-157. - Revocation of license. 
    Any license under this article may be revoked by the city council for violation of any representation made in the application or for any condition under which the filling operations proceed. 
(Code 1999, § 123.050) 
Sec. 28-158. - Minimum application. 
    This article shall not apply to any filling operation involving, in total, less than 25 yards of fill. 
(Code 1999, § 123.060) 
Chapter 30 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Application. 
    Pursuant to statutory authority of the city to regulate, control and maintain city streets as provided in M.S.A. ch. 412, the following provisions are hereby declared to apply to all streets hereafter constructed within the city and are declared to be necessary and essential because of the growth and expansion of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 71.010; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AASHTO means the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials. All references to AASHTO specifications or methods of test is understood to refer to the latest published edition of the "Standard Specifications for Highway Materials and Methods of Sampling and Testing" of the AASHTO, unless specifically provided otherwise. 
    Applicant means any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct, or use any portion of a right-of-way. 
    Base means that portion of the street which is the foundation for the bituminous surfacing. 
    Bituminous surfacing means that portion of the street mixed with bituminous material and including the layers of asphalt, aggregate and concrete curbing. 
    City cost means the actual cost incurred by the city for public rights-of-way management, including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user equipment during public right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way permits; and performing all other tasks required by this chapter, including other costs the city may incur in managing the provisions of this chapter. 
    Collector streets or arterial streets means streets serving commercial, industrial or manufacturing areas or connecting points of major traffic interest within the city. 
    Grade means the established elevation of the finished bituminous surface of the street. 
    Gravel means gravel or sand, or any combination thereof. 
    MnDOT means the state department of transportation. All references to MnDOT specifications or methods is understood to refer to the latest published edition of the "Specifications for Highway Construction" as published by the state department of transportation. 
    Micro wireless facility has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 14, as may be hereafter modified. 
    Obstruct means to place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way. 
    Obstruction permit means the permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for the duration specified therein. 
    Obstruction permit fee means money paid to the city by a registrant to cover the costs as established in the city fee schedule. 
    Plans means all drawings and standard details or reproductions thereof pertaining to details of construction or of the contract work and which are made a part of the contract. 
    Permittee means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter. 
    Pole attachment permit means the permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may install or use a wireless facility on a wireless support structure. 
    Pole attachment permit fee means money paid to the city by a registrant to cover the costs as established in the city fee schedule. 
    Registrant means any person who has or seeks to have its equipment located in any right-of-way, or, in any way, occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way. 
    Repair means the temporary construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable for travel. 
    Residential streets means streets providing access to residents only and not primarily serving business, commercial, industrial or manufacturing areas and not connecting points of major traffic interest. 
    Restoration bond means a performance bond, a letter of credit, or cash deposit posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to ensure that right-of-way excavation and obstruction work is completed in both a timely and quality manner. 
    Restoration cost means an amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the cost of restoration. 
    Restore or restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition that existed before the commencement of the work. 
    Right-of-way means the surface and space above and below a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way, for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. The right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service. 
    Right-of-way permit means the excavation permit, obstruction permit, and/or pole attachment permit required by this chapter. 
    Service or utility service includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S.A. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; 
(2)  Telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna television, fire and alarm communications, water, electricity, light, heat, cooling energy, or power services; 
(3)  The services provided by a corporation organized for the purposes set forth in M.S.A. § 300.03; 
(4)  The services provided by a district heating or cooling system; and 
(5)  Cable communications systems as defined in M.S.A. ch. 238. 
    Small wireless facility has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 11, as may be hereafter modified. 
    Specifications means the directions, provision and requirements that are prepared for the project under consideration and made a part of the contract. 
    Sub-base means that portion of the street lying between the base and subgrade. 
    Sub-grade means that portion of the street which is the foundation for sub-base, base and surface. 
    Telecommunications right-of-way user has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 4, as may be hereafter modified. 
    Unusable equipment means equipment in the right-of-way which has remained unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to provide proof that it has either a plan to begin using it within the next 12 months or a potential purchaser or user of the equipment. 
    Wireless facility has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 13, as may be hereafter modified. 
    Wireless support structure has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 16, as may be hereafter modified. 
(Code 1999, § 71.020; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958; Ord. No. 725, § V(75.020), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 30-3-30-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-23. - Building sites to be located adjacent to existing street; exceptions. 
    No building permits will be issued for any construction within the city unless the building site is located adjacent to an existing street which is dedicated and maintained as a city street, or unless provision for street construction has been made in full compliance with this article, and in no case until grading work, as provided in section 30-54(1), has been completed and certified to the building official by the city engineer; except that in isolated instances, the council may enter into an agreement with a property owner for special handling of an unusual situation which agreement shall be recorded so as to run with the land affected. 
(Code 1999, § 72.010; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Sec. 30-24. - Permit required. 
    Before any improvement, construction or alteration of any kind whatsoever is undertaken within the limits of a right-of-way, the person proposing such improvement, construction or alteration shall procure a permit therefor from the city. 
(Code 1999, § 72.020; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Sec. 30-25. - Petitions. 
    All requests for street construction, improvement, or reconstruction shall be initiated by a request to the council upon a street improvement petition form. The form of petition shall be available to the public at all times at the office of the city clerk. Such petition, when properly executed, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 72.030; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Sec. 30-26. - Preliminary report. 
    Upon receipt of a street improvement petition, the clerk shall present the same to the council. All such petitions, before being acted upon by the council, shall be referred to the city engineer for preliminary report as to feasibility of the improvement, as to whether it should be made as proposed or in connection with some other improvement, and as to the estimated cost. When the city engineer's report has been received, the council shall determine whether such improvement is to be made and how it shall be financed. If the council determines that the improvement shall be financed by assessment against benefited property, all further proceedings shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law. If the council determines that the improvement is to be financed by means other than assessment of benefited property, all further proceedings shall be in accordance with section 30-27. 
(Code 1999, § 72.040; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Sec. 30-27. - Deposit. 
(a)  When the street improvement will not be financed by assessment, a copy of the city engineer's preliminary report shall be furnished to each petitioner. The petitioner shall deposit with the city an amount equal to 100 percent of the cost to prepare the necessary bid documents. This sum shall be used to defray expenses incurred by the city for plans, specifications, legal services, advertising, or any other expense in connection therewith. In the event the work is not ordered by the council, any money remaining in such ten percent deposit after expenses, as above specified, have been paid, shall be refunded to the petitioners. 
(b)  After the petitioners have paid the deposit required in subsection (a) of this section, the council shall instruct the city engineer to prepare final plans and specifications and estimate the cost for the improvement, construction, or re-construction including drainage and utility installations as petitioned and as recommended by the city engineer's preliminary report. When final plans and specifications and estimate of costs are completed, the city engineer shall present the same to the council and shall furnish a copy thereof to the clerk for transmittal to the petitioner. Before the council orders the work done or advertises for bids, the petitioners shall deliver to the city a cash deposit, or a surety bond, in the amount of 11/2 times the city engineer's final estimate; and such cash deposit shall be used for, or such surety bond shall guarantee, the payment in cash for all work as specified in the payment terms of the contract as let by the council. If the petitioners fail to furnish the cash deposit or bond within 30 days from the date the clerk forwards a copy of the city engineer's final estimate to the petitioner, the project shall be terminated and the clerk shall forthwith deduct all expenses incurred by the city from the deposit provided in subsection (a) of this section. Any balance remaining shall be paid back to the petitioners. 
(c)  Upon receiving from the petitioner the cash deposit or bond required by subsection (b) of this section, the council shall proceed in accordance with state law for the work to be done. This language shall not be construed to require the issuance of bonds by the city, nor to require assessments to be spread. 
(Code 1999, § 72.050; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Sec. 30-28. - Partial plat development to provide circuity of streets. 
    In the development of a large subdivision or plat, the street construction may be undertaken in parts or sections of the plat, providing that the petitioner includes in each separate undertaking streets which will make a complete circuit so that there will be no dead-ends when the construction of a particular section has been completed. 
(Code 1999, § 72.060; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Sec. 30-29. - Streets less than 60 feet wide. 
    Any temporary or permanent street having a right-of-way width of less than 60 feet shall be considered as a variance, providing the city engineer shall design such street in the best possible manner for the contemplated use. The petitioner may be required to enter into special agreements pertaining to such substandard streets. Provisions for temporary cul-de-sacs may be required by the city at the developer's sole expense. 
(Code 1999, § 72.070; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Sec. 30-30. - Temporary maintenance during street construction. 
    The council shall, at all times, have the right to determine and specify the timing of the street construction and may, in its discretion, contract for grading under a separate contract from the finishing or surfacing of the driving area. Whenever surfacing is delayed for a substantial period of time after grading, the council may provide for snow plowing and general maintenance operations on such streets at the expense of the developer. If the council does provide for snow plowing and maintenance, such action on the part of the council shall not, in any way, constitute or be deemed to be final acceptance by the city of such streets for maintenance. If conditions require, during the period of such partial maintenance, that aggregate or gravel be applied to the entire driving surface, the application thereof shall be deemed to be part of the street construction to be paid for by the petitioner on a time and materials basis to the city. Such partial maintenance, as provided for in this section, shall not be construed to have any effect upon construction agreements existing between the city and the petitioner, but shall be construed to be part of such construction agreements and shall be construed to be an exercise by the council of its right under applicable provisions of state law, to perform part of the work contemplated by the city labor and city equipment on a time and materials basis. 
(Code 1999, § 72.080; Ord. No. 8, 5-26-1958) 
Secs. 30-31-30-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 30-50. - Primary street system. 
    The council shall from time to time designate those streets which shall constitute the primary street system of the city. Primary streets shall differ from other streets as set forth in the specifications. Designation of primary streets shall be by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1999, § 73.010) 
Sec. 30-51. - Minimum construction requirements. 
(a)  Unless otherwise required by the council, all street and parking lot base and pavement thickness shall be designed in accordance with the current state Department of Transportation Road Design Manual for flexible pavements. The designed thickness of the surfacing elements shall be in accordance with the flexible pavement design standards for road classification as follows: 
Classification Pavement Design; Axle Load Local streets 7-ton minimum Collector/commercial streets 9 ton Parking lots 7-ton minimum, unless otherwise specified by the city engineer  
(b)  Sufficient traffic information and a soil analysis report with a recommended pavement design shall be submitted to the city engineer for his review. 
(Code 1999, § 73.020) 
Sec. 30-52. - Drainage. 
    Provisions shall be made for the proper drainage of all streets through the installation of adequately designed culverts, storm sewers, etc., and the installation thereof shall be considered part of the essential street construction requirements. Such drainage shall fit into the overall drainage plan for the city. 
(Code 1999, § 73.030) 
Sec. 30-53. - Soil tests. 
    To determine subgrade soil classifications, soil samples shall be collected and analyzed by a reputable testing laboratory. Reports of the soil analysis shall be submitted to the city engineer with the pavement plans. The frequency and location of these samples shall be determined by the independent testing laboratory. 
(Code 1999, § 73.040) 
Sec. 30-54. - Minimum construction requirements. 
    Basic requirements for construction of streets described in section 30-50 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Grading. All streets shall be graded for the full width of the right-of-way and in such a manner as to provide a minimum finished surface width of 28 feet from back-of-curb to back-of-curb. All streets will be undercut below the established grade for the width of the finished surface to a depth adequate to accommodate the sub-base, base, and bituminous surfacing. 
(2)  Subgrade. The subgrade of the streets shall be so constructed so as to satisfactorily sustain the street in a stable condition. Any unsuitable or undesirable materials shall be removed. 
(3)  Sub-base and base. All streets shall be constructed having a gravel base of six-inch minimum thickness conforming to MnDOT and city requirements. The design thicknesses of the sub-base and base for streets and parking lots shall be in accordance with the MnDOT road design manual for flexible pavements. 
(4)  Bituminous surfacing. All city streets shall be surfaced with a plant-mix bituminous mat having a minimum thickness of three inches conforming to MnDOT and city requirements. A job mix design utilizing the planned aggregate source shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. The design thicknesses of the bituminous surface for streets and parking lots shall be in accordance with the MnDOT road design manual for flexible pavements. One and one-half inches of bituminous surfacing shall be installed the year of construction and 11/2 inches the following year, providing the street has gone through one freeze-thaw cycle, as approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1999, § 73.050) 
Sec. 30-55. - Coal tar-based sealer products. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the use of sealer products within the city, in order to protect, restore, and preserve the quality of its waters. The use of sealers on asphalt driveways is a common practice; however, scientific studies on the use of driveway sealers have demonstrated a relationship between stormwater runoff and certain health and environmental concerns. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Asphalt-based sealer means a petroleum-based sealer material that is commonly used on driveways, parking lots, and other surfaces and which does not contain coal tar. 
    Coal tar means a byproduct of the process used to refine coal. 
    MPCA means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
    PAHs means polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; a group of organic chemicals formed during the incomplete burning of coal, oil, gas, or other organic substances, present in coal tar and believed harmful to humans, fish, and other aquatic life. 
    Undiluted coal tar-based sealer means a sealer material containing coal tar that has not been mixed with asphalt and which is commonly used on driveways, parking lots and other surfaces. 
(c)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall apply any undiluted coal tar-based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the city. 
(2)  No person shall contract with any commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial developer, or any other person for the application of any undiluted coal tar-based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the city. 
(3)  No commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial developer, or other similar individual or organization shall direct any employee, independent contractor, volunteer, or other person to apply any undiluted coal tar-based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the city. 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Persons conducting research. Upon the express written approval from both the city and the MPCA, a person conducting bona fide research on the effects of undiluted coal tar-based sealer products or PAHs on the environment shall be exempt from the prohibitions provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(2)  Asphalt-based sealcoat products. The provisions of this section shall only apply to use of undiluted coal tar-based sealer in the city and shall not affect the use of asphalt-based sealer products within the city. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section is subject to the penalty provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1999, § 73.055) 
Sec. 30-56. - Public utilities. 
    All public utilities which are available and which are to be buried within the street right-of-way, together with such service lines, leads, stubs, or other appurtenances as may be required to connect the adjacent property to these public utilities, shall be constructed or installed prior to the time any part of the bituminous surfacing is applied to the street. 
(Code 1999, § 73.060) 
Sec. 30-57. - Light poles. 
    As part of the street construction, the applicant or developer shall install street light poles and fixtures with necessary electric lines of a kind and in a number approved by the city engineer. All costs shall be borne by the applicant or developer. Such installation shall be completed before the street is surfaced. 
(Code 1999, § 73.062) 
Sec. 30-58. - Standard detail plates. 
    The city engineer shall maintain standard detail plates showing typical standard minimum requirements of construction and materials. These detail plates may be revised or added to from time to time by resolution of the city council and such revised or additional plates shall be considered part of this division. 
(Code 1999, § 73.070) 
Sec. 30-59. - Concrete curb and gutters. 
    Concrete curb and gutters of a kind specified and approved by the city engineer shall be constructed on all streets within the city. All streets shall have concrete curb and gutter meeting the requirements shown on the standard detail plates. 
(Code 1999, § 73.080) 
Sec. 30-60. - Variances and exceptions. 
    The council may permit variances from the requirements of this division, as recommended by the city engineer, in specific instances where, due to peculiar topographical and geographical conditions, strict adherence of these regulations becomes infeasible. 
(Code 1999, § 73.090) 
Secs. 30-61-30-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESTORATION AND CLEANUP 

Sec. 30-79. - Street restoration and cleanup. 
    Where work is done on private property contiguous to any city street, any damage caused within the street right-of-way by reason of the work shall be promptly repaired by the person obtaining the building permit, and all foreign debris deposited on the street right-of-way by reason of the work shall be removed by the person, so as to leave the street right-of-way in its original condition upon cessation of the work. 
(Code 1999, § 74.010) 
Sec. 30-80. - Road maintenance and clean up. 
    New residential and commercial construction causes increased traffic and the resulting increased maintenance and clean up on city streets. Every person desiring a building permit to construct any residential or commercial/industrial structure on property contiguous to any city street shall pay an amount as provided in the city fee schedule, to be used to defray additional street maintenance and cleanup costs arising from the construction. This does not relieve the permittee from the obligation and civil liability set forth in section 30-79. 
(Code 1999, § 74.012) 
Secs. 30-81-30-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 30-103. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to control the location of driveways in order that traffic hazards be reduced, adequate street drainage be maintained, and ingress and egress shall not constitute a hazard or impair the health or safety of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 74.040) 
Sec. 30-104. - Permit for driveways. 
    No driveways shall be constructed at any location where motor vehicles will be provided with access to any city street without first obtaining a permit for the construction. The city must approve the driveway grade. 
(Code 1999, § 74.020) 
Sec. 30-105. - Driveway construction. 
    Any driveway lying between the edge of the roadway and the property line (boulevard area) of the property being served by the driveway shall be constructed with a hot mixed bituminous surface, or concrete surface. If concrete is used, where there is no concrete curb or gutter, the concrete driveway shall be held back two feet from the curbline. The remaining two feet shall be surfaced with hot mixed bituminous material. Prior to starting work, the owner or contractor shall obtain a permit and cash deposit pursuant to this division. The cash deposit required in section 30-80 shall apply to this section. 
(Code 1999, § 74.032) 
Secs. 30-106-30-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 30-130. - Purpose and intent. 
    This article is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies by imposing reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of equipment currently within the city's rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is the intent of this article that persons disturbing and obstructing city rights-of-way shall bear a fair share of the financial responsibility for the integrity of those rights-of-way and that the city recover its out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using those rights-of-way. 
(Code 1999, § 75.010) 
Sec. 30-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way. 
    City center district means that portion of the city lying within and bounded by the following streets: all property along one quarter mile either side of County Road E, lying between the railroad right-of-way west of Arcade Street and the Labore Road right-of-way on the east, which is designated on the city's zoning map as CC-city center zoning district. 
    City cost means the actual cost incurred by the city for public rights-of-way management, including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user equipment during public right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way permits; and performing all other tasks required by this article, including other costs the city may incur in managing the provisions of this article. 
    City engineer means the superintendent of the department of public works of the city, or his designee. 
    Degradation means the accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way caused by excavation or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation did not occur. 
    Degradation cost means money paid to the city to cover the cost associated with a decrease in the useful life of a public right-of-way caused by excavation. 
    Disruptive fee is the penalty imposed as a result of the adverse impact on city citizens and others who are required to alter travel routes and times resulting from right-of-way obstructions. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer. 
    Equipment means any tangible object in any right-of-way, but shall not include boulevard plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the right-of-way between a person's property and the street curb. 
    Excavate means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way, except horticultural practices of penetrating the boulevard area to a depth of less than 12 inches. 
    Excavation permit means the permit which, pursuant to this article, must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit. 
    Excavation permit fee means money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in section 30-138. 
    In , when used in conjunction with "right-of-way," means over, above, in, within, on or under a right-of-way. 
    Obstruct means to place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way. 
    Obstruction permit means the permit which, pursuant to this article, must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for the duration specified therein. 
    Obstruction permit fee means money paid to the city by a registrant to cover the costs as provided in section 30-138. 
    Permittee means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this article. 
    Registrant means any person who has, or seeks to have, its equipment located in any right-of-way, or in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way. 
    Repair means the temporary construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable for travel. 
    Restoration bond means a performance bond, a letter of credit, or cash deposit posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to ensure that right-of-way excavation and obstruction work is completed in both a timely and quality manner. 
    Restoration cost means an amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the cost of restoration. 
    Restore or restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition that existed before the commencement of the work. 
    Right-of-way means the surface and space above and below a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. 
    Right-of-way permit means either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this article. 
    Service or utility service includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S.A. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; 
(2)  Telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna television, fire and alarm communications, water, electricity, light, heat, cooling energy, or power services; 
(3)  The services provided by a corporation organized for the purposes set forth in M.S.A. § 301B.01; 
(4)  The services provided by a district heating or cooling system; and 
(5)  Cable communications systems as defined in M.S.A. ch. 238. 
    Telecommunication rights-of-way user means a person owning or controlling a facility in the public right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the public right-of-way that is used, or is intended to be used, for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For the purposes of this article, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S.A. ch. 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services are not telecommunications rights-of-way users. 
    Unusable equipment means equipment in the right-of-way which has remained unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to provide proof that it has either a plan to begin using it within the next 12 months or a potential purchaser or user of the equipment. 
(Code 1999, § 75.020) 
Sec. 30-132. - Administration. 
    The city engineer is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The city engineer may delegate any or all the duties hereunder. 
(Code 1999, § 75.030) 
Sec. 30-133. - Registration and right-of-way occupancy. 
    Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way, including by lease, sublease or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have, equipment in any right-of-way must register with the city engineer prior to performing any work within a right-of-way. Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee. 
(Code 1999, § 75.040) 
Sec. 30-134. - Registration information. 
    The information provided to the city engineer at the time of registration shall include such information as the city engineer requires, including liability insurance in a form and amount approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1999, § 75.050) 
Sec. 30-135. - Permit requirement. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct, excavate, or use any right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city engineer to do so. 
(1)  Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing equipment described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. 
(2)  Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. 
(3)  Pole attachment permit. A pole attachment permit is required by a registrant to attach a wireless facility to a wireless support structure in the right-of-way. 
(4)  72-hour notice. After obtaining a permit, the applicant shall provide the city engineer with 72 hours prior notice of the time that work will be commenced. 
(Code 1999, § 75.060; Ord. No. 725, § V(75.060), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 30-136. - Permit applications. 
    Application for a permit is made to the city engineer. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of, the following provisions: 
(1)  Registration with the city engineer pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed equipment; 
(3)  Payment of all money due to the city for: 
a.  Permit fees and costs; 
b.  Prior obstructions or excavations; 
c.  Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; 
d.  Franchise fees, if applicable. 
(4)  When an excavation permit is required for purposes of installing additional equipment, and the posting of a restoration bond for the additional equipment is insufficient, the posting of an additional or larger restoration bond for the additional equipment may be required. 
(Code 1999, § 75.070) 
Sec. 30-137. - Issuance of permit; conditions. 
(a)  Permit issuance. If the city engineer determines that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this article, the city engineer may issue a permit. 
(b)  Conditions. The city engineer may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the right-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(Code 1999, § 75.080) 
Sec. 30-138. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Excavation permit fee. The excavation permit fee shall be as provided in the city fee schedule and in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs: 
(1)  The city cost; 
(2)  Degradation cost, if applicable. 
(b)  Obstruction permit fee. The obstruction permit fee shall be established by the city engineer and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city cost. 
(c)  Pole attachment permit fee. The pole attachment permit fee shall be established by the city council, to be included in the current city fee schedule, and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city cost. 
(d)  Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without payment of such fees before the issuance of such a permit unless the applicant shall agree to pay such fees within 30 days of billing therefor. 
(e)  Nonrefundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that has been revoked for a breach, as stated in section 30-147, are not refundable. 
(f)  Use of permit fees. All obstruction and excavation permit fees shall be used solely for city management, construction, maintenance and repair costs of the right-of-way. 
(Code 1999, § 75.090; Ord. No. 725, § V(75.090), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 30-139. - Right-of-way repair and restoration. 
(a)  Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the repair and restoration of the right-of-way, as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable by the city engineer. In addition to repairing its own work, the permittee must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including the paving and its foundations, to the same condition that existed before the commencement of the work and must inspect the area of the work and use reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 36 months thereafter. 
(b)  Repair and restoration. The permittee shall repair his own work. In addition, in his application for an excavation permit, the permittee may choose either to have the city restore the right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way himself. 
(1)  City restoration. If the permittee chooses to have the city restore the right-of-way, it shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, during the 36 months following such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of repairing the pavement. 
(2)  Permittee restoration. If the permittee chooses to restore the right-of-way himself, he shall, at the time of application for an excavation permit, post a restoration bond in an amount determined by the city engineer to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to its pre-excavation condition. If, 36 months after completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the city engineer determines that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the restoration bond shall be released. 
(c)  Standards. The permittee shall perform repairs and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city engineer. The city engineer shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis. The city engineer, in exercising this authority, shall be guided by the following standards and consideration: 
(1)  The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations, disruptions or damage to the right-of-way; 
(2)  The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way, the character of the development surrounding the right-of-way; 
(3)  The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way, and the remaining life expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation; 
(4)  Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from the excavation, disturbance or damage to the right-of-way; and 
(5)  The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise take place. 
(d)  Standards for wireless facilities. 
(1)  Purpose. The city desires high quality wireless communication services to accommodate the needs of residents and businesses. At the same time, the city strives to minimize the negative impacts that wireless facilities can have on aesthetics and public safety. Due to the many services that must be delivered within its limited area, the city also strives to avoid unnecessary encumbrances within the public right-of-way. The city allows and regulates wireless facilities outside of the public right-of-way through performance standards and height limits. The purpose of this section is to regulate wireless facilities within the public right-of-way in a manner that balances desire for service with vital concerns of public health, safety, and welfare. Demand for right-of-way space is constantly increasing, while the space available is limited. Every competing use of this finite space creates a distraction for drivers, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Thus, to every extent reasonably possible, this section places emphasis on uniformity and reduction of clutter in the public right-of-way. Wireless facilities in public rights-of-way must have minimal impacts (i.e., small pole attachments that do not require new poles, do not require pole extensions, and do not have associated ground mounted equipment). Subject to limited situations meeting the standards below, wireless telecommunication facilities that require greater heights than can be afforded by existing poles in the public right-of-way and that require ground mounted equipment are more appropriately sited outside the public right-of-way in accordance with the adopted performance standards in subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Criteria and standards. All wireless facility operators and wireless facilities within the public right-of-way shall meet the following criteria and performance standards: 
a.  The wireless facility shall only be located on an existing public utility structure, excluding traffic lights and traffic signs. 
b.  No wireless facility shall be attached to a decorative public utility structure, including, but not limited to, the city light poles located in the city center district. No wireless facility shall interfere with city decorative features such as flower baskets, banners or flags. 
c.  No light or sound shall emanate from the wireless facility. 
d.  Wireless facility users shall enter into collocation agreements with the city prior to any use of the right-of-way. 
e.  If the wireless facility is to be attached to a city-owned public utility structure, the applicant shall pay a license fee to the city as established in the city fee schedule. 
f.  The wireless facility shall, to the greatest extent possible, match the public utility structure in color, material and design, and the wireless facility design shall, to the greatest extent possible, minimize exposed cables, wires and other attachment hardware. 
g.  The wireless facility applicant shall provide evidence that the public utility structure has adequate structural capacity to carry the additional equipment proposed. 
h.  The wireless facility applicant must agree that the wireless facility or any component of the wireless facility equipment must be removed and relocated, at the applicant's sole expense and at no expense to the city, if the city or road authority for the public right-of-way in which it is located requires removal and/or relocation of the wireless support structure. 
i.  The wireless facility applicant shall submit, in writing, to the city written approval from the wireless support structure owner to which the wireless facility will be attached. 
j.  The wireless facility applicant shall obtain any and all permits and approvals from the road authority for the public right-of-way in which the wireless facility is located. 
k.  The wireless facility applicant must be a telecommunications right-of-way user as defined in M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 4. 
l.  The wireless facility applicant shall obtain all required permits from the city's public works department and comply with any requirements set forth in the permits and this article. 
m.  The wireless facility applicant shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal ordinances, statutes and regulations. 
n.  The wireless facility applicant shall provide evidence that the wireless facility will not interfere with public safety communications. 
o.  All components of the wireless facility shall be maintained in a state of safe, neat and clean quality and repair. 
(3)  Wireless facilities as pole attachments. Wireless facilities that comply with the following requirements may be attached to existing public utility structures within the right-of-way after issuance of a pole attachment permit: 
a.  The wireless facility shall not extend above the top of the existing public utility structure, and the height of the existing public utility structure shall not be increased to accommodate the wireless facility. 
b.  If the public utility structure must be replaced to structurally accommodate the wireless facility, the replacement public utility structure height shall not exceed the existing public utility structure height, and the replacement public utility structure diameter shall not exceed the existing public utility structure diameter by more than 50 percent. 
c.  The wireless facility shall not be larger than three cubic feet and shall have no individual surface larger than four square feet. 
d.  The wireless facility shall not extend outward from the existing pole or tower or arm thereof by more than 21/2 feet, except that an antenna one-half inch in diameter or less may extend an additional six inches. 
e.  The wireless facility shall include no ground-mounted equipment within the planned widened rights-of-way. 
f.  The wireless facility shall not block light emanating from the public utility structure and shall not otherwise interfere with the original use of the public utility structure. 
(4)  Wireless facilities as pole extensions or with ground-mounted equipment. Wireless facilities that require increased public utility structure height or that have ground-mounted equipment may be erected in the public right-of-way only when in compliance with the following provisions and after issuance of a pole attachment permit or excavation permit: 
a.  The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the wireless facility cannot be placed in a code-complying location outside the right-of-way within one-quarter mile of the proposed location. 
b.  The replacement public utility structure, including lightning rods and all other attachments, shall not exceed the height of the existing public utility structure by more than ten percent. Once the height of a public utility structure has been increased under the provisions of this section, the height shall not be further increased. 
c.  The replacement public utility structure diameter shall not exceed the existing public utility structure diameter by more than 50 percent. 
d.  The wireless facility shall not extend outward from the public utility structure by more than two feet. 
e.  The replacement public utility structure shall match the original and surrounding public utility structures in materials and color. 
f.  A pole attachment or excavation permit for a wireless facility that has ground-mounted equipment will be issued only if the issuing authority finds that the ground-mounted equipment meets the following performance standards: 
1.  The ground-mounted equipment will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation; 
2.  The ground-mounted equipment will not create a safety hazard; 
3.  The location of the ground-mounted equipment minimizes impacts on adjacent property; 
4.  The ground-mounted equipment will not adversely impact the health, safety or welfare of the community; 
5.  The ground-mounted equipment will be set back a minimum of ten feet from the planned widened rights-of-way; 
6.  The ground-mounted equipment will be separated from all streets and sidewalks by a minimum of three feet; 
7.  The ground-mounted equipment will be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest intersecting right-of-way line; 
8.  The ground-mounted equipment will be separated from the nearest ground mounted wireless equipment installation on the same block face by a minimum of 330 feet unless the equipment is placed underground; 
9.  If located adjacent to residential uses, ground-mounted equipment shall be limited to three feet in height above grade and 27 cubic feet in cumulative size; 
10.  If located adjacent to nonresidential uses, ground-mounted equipment shall be limited to five feet in height above grade and 81 cubic feet in cumulative size; and 
11.  Vegetative or other screening compatible with the surrounding area shall be provided around the ground-mounted equipment. 
(Code 1999, § 75.100; Ord. No. 725, § V(75.100), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 30-140. - Supplementary applications. 
(a)  Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee who determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must, before working in that greater area: 
(1)  Make application for permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby; and 
(2)  Be granted a new permit or permit extension. 
(b)  Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin his work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, he must apply for a new permit for the additional time he needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary applications must be done before the permit end date. 
(Code 1999, § 75.110) 
Sec. 30-141. - Other obligations. 
(a)  Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve the permittee of his duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other city, county, state, or federal rules, laws or regulations. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to his permit, regardless of who does the work. 
(b)  Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city engineer, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work. 
(c)  Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. 
(Code 1999, § 75.120) 
Sec. 30-142. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  Mandatory denial. Except in an emergency, no right-of-way permit will be granted: 
(1)  To any person who has failed within the past three years to comply, or is presently not in full compliance, with the requirements of this article; 
(2)  To any person as to whom there exist grounds for the revocation of a permit; or 
(3)  If, in the discretion of the city engineer, the issuance of a permit for the particular date or time would cause a conflict or interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The city engineer, in exercising this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary travel of the public over the right-of-way, and by considerations relating to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Permissive denial. The city engineer may deny a permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its users. The city engineer, in his discretion, may consider one or more of the following factors: 
(1)  The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought is available; 
(2)  The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way; 
(3)  The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other rights-of-way for the equipment in the right-of-way; 
(4)  The applicability of ordinance or other regulations of the right-of-way that affect location of equipment in the right-of-way; 
(5)  The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms and conditions of its franchise, this article, and other applicable ordinances and regulations; 
(6)  The degree of disruption to surrounding residential and commercial properties that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way; 
(7)  The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when it is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction; and 
(8)  The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by the expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way. 
(c)  Discretionary issuance. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section to the contrary, the city engineer may issue a permit in any case where the permit is necessary to allow such customer to materially improve his utility service or to comply with applicable federal, state or local law. 
(Code 1999, § 75.130; Ord. No. 725, § V(75.130), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 30-143. - Installation requirements. 
    The excavation, backfilling, repair and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with "The Standard Specifications for Street Openings" as promulgated by the city engineer. 
(Code 1999, § 75.140) 
Sec. 30-144. - Inspection. 
(a)  Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the city engineer. 
(b)  Site inspection. The permittee shall make the worksite available to the city engineer and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
(c)  Authority of city engineer. At the time of inspection, the city engineer may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public. The city engineer may issue an order to the registrant for any work which does not conform to the applicable standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after issuance of the order, the registrant shall present proof to the city engineer that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the city engineer may revoke the permit. 
(Code 1999, § 75.150) 
Sec. 30-145. - Work done without a permit. 
(a)  Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the city engineer of any event regarding its equipment which it considers to be an emergency. The registrant must proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring himself into compliance with this article for the actions he took in response to the emergency. If the city engineer becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's equipment, the city engineer may attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city engineer may take whatever action he deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose equipment occasioned the emergency. 
(b)  Nonemergency situations. Except in an emergency, and in addition to all other penalties, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double for normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by the legislative code, deposit with the city engineer the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 75.160) 
Sec. 30-146. - Supplementary notification. 
    If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city engineer of the accurate information as soon as this information is known. 
(Code 1999, § 75.170) 
Sec. 30-147. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Substantial breach. Registrants hold permits, issued pursuant to this article, as a privilege and not as a right. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any condition of the permit. A substantial breach by a permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit; 
(2)  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens; 
(3)  Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit; 
(4)  The failure to maintain the required bonds or insurance; 
(5)  The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; or 
(6)  The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to section 30-144. 
(b)  Written notice of breach. If the city engineer determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city engineer shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. Further, a substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city engineer, at his discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit. 
(c)  Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, the permittee shall contact the city engineer with a plan, acceptable to the city engineer, for its correction. The permittee's failure to so contact the city engineer, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. 
(d)  Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney's fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Code 1999, § 75.180) 
Sec. 30-148. - Mapping data. 
(a)  Information required. Within one month after completion of the work, each registrant shall provide to the city engineer information indicating the horizontal and vertical location, relative to the boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has control and which is located in any right-of-way (mapping data). Mapping data shall be provided with the specificity and in the format requested by the city engineer for inclusion in the mapping system used by the city engineer. 
(b)  Telecommunication equipment. Information on existing facilities and equipment of telecommunications right-of-way users need only be supplied in the form maintained by the telecommunications right-of-way user. 
(c)  Trade secret information. At the request of any registrant, any information requested by the city engineer which qualifies as a trade-secret under M.S.A. § 13.37(b) shall be treated as trade secret information as detailed therein. With respect to the provision of mapping data, the city may consider unique circumstances from time to time required to obtain mapping data. 
(Code 1999, § 75.190) 
Sec. 30-149. - Location of equipment. 
(a)  Undergrounding. Unless otherwise permitted by an existing franchise or state law, or unless existing aboveground equipment is required or replaced, new construction and the installation of new equipment and replacement of old equipment shall be done underground or contained within buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable codes. 
(b)  Corridors. The city engineer may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof, as may be necessary for each type of equipment that is, or pursuant to current technology, the city engineer expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued by the city engineer involving the installation of replacement of equipment shall designate the proper corridor for the equipment at issue. Any registrant whose equipment is in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the city engineer shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where its equipment is located, move that equipment to its assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city engineer for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant. 
(c)  Nuisance. One year after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any equipment found in a right-of-way that has not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the equipment and restoring the right-of-way to a useable condition. 
(Code 1999, § 75.200) 
Sec. 30-150. - Relocation of equipment. 
(a)  A registrant must promptly and at his own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate his equipment and facilities in the right-of-way whenever the city engineer requests such removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the same condition it was in prior to the removal or relocation. The city engineer may make such request to prevent interference by the company's equipment or facilities with a present or future city use of the right-of-way, a public improvement undertaken by the city, an economic development project in which the city has an interest or investment, when the public health, safety and welfare require it, or when necessary to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to remove or relocate his equipment from any right-of-way which has been vacated in favor of a nongovernmental entity, unless and until the reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the person therefor. 
(Code 1999, § 75.210) 
Sec. 30-151. - Pre-excavation equipment location. 
    In addition to complying with the requirements of the state one call excavation notice system before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and approximately vertical placement of all the equipment. Any registrant whose equipment is less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to exact location of his equipment and the best procedure for excavation. 
(Code 1999, § 75.220) 
Sec. 30-152. - Right-of-way vacation. 
(a)  Limitation of liability. By reason of the acceptance of a registration or the grant of a right-of-way permit, the city does not assume any liability for injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service claims by parties other than the registrant or the city, or for claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance, or operation of equipment by registrants or activities of registrants. 
(b)  Indemnification. By registering with the city engineer, a registrant agrees, or by accepting a permit under this article, a permittee is required to defend, indemnify, and hold the city whole and harmless from all costs, liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its equipment, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by a right-of-way permit. He further agrees that he will not bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against the city for any claim nor for any award arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance or operation of its equipment, or any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether or not the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a right-of-way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own negligence, except for claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence where such negligence arises out of or is primarily related to the presence, installation, construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the equipment by the registrant or on the registrant's behalf, including, but not limited to, the issuance of permits and inspection of plans or work. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the registrant or to the city, and the registrant, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf. 
(Code 1999, § 75.230) 
Sec. 30-153. - Future uses. 
    In placing any equipment, or allowing it to be placed, in the right-of-way, the city is not liable for any damages caused thereby to any registrant's equipment which is already in place. No registrant is entitled to rely on the provisions of this article, and no special duty is created as to any registrant. This article is enacted to protect the general health, welfare and safety of the public at large. 
(Code 1999, § 75.260) 
Sec. 30-154. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
(a)  The city, by the granting of a right-of-way permit or by registering a person under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter be granted to the city under the city Charter or state law, statute or constitution to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the permittee, and the permittee, by his acceptance of a right-of-way permit or of registration under this article, agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A permittee or registrant is deemed to acknowledge that his rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. 
(b)  Any conflict between the provisions of a registration or of a right-of-way permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the city's regulatory or police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(Code 1999, § 75.270) 
Sec. 30-155. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order that any permit, right or registration issued under this article, or any portions of this article, is illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit, right or registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate, without cause, upon giving 60 days' written notice to the other. The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the right of termination. If a permit, right or registration shall be considered a revocable permit as provided herein, the permittee must acknowledge the authority of the city council to issue such revocable permit and the power to revoke it. Nothing in this article precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein. 
(Code 1999, § 75.200) 
Chapter 32 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  Each new subdivision becomes a permanent and integral part of the physical structure of the city; since the design and the development of plats subdividing property establishes a pattern for the future development of the entire community, adherence to this pattern by future developers becomes mandatory. Planning of subdivisions in a piecemeal manner, without proper consideration being given to the overall development of the city, would lead to a chaotic patchwork of community development, making future improvements difficult, if not impossible and certainly very costly. The lack of regulations and mismanagement of subdivision control would have a disastrous effect upon the distribution of population and would actually create areas contrasting so greatly in their environment as to provide for future so-called blighted areas from the start. 
(b)  To provide for the orderly and equitable development of the city, all subdivisions hereafter platted within the corporate limits of the city shall, in all respects, fully comply with the regulations set forth herein which shall be interpreted as minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Code 1999, § 25.010) 
Sec. 32-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of property otherwise abutting on the street. 
    Building setback line means a line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on the plat between which the adjacent street, the erection of an enclosed structure, or portion thereof, is prohibited. 
    Butt lot means a lot at the end of a block, lying between two corner lots. 
    Contour map means a topographic map showing the irregularities in elevation of land surface through the use of lines connecting points of equal elevation. The term "contour interval" means the vertical height difference between the connecting lines on a contour map. 
    Copy means a print or reproduction made from a tracing. 
    Corner lot means a lot bordered on at least two sides by streets. 
    Covenants. Protective covenants are contracts made between private parties and constitute an agreement between these parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with a view to protecting and reserving the physical, social and economic integrity of any given area. 
    Cul-de-sac means a short minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated at the other by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Design standards means the specifications for the preparation of preliminary plans indicating minimums and maximums in the dimensions, magnitude and capacity in such features as the layout of streets, lots, blocks, drainage and required improvements. 
    Development means the act of building structures and installing site improvements. 
    Double frontage lots means lots having a front line abutting one street and a back line abutting another street. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the public or any person for any specific purpose. 
    Final plat means a map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material. 
    Flag lot means lots having insufficient lot width at the public right-of-way or the minimum setback line to comply with applicable required lot width dimensions, but with sufficient area to meet all other applicable lot requirements. 
    Frontage means the width of a lot or building site measured on the line separating it from a public street or way. 
    Key map means a small map drawn to a comparatively small scale which definitely shows the area proposed to be platted and the vicinity surrounding it. 
    Lot means a portion of the subdivision intended for building development or for transfer of ownership. 
    Marginal access street means minor streets parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways to provide access to abutting properties and protection to through traffic. 
    Minor street means a street that provides for direct access to abutting property and for local traffic movement, distinguished by its being completely local in character. 
    Natural waterway means a natural passageway in the surface of the earth so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area. The term "natural waterway" also includes all drainage structures that have been constructed or placed for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another. 
    Pedestrian way means a public or private right-of-way through a block, or providing access with a block for the use of pedestrians. 
    Preliminary plan means a tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision. 
    Reserve strips means a narrow strip of land between lot lines and streets to control access. 
    Resubdivision means the arrangement of lots or boundary lines of lots within an existing subdivision, the combining of substandard lots of record into standard lots, or the resubdivision of previously platted large lots. 
    Right-of-way means the land dedicated for public use as a street or way or for private use such as a powerline or railroad. 
    Sketch plan means a freehand drawing showing the proposed general design for suggestion for the layout of streets to serve a contemplated platted area. 
    Street means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or a similar name. 
    Street width means the shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the street. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcel is less than five acres in area, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, including the location and dedication of necessary streets to serve such lots. 
    Tracing means a plat or map drawn on transparent paper or cloth which can be reproduced. 
    Zoning means the reservation of certain specified areas within the city for buildings and structures for certain purposes with other limitations, such as height and lot coverage. 
(Code 1999, §§ 27.020-27.310) 
Sec. 32-3. - Continued applicability of building and zoning regulations. 
    The provisions of this chapter are in addition to and not in replacement of city building and zoning regulations set forth in this Code. Any provisions of the building code or zoning code relating to platting shall remain in full force and effect except as they may be less restrictive or contradictory to the provisions hereof, in which cases, this chapter shall prevail. 
(Code 1999, § 35.010; Ord. No. 60, 9-30-1965) 
Sec. 32-4. - Administration. 
    The chapters on platting shall be administered and enforced by the city council. The city council shall make all final decisions pertaining to the proposed platting, subdividing, or development of any tract of land. 
(Code 1999, § 25.020) 
Sec. 32-5. - Application. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no land shall be platted, subdivided, rearranged, developed or improved in any way which is not in conformity with the regulations and terms herein specified. 
(Code 1999, § 25.030) 
Sec. 32-6. - Minor subdivisions. 
(a)  Generally. The following land subdivisions shall be considered minor subdivision and exempt from articles II through V of this chapter if all the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The land involved has been previously platted into lots and blocks and is designated in a subdivision plat filed in the office of the county recorder or registrar of titles; 
(2)  The subdivision involves no more than three previously platted lots and results in no more than three revised lots; 
(3)  The subdivision will not cause the land or any structure on the land to be in violation of any provision of this Code; 
(4)  The subdivision will not involve any new street, road, or public improvement, or extension of existing public improvements; 
(5)  The purpose of the subdivision is to divide up to three parcels into not more than three new parcels or revise lot lines or correct surveyor errors for up to three parcels which does not create any new buildable lots. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a minor subdivision shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city including all required materials and fees. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. No minor subdivision shall be approved until a public hearing has been held by the city council. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of an affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the minor subdivision relates. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(d)  Review and recommendation by the development review committee. A minor subdivision application shall be reviewed by the development review committee to determine compliance with the applicable requirements in this chapter and shall be recommended for approval or denial, with findings prepared for the city council. 
(e)  Decision by city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation by the development review committee. The city council may, by majority vote, deny a minor subdivision by resolution with findings of fact, approve it by resolution, or table action to a future meeting. The applicant shall be notified in writing of such action including any conditions of approval. 
(f)  Filing; costs. The applicant shall be responsible for filing the minor subdivision and for payment of associated costs. 
(Code 1999, § 25.040) 
Sec. 32-7. - Procedure to establish minor subdivisions. 
    The owners of proposed lots for a minor subdivision shall file with the city clerk a certificate of survey of the lots to be divided and pay the required fee, plus any required park dedication and stormwater fees. The certificate of survey shall show the dimensions of the lots, as measured upon the recorded proposed property lines, all visible encroachments, a wetland delineation, all easements of record, all proposed easements, all public and private utilities, and the proposed lot division. A written description of the separately-described tracts which will result from the proposed subdivision shall be included on the survey. 
(1)  If the proposed subdivision complies with all the requirements of this section, it will be reviewed by the development review committee with findings prepared for the city council. The city council will consider the application at a regular city council meeting; written notice of the meeting shall be sent to property owners within 350 feet of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  If the proposed minor subdivision is approved, the city clerk and mayor shall sign the minor subdivision and collect all fees. The applicant shall file the minor subdivision with the county recorder or registrar of titles. 
(Code 1999, § 25.050) 
Sec. 32-8. - Variances from subdivision regulations. 
(a)  The planning commission may recommend, and the city council may grant, a variance from the standards of this chapter (not procedural provisions) when undue hardship may result from strict compliance. 
(b)  In recommending any variance, the planning commission shall prescribe any conditions that it deems necessary or desirable for the public interest. In making its recommendations, the planning commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
(c)  A variance shall only be considered when all the following exist: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property resulting from significant physical hardship such as topography, soils, or shape of the property that the strict application of the subdivision provisions would deprive the applicant/owner of the reasonable use of the land or result in inequities. 
(2)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which property is situated. 
(3)  The variance is not contrary to the intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1999, § 25.060) 
Sec. 32-9. - Requests for variance. 
    Request for variance from the requirements of this chapter shall follow the procedure provided in section 38-38(b) through (f). 
(Code 1999, § 25.070) 
Sec. 32-10. - Violations. 
    No land zoned as residential shall be divided into two or more lots or parcels except in accordance with this chapter. If such land has been divided into two or more parcels or lots in violation of this chapter, then no building permit shall be issued for any improvement thereon. 
(Code 1999, § 26.010; Ord. No. 142, 3-20-1973) 
Sec. 32-11. - Unit fee for stormwater improvements. 
    The city council recognizes that each new development intensifies existing stormwater problems and adds to future needs for stormwater improvements. To create a fund to assist in paying for such improvements when needed, a developer shall pay to the city the sum of $100.00 per lot prior to approval of the final plat, such sum to be maintained and used only for stormwater and drainage maintenance and improvements throughout the city. 
(Code 1999, § 33.030) 
Sec. 32-12. - Consideration of public property. 
    The subdivider shall consult with the city planning commission at the time that their sketch plan is under consideration to secure their recommendation as to the location of any property that should be dedicated to the public, such as future parks, playgrounds, or similar features. The preliminary plat shall show the location and dimensions of all areas reserved or to be dedicated in this manner. 
(Code 1999, § 33.040) 
Secs. 32-13-32-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 32-43. - Generally. 
    To facilitate the handling of plats and to establish a definite procedure for the consideration of the many problems involved in preparing and recording a plat to be approved and recorded, the following procedure is approved by the city council: 
(1)  An applicant for a minor subdivision shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city, including all required materials and fees for the consideration of the planning commission and the city council. 
(2)  After receiving tentative approval of the preliminary plat, the owner shall enter into a development agreement with the city council guaranteeing the improvement and development of the property as described elsewhere in this chapter. 
(3)  After entering into the agreements required in subsection (2) of this section, the owner shall submit final plats as described elsewhere in this chapter. 
(4)  The final plats shall be recorded by the owner, at his expense, after approval by the city council and all county agencies having to do with these matters. 
(Code 1999, § 28.010) 
Sec. 32-44. - Preliminary information available. 
    Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the developer is invited to obtain available information as to the general feasibility of the plan that is to be proposed. Such an owner or developer may receive a copy of the platting ordinance of the city and is urged to discuss the provisions of this chapter with city officials before submitting a plan. 
(Code 1999, § 28.020) 
Sec. 32-45. - Sketch plan. 
    Before submitting the required preliminary plat for approval, the owner may submit a sketch plan showing the general layout of blocks and streets as proposed for the subdivision. This sketch may be submitted to the city clerk, who, in turn, shall submit it to the planning commission for study to determine whether such a plan would be feasible and in compliance with the general rules and regulations of the city. The owner is not required to submit a sketch plan, and the report of the planning commission on such a plan is not binding on the city, nor shall it affect subsequent considerations of the preliminary and final plats. This service is offered to owners in an effort to acquaint them with the rudimental principles of platting property in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 28.030) 
Sec. 32-46. - Park dedication determination. 
    Before appearing at the planning commission hearing, the subdivider shall meet with the city staff to review park dedication requirements. At such meeting, the subdivider and city staff shall determine how they intend to meet the requirements of dedication of land or money for parks. 
(Code 1999, § 28.040) 
Sec. 32-47. - Preliminary plat. 
    The owner shall file with the city clerk four copies of the preliminary plat and a cash fee to use for the expense of the city in connection with the approval or disapproval of the plat and the approval or disapproval of any final plat which may thereafter be submitted. 
(Code 1999, § 28.050) 
Sec. 32-48. - Fees. 
(a)  The fee to be paid to the city clerk when a preliminary plat is submitted shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  In addition to the fee for application for a preliminary plat, whenever the preliminary plat contains more than four acres or ten lots, the applicant shall pay for engineering, legal and other consultant expenses in excess of $50.00, incurred by the city to process and consider the preliminary plat application. The applicant, in such case, shall tender with their fee a cash deposit or a surety bond in the amount specified in the city fee schedule to guarantee payment of this obligation. In the event of such cash deposit, the clerk shall refund all unused portions of the deposit in excess of $50.00. 
(Code 1999, § 28.060) 
Sec. 32-49. - Distribution of tentative plat copies. 
    Upon receipt of seven copies of a tentative plat, the city clerk shall refer one copy to the city planner, city engineer, and city attorney, and the remaining copies shall be filed in the city hall. 
(Code 1999, § 28.070) 
Sec. 32-50. - Clerk to deposit fee. 
    The city clerk shall deposit any money received as fees under this article to the credit of the general fund of the city, and no money shall be refunded to the applicant, nor shall any additional charge other than the fee stipulated in section 32-48 be made or collected regardless of the cost of processing the plat. 
(Code 1999, § 28.080) 
Sec. 32-51. - Public hearing before planning commission. 
    The planning commission's hearing on the preliminary plat shall be a public hearing, preceded by at least ten days' published notice of the same in the official newspaper and mailing notices to property owners within 350 feet of the proposed plat. 
(Code 1999, § 28.090) 
Sec. 32-52. - Planning commission to report. 
    The planning commission shall report its findings to the city council within 60 days after receipt of the preliminary plat at a meeting of the planning commission, or the city council may take action without such report. 
(Code 1999, § 28.100) 
Sec. 32-53. - City engineer, attorney, and planner. 
    The report of the city engineer, city attorney, and city planner shall be due within 15 days from receipt of such plat. 
(Code 1999, § 28.110) 
Sec. 32-54. - Preliminary plat hearing before council. 
(a)  The city council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within 90 days after referring it to the planning commission. Notice of the city council hearing shall be as set forth in section 32-51. The city clerk shall notify the subdivider that the plat has been approved or disapproved and if it has been disapproved, the notice to the subdivider shall state the reason for such disapproval. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not be construed to be approval of the final plat. 
(b)  If approved, the city engineer shall authenticate the preliminary plat which was approved by the city council and the same shall be retained by the clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 28.120) 
Sec. 32-55. - Improvement agreements. 
    After the preliminary plat has been approved by the city council and before any final plat is submitted for approval, the subdivider shall execute and submit to the city council an agreement, which shall be binding on their heirs, personal representatives, and assigns, that they will cause no private construction to be made on the plat or file or cause to be filed any application for building permits for such construction until all improvements required by this chapter have been made or arranged for in the manner following as respects the streets to which the lots sought to be platted have access. 
(Code 1999, § 28.130) 
Sec. 32-56. - Estimated cost of improvements. 
    After final plats have been submitted for approval, but before such approval is granted by the city council, the city engineer shall review the estimated total cost of construction of all streets and public utilities in accordance with the minimum requirements described elsewhere in this Code. This estimate shall include costs of city engineering services in connection with the design and construction of these improvements. 
(Code 1999, § 28.140) 
Sec. 32-57. - Cash deposit or performance bond. 
(a)  Before approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall be required to deposit with the city clerk an amount of money equal to 11/2 times the city engineer's estimated total costs of any road or utility improvements or light pole installation. This deposit may be either cash or an indemnity bond, with sureties satisfactory to the city, conditioned, if the subdivider defaults, upon the payment of all construction costs incurred by the city in the making or completing of such improvements and all expense incurred by the city for engineering, legal fees and other incidental expense in connection with the making of such improvement. 
(b)  This requirement may be satisfied by having the contractor who is to perform the work provide the above security (cash deposit or performance bond), either separately or as a part of the security that the contractor provides to the subdivider, in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1999, § 28.150) 
Sec. 32-58. - Maintenance bond. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 32-57, the subdivider shall also furnish, immediately after acceptance of each road or utility improvement, a surety bond, cash deposit, or letter of credit to be approved by the city attorney in the amount of 20 percent of the total construction cost, or, as specified by the city engineer, to maintain the work in good condition for a period of one year from and after the date of acceptance of all roads and utility improvements within the subdivision. The subdivider may not release any security until they have received a release from the city. The security required in this section may be part of the same security required under section 32-57. 
(Code 1999, § 28.152) 
Sec. 32-59. - Improvements may be partial. 
(a)  It is not the intent of this article that the subdivider must, at one time, develop the entire plat by the making of all the required improvements so long as section 32-57 is complied with prior to commencement of construction of each segment of the improvements. 
(b)  No building permits will be granted except on the lots having access to streets and utilities on which required improvements have been made or arranged for by a cash deposit. 
(Code 1999, § 28.160) 
Sec. 32-60. - Approval of work. 
    All of the improvements required under the provisions of this Code shall be designed by a professional engineer in accordance with the city or other applicable governmental specifications and subject to the prior approval of the city council and the city engineer of the plans and specifications. 
(Code 1999, § 28.170) 
Sec. 32-61. - Excess money to be returned. 
    Upon the completion of the project involved in the construction of required improvements and after all costs have been paid, all monies remaining from the deposit of the developer shall be returned by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 28.180) 
Sec. 32-62. - Final plat. 
    After the subdivider has complied with all the foregoing requirements of this chapter, they may submit final plats to the city for approval. If the final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat, review by the planning commission is not required, as determined by the city planner. In addition to the customary plats and tracing that are required to be recorded in the county offices of record, the subdivider shall furnish the city clerk with a tracing or transparent sepia and two copies of the final plat. 
(Code 1999, § 28.190) 
Sec. 32-63. - Time limit. 
    A subdivider shall submit a proposed final plat to the city within two years of the city's approval of the preliminary plat. Failure to do so will void the approval of the preliminary plat and require the subdivider to resubmit and renew the preliminary plat procedure. 
(Code 1999, § 28.192) 
Sec. 32-64. - Clerk to submit plats. 
    Upon receiving final plats, the city clerk shall submit them to the city council for final approval. The clerk shall also submit a certified statement to the city council that the platting requirements have been complied with and that the following items have been filed in the clerk's office: 
(1)  A copy of the tentative plat. 
(2)  A report from the planning commission recommending approval of the tentative plat. 
(3)  Reports from the city engineer, including an improvement cost estimate as required by this article. 
(4)  An agreement in accordance with section 32-57. 
(5)  A record of cash deposit or a performance bond in accordance with section 32-57. 
(6)  Reports from the city attorney, including a statement that the agreement and sureties therewith are satisfactory. 
(Code 1999, § 28.200) 
Sec. 32-65. - Review before city council of proposed final plat. 
    After the final plat has been received and determined complete by the city council, it shall, at its next regular meeting, approve or disapprove the proposed final plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in the proceedings of the city council and reported to the person applying for such approval. 
(Code 1999, § 28.210) 
Sec. 32-66. - Resubdivisions. 
    Whenever an existing plat is resubdivided, the owner shall comply with all the requirements of the chapters on platting deemed applicable by the city council acting upon the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Code 1999, § 28.220) 
Sec. 32-67. - Subdivider to record plat. 
    After the final plats have been approved by the city council and signed by the mayor and the city clerk, the subdivider shall record the plat in the county office of record within 60 days after the date of such final approval by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 28.230) 
Secs. 32-68-32-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 32-93. - Public improvements. 
    All public improvements shall be made in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer in accordance with the requirements and standard specifications of the city. All public improvement construction performed by the developer is under the supervision and direction of the city engineer, who shall be responsible only to the city council. The city council may, upon the request of the owner, allow the improvement of only part of the streets and utilities in a subdivision at one time; provided, however, that the time for completion of the total required construction shall have been agreed between the city council and the subdivider prior to the acceptance of the final plat. Any agreement permitting partial improvements shall include a stipulation that no building permits will be requested or issued, except on lots having access to streets on which the required improvements have been completed or arranged for in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 29.010) 
Sec. 32-94. - Cost of supervision. 
    The city engineer shall estimate the cost of supervising the construction of public improvements required by this article, and the developer shall make a cash deposit of such amount which shall be used to pay the city engineer for such supervision costs. No work shall be commenced prior to such cash deposit. 
(Code 1999, § 29.012) 
Sec. 32-95. - Required land improvements. 
    No final plat shall be approved by the city council without first receiving a report signed by the city engineer and the city attorney certifying that the improvements described in this article have been arranged for in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(Code 1999, § 29.020) 
Sec. 32-96. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Sanitary sewers and services to the property line shall be installed to serve all properties in the subdivision where a connection to a city sanitary sewer system is available, or where detailed plans and specifications for sanitary sewers to serve the subdivision are available. 
(b)  Storm sewers shall be constructed to serve all properties in the subdivision where a connection to a city storm sewer system is available, or where detailed plans and specifications for storm sewers to serve the subdivision are available. 
(c)  Where a connection to the city water system is presently available, water distribution facilities, including pipe fittings, hydrants, service to property line, etc., shall be installed to serve all properties within the subdivision. Water mains shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter. 
(d)  Streets shall be graded in accordance with the plan prepared by the city engineer and approved by the city council. The grading shall include the entire width of the right-of-way and shall provide for boulevards in addition to a driving surface having a minimum width of 28 feet from face-of-curb to face-of-curb. 
(e)  The owner shall furnish all necessary rights-of-way and easements at no cost to the city. 
(f)  Drainage and utility easements in compliance with the applicable requirements of this Code or as otherwise required by the city council shall be furnished by the owner at no cost to the city. 
(g)  Where all utilities have not been installed in the street, street construction shall be in accordance with section 30-54. 
(h)  Where sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water mains have been installed in the street, concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed on both sides of the street. Minor, cul-de-sac, and marginal access street surfacing shall be designed for a seven-ton axle load and may have either concrete or asphalt surfacing. If a concrete street is constructed, an integral curb may be used in lieu of concrete curb and gutter. 
(i)  All boulevards shall be sodded. Sodding shall take place on the boulevards in front of any lot only after the house is constructed. 
(j)  Boulevard trees shall not be planted without approval of the city as to type and placement. The city may prohibit planting of trees within public rights-of-way. 
(k)  Street signs shall be placed at each intersection. The design and exact location shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1999, § 29.030) 
Sec. 32-97. - Half-width streets. 
    The dedication of half-width streets along boundary lines of proposed plats shall not be approved except as follows: 
(1)  Where a half street has been dedicated and recorded on the opposite side of the boundary line. In these cases, the dedication of a matching half street shall be a requirement. 
(2)  Where it is evident to the planning commission or city council that the proper layout of the proposed plat cannot be satisfactorily accomplished in any other way. 
(Code 1999, § 29.040) 
Sec. 32-98. - Construction in half-width right-of-way. 
    The construction of a street within a half-width right-of-way is prohibited except as follows: 
(1)  When a half street is adjacent to side lot lines only, in which case, the subdivider shall deposit cash or furnish a bond to the city guaranteeing three-fourths of the cost as estimated by the engineer for the construction of a full-width street. 
(2)  Where a half-width street right-of-way is adjacent to a recorded or dedicated half-width right-of-way on the opposite side of a property boundary line, the subdivider shall be required to grade the entire width of the driving surface, i.e., between gutter lines. The construction of a boulevard, curbing and boulevard sodding as described in section 32-96 shall be required on the side of the street which is being developed. 
(3)  Where the construction of a half-width street is permitted under the provisions of subsection (1) or (2) of this section, the developer or subdivider shall be required to deposit cash or furnish a bond guaranteeing three-fourths of the estimated cost of a bituminous surface for the entire width, and such deposit or bond may be held by the city to guarantee payment for such bituminous surfacing at a later date. 
(4)  No building permit shall be issued for property fronting on a half-width street unless and until the half of the street situated on such property has been dedicated and the owners of such property have complied with each and every requirement of the chapters relative to the construction of streets. 
(Code 1999, § 29.050) 
Secs. 32-99-32-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLATS 

Sec. 32-125. - Necessary data for preliminary plat. 
    In addition to the data prescribed by state law, the preliminary plat shall include the required materials and fees as specified on applicable application forms made available by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 30.010) 
Sec. 32-126. - Requirements governing approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  The planning commission may recommend and the city council may require such changes or revisions as the city council deems necessary for the health, safety, general welfare and convenience of the city. 
(b)  The approval of a preliminary plan by the planning commission and the city council is tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout as submitted. 
(c)  Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals pertaining to water supply, storm drainage, sewerage and sewage disposal, gas and electric service, grading, gradients and roadway widths, and the surfacing of streets by the city engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction, prior to the approval of the final plat by the city. 
(d)  Stormwater drainage criteria and concepts shall be set forth in sufficient detail so as to meet approval of the city engineer and all watershed and subwatershed governmental entities. It is intended that the developer here set forth a general plan for control or diversion of stormwaters. 
(Code 1999, § 30.020) 
Sec. 32-127. - Land subject to flooding or containing poor drainage facilities. 
    No plan will be approved for a subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains poor drainage facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the city engineer, make the area completely safe for residential occupancy, and provide adequate street and lot drainage, the preliminary plan of the subdivision may be approved. 
(Code 1999, § 30.030) 
Sec. 32-128. - Soil tests. 
    The city engineer may require soil tests prior to the final approval of any plat. These soil tests shall consist of test holes to a depth necessary to determine the various types of soil to be encountered before reaching a stable base. Such test holes, when ordered by the city authorities, shall be drilled at the expense of the owner or developer, and the information disclosed shall be furnished to the city council, together with a copy of the proposed plat showing the location of each test hole. The information required by the city council shall include a report as to the various types of soil encountered and their depths, the level of the groundwater and a seepage test and may include additional information. The number of test holes to be drilled and their location on the property which is proposed to be platted will be as directed by the city council or their authorized representative. In questionable cases, the owner shall be required to furnish to the city council a report from a recognized engineering laboratory as to the safety and practicability of the use of the area for building construction, including the feasibility for installation of sewage facilities. 
(Code 1999, § 30.040) 
Sec. 32-129. - Final plats. 
(a)  Final plats shall be drawn to conform with all the rules and regulations of the county plat commission and existing state laws governing the platting of property in the county. To satisfy city requirements, the final plat application shall contain the required materials and fees specified on the applicable application forms made available by the city. 
(b)  For all subdivisions in the floodplain, floodway and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents. 
(Code 1999, § 30.060) 
Sec. 32-130. - Plat names. 
    No plat shall contain the name of any city (except this city) or town which is situated within the county or any contiguous county. 
(Code 1999, § 30.070) 
Secs. 32-131-32-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LOTS 

Sec. 32-159. - Individual lot requirements. 
(a)  Each lot shall conform to the requirements of this article pertaining to general minimum requirements. 
(b)  Where sanitary sewer or city water is available, connection to each lot shall be mandatory. Connections from the main to the property line shall be placed prior to the surfacing of the street. 
(c)  The use of double-facing and flag lots shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Each lot shall provide an adequate building site at least one foot above street grade. This requirement may be waived upon approval of the city council. 
(e)  All lots shall be drainable. In cases where adequate drainage is not evident because of the contour of the land, the subdivider must agree to a definite plan for the drainage of such lot prior to the approval of the final plat; failure to do so shall be sufficient reason for the denial of a building permit by the city inspector. 
(f)  Butt lots in any subdivision are to be discouraged. Where such lots must be used to fit a particular type of design, they shall have an average width of at least five feet greater than the width otherwise required. 
(Code 1999, § 30.010) 
Secs. 32-160-32-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STREETS AND EASEMENTS 

Sec. 32-187. - Minimum street and utility easement widths. 
    The following standards for street widths, utility easement widths and other dimensions involved in plat design shall be considered the minimum: 
(1)  All interior street rights-of-way shall be at least 50 feet wide, however, the city may require additional right-of-way to be dedicated to accommodate utilities, trail/sidewalk facilities, or for other reasons as determined necessary by the city council. 
(2)  Alleys are not permitted in residential areas unless it can be shown that their use is essential to a proper plan. Where alleys are used in a proposed business or industrial area, they shall be not less than 24 feet in width. 
(3)  A cul-de-sac shall not exceed 600 feet in length. At the closed end of each cul-de-sac, there shall be a dedicated turnaround area with a radius of at least 60 feet. The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured on the centerline between the main street and the center of the turnaround. 
(4)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets are prohibited. 
(5)  Pedestrian ways shall be prohibited except in cases where their use is deemed a necessity by the planning commission. 
(6)  Utility and drainage easements of ten feet on front and rear and five feet on each side of each lot. 
(7)  The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,320 feet. 
(8)  Where a subdivision borders upon a railroad or limited access highway right-of-way, a street may be required approximately parallel to, and at a distance suitable for appropriate use of, the intervening land as for park purposes in residential districts, or for parking, commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and possible future grade separation. 
(9)  Where horizontal street lines within a block deflect from each other at any one point more than ten degrees, there shall be a connecting curve. Streets shall be so aligned that jogs with centerline offsets with less than 125 feet shall not be necessary. 
(10)  Upon advice from the city engineer, the city council may vary the width of the street right-of-way based upon the type of use and location of the street. 
(Code 1999, § 32.010; Ord. No. 729 , § VIII, 9-18-2018) 
Sec. 32-188. - Street lights. 
    In conjunction with street construction, the developer shall install the necessary street light poles and the fixtures in accordance with section 30-57. Security for completion of such installation shall be provided as set forth in section 32-57. 
(Code 1999, § 32.020) 
Secs. 32-189-32-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PARK LANDS AND NATURAL FEATURES 

Sec. 32-215. - Protection of natural features. 
    The city council reserves the right to decline approval of a subdivision if due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural features such as large trees, watercourses, scenic points, historical spots and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness, stability and value to the property. 
(Code 1999, § 33.010) 
Sec. 32-216. - No net loss of park land. 
    It is the policy of the city that there be no net loss of park land, in accordance with the policy more particularly set forth in the city's comprehensive park plan, as amended. 
(Code 1999, § 33.015) 
Sec. 32-217. - Dedication of land for parks. 
    Pursuant to M.S.A. § 462.358, subd. 2, and because a development creates an additional need for parks and recreation area, the city council shall require: 
(1)  For residential development. 
a.  That the developer dedicate to the city a portion of their site based upon the formula shown by the following table. The area so dedicated shall be suitable for park and recreation use. 
Formula for Land Dedication 
Proposed Number of Dwelling Units Per Acre Percentage of Site Which May Be Required for Park Dedication 2.0 9 percent 2.1-4.0 11 percent 4.1-6.0 13 percent 6.1-8.0 15 percent 8.1-10.0 17 percent 10.0+ Add one percent for each dwelling unit per acre beyond 10 and up to a maximum of 20 percent.  
b.  That the developer grant to the city for park and recreation purposes a sum of money in place of the land dedication required in subsection (1)a of this section. The option of whether the developer should dedicate either land or cash shall be at the discretion of the city council. Such money shall be placed in a special fund for park and recreation use, shall be deposited with the city clerk prior to approval of the final plat, and shall be refunded if the final plat is not approved. 
c.  That developers of sites of 20 lots/units or less in size are required to grant money in place of land according to the following formula: $1,500.00 per lot or unit. 
d.  That developers of sites of more than 20 lots/units grant money in place of land equal to a percentage of the fair market value of the undeveloped site or in accordance with the dwelling unit fee table above, whichever is greater. Such percentage shall be based upon the following table. The value of the undeveloped site shall be determined by the city clerk by reference to current market data, if available, or by obtaining an appraisal of the land from a licensed real estate appraiser. The developer shall pay for the land appraisal. Such dedicated money shall be placed in a special fund for park and recreation use, shall be deposited with the city clerk prior to approval of the final plat, and shall be refunded if the final plat is not approved. At its discretion, the city council, for good cause, may defer the payment of such dedication fee until the time of issuance of the building permit. 
Formula for Cash Dedication in Place of Land Development Sites of More Than Two Lots (Units) 
Proposed Number of Dwelling Units Per Acre Percentage of Appraised Undeveloped Land Value Which May be Required for Park Dedication 0-2.0 9 percent 2.0-4.0 11 percent 4.0-6.0 13 percent 6.0-8.0 15 percent 8.0-10.0 17 percent More than 10.0 Add one percent for each dwelling unit per acre beyond ten up to a maximum of 20 percent  
e.  That if the amount of land dedicated to the city by the developer only partially fulfills the requirements set forth in subsection (1)a of this section, the city council requires that the developer apply the applicable formula in subsection (1)d of this section to the unmet portion of their dedication requirement. 
f.  That the developer create, and a private entity maintain, some form of on-site recreation for use by the site's residents, particularly pre-school children. This requirement may be in addition to the dedication of land or cash for park and recreation purposes. The city council will review this private recreation design during the preliminary plat approval process. 
(2)  For commercial or industrial development. 
a.  That the developer shall pay to the city a fee, as provided in the city fee schedule, for each 1,000 square feet of proposed building for any commercial or industrial use except those uses set forth in subsections (2) b and c of this section. 
b.  The developer shall pay to the city a fee as, provided in the city fee schedule, for each 1,000 square feet of proposed building for uses as follows: 
1.  Warehousing; 
2.  Low labor intensive light manufacturing/assembly (one or less employee per 1,000 square feet of structure); 
3.  Other low labor intensive uses. 
c.  The developers of hotels and motels pay to the city a fee, as provided in the city fee schedule, per hotel and motel unit. 
d.  All such money must be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
e.  The above shall apply to new buildings and additions to existing buildings. 
(Code 1999, § 33.020) 
Chapter 34 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - State law adopted. 
    The regulatory provisions and definitions of M.S.A. ch. 169 are adopted in this section, for purposes of regulating the use of highways, streets, alleys and other portions of the city, as if set out herein in full. 
(Code 1999, § 76.010) 
Sec. 34-2. - Driving regulations on private roadways or in parking lots. 
    On any private roadways or parking lots which are used by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic by permission of the owner, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  The police department of the city may post signs at any entrances to such roads or lots from public streets to designate one-way traffic for entrance or exit, and drivers of vehicles entering or leaving such lots shall comply with the posted signs. 
(2)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on such a roadway or parking lot at a speed greater than is safe and reasonable under existing conditions, and in no event greater than any speed which has been posted by the owner. 
(3)  No motor vehicle shall be parked or allowed to stand on such roadway or parking lot in any area which is designated as no parking or which is used as a lane for moving traffic. 
(4)  No motor vehicle shall be parked or allowed to stand at a curb which is painted yellow. 
(5)  No motor vehicle shall be parked or allowed to stand where such area is posted as a fire lane. 
(6)  A police officer may issue a citation for expired or improper license or any equipment violation pertaining to a motor vehicle while such vehicle is within a parking lot open to the public. 
(Code 1999, § 76.030) 
Secs. 34-3-34-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 34-23. - Generally. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle or combination thereof, as defined by M.S.A. § 169.822, upon any road in the city where a gross weight on any single wheel exceeds 9,000 pounds or where the gross weight on any single axle exceeds 18,000 pounds; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall not restrict the operation of authorized emergency or road maintenance vehicles, and provided further that the gross weight of a rear loading refuse compactor collection vehicle used solely for transporting solid waste on the city roads shall not exceed 22,000 pounds on a single axle, 40,000 pounds on both axles, 32,000 pounds on a tandem axle, and 50,000 pounds on three axles. The provisions of this section shall be subject to temporary frost condition provisions contained in section 32-24. 
(Code 1999, § 76.110) 
Sec. 34-24. - Temporary frost conditions. 
    During the general period of March 1 to May 15 of each year, the city engineer shall have authority, at his discretion, to restrict or prohibit vehicular traffic on the city streets when frost conditions and base conditions are such that material damage may result to the street by vehicular use. The exact dates of the road restrictions will follow the schedule determined by the state department of transportation. The city engineer shall cause to be erected and maintained signs or barricades on the streets or portions so restricted, or if the restrictions are city wide, temporary signs at the main entrances to the city. During temporary frost condition periods, the city engineer shall require that rear loading refuse compactor vehicle's gross weight on any single wheel not exceed 9,000 pounds or gross weight on any single axle not exceed 18,000 pounds. 
(Code 1999, § 76.120) 
Sec. 34-25. - Permit authorized. 
    Upon application in writing and good cause shown, the city clerk may issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to exceed weight limitations. Such application shall be approved by the city public works supervisor. The application shall contain the name of the applicant, the vehicle to be used, the load to be transported, the roads to be used, the time, the number of trips, the reason such exception is necessary and such other information as may be required. The application may be approved or denied by the city public works supervisor. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers. If more than one vehicle is involved, a permit and paid fee for each will be required. 
(Code 1999, § 76.130) 
Sec. 34-26. - Road damage liability bond. 
    In cases where load limitation variances are granted, the city engineer may require a bond or cash deposit to cover the cost of repairing or replacing any street that might be damaged as a result of vehicles being permitted to exceed load limitation. Such bond or cash deposit shall not exceed $10,000.00 per vehicle authorized to exceed load limits, and such bond or deposit shall be on hand in the office of the city clerk prior to issuance of any variance permit. 
(Code 1999, § 76.140) 
Sec. 34-27. - Civil liability. 
    Any person driving any vehicle upon city roads shall be liable for all damage which the road may sustain as a result of any illegal operation or as a result of any operation of a vehicle exceeding the restriction of this article but authorized by special permit. 
(Code 1999, § 76.110) 
Secs. 34-28-34-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 

Sec. 34-58. - Parking after snowfall. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall park any vehicle on any street for a period of 48 hours, commencing immediately after the accumulation of two inches or more of snowfall, or until snow removal has been completed on such street, whichever occurs first. Further, no on-street parking shall occur as described in section 34-59. 
(b)  Removal of illegally parked vehicle. Any vehicle parked in violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance which interferes with snow removal from streets, creating hazardous road conditions impeding or likely to impede the free movement of vehicular traffic, and any authorized city agent may remove or cause to be removed, summarily, any such vehicle, by means of towing or otherwise, or the agent may require the driver or owner to remove the vehicle from the paved, improved or traveled portion of the street. 
(c)  Notice to owner. As soon as practicable after any vehicle has been removed for parking in violation of this section, the clerk shall provide notice, in writing, to the person shown to be the owner of such vehicle by the registration. The notice will include a description of the vehicle, together with the license number, the approximate time and reason for removal, and the place to which the vehicle has been removed. 
(d)  Reclaiming vehicle. Before any vehicle that has been removed can be reclaimed by the owner or other claimant, that person shall satisfactorily establish their right, title or interest to the vehicle, and pay all costs and charges in connection with the towing, removal and storage of such vehicle. The payment of the charges shall not preclude a prosecution for violation of any provision of this Code. 
(Code 1999, §§ 77.010-77.040) 
Sec. 34-59. - Time limitation for parking on streets. 
    No vehicle shall be parked on any street from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. from November 1 of each year to April 1 of the succeeding year. No truck or tractor-trailer with a capacity of over two tons shall be parked on any street for more than 90 minutes or for the time necessary to continuously load or unload such vehicle. 
(Code 1999, § 77.050) 
Sec. 34-60. - Parked vehicles obstructing traffic. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any street, whether attended or unattended (except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device), unless a clear and unobstructed width of at least 15 feet of such part of the paved street opposite such standing vehicle is left for free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicle is available from a distance of 100 feet in each direction upon such street. 
(b)  A vehicle in violation of this section may be towed four hours after issuance of a citation; however, the four-hour waiting period may be exempted if the vehicle is parked within the right-of-way of a controlled access highway or within the traveled portion of a public street. The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing, storage, and associated charges. 
(Code 1999, §§ 77.060, 77.061) 
Secs. 34-61-34-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SNOWMOBILES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 

Sec. 34-79. - State law adopted. 
    M.S.A. §§ 84.81 through 84.90, inclusive, and Minn. R. 6100.5000 through 6100.5700, inclusive, including subsequent amendments, are adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(Code 1999, § 78.010) 
Sec. 34-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or recreational vehicle. 
    Operator means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile or recreational vehicle. 
    Owner means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile or a recreational motor vehicle, entitled to the use or possession of. 
    Recreational motor vehicle or R.V. means any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, snowmobiles, trail bikes or other all-terrain vehicles, hovercrafts, or motor vehicles licensed for highway operation which is being used for off-road recreational purposes. 
    Snowmobile means a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice steered by skis or runners, except for those vehicles excluded from the definition by M.S.A. § 84.81, subd. 3(1) through (6). 
(Code 1999, § 78.020) 
Sec. 34-81. - Operation. 
    Except as otherwise specifically permitted, it is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or recreational vehicle: 
(1)  Within the right-of-way of any city street. 
(2)  On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  On boulevards within any city public right-of-way. 
(4)  On private property of another without written/dated/signed permission of the owner or person in control of the property, which permission shall be on the operator's person. 
(5)  Upon any school grounds without written/dated/signed permission of responsible school authority, which permission shall be on the operator's person. 
(6)  On any other public place or ground except as may be specifically permitted by other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 78.030) 
Sec. 34-82. - Crossing. 
    A snowmobile or recreational vehicle may make a direct crossing of a street or highway (except an interstate highway or freeway) as follows: 
(1)  The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing. 
(2)  The snowmobile or recreational vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street or highway and is then walked across the street or highway. 
(3)  The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming vehicles or pedestrians which constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 1999, § 78.040) 
Sec. 34-83. - Hours. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile or recreational vehicle not licensed for highway use or a recreational vehicle licensed for highway use when operating on private property: 
(1)  During the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. of any day of the week. 
(2)  Within 100 feet of any skating rink or sliding area where the operation would conflict with its use or endanger other persons or operations. 
(Code 1999, § 78.050) 
Sec. 34-84. - Equipment. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or recreational vehicle unless it is equipped with the following: 
(1)  Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile and recreational vehicle under any condition of operation. 
(2)  A safety or so-called "dead man's" throttle in operating condition. 
(3)  If driven during darkness, a headlamp and taillight visible from at least 100 feet and made of a reflective material so as to reflect lights at a 90-degree angle. 
(Code 1999, § 78.060) 
Sec. 34-85. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to snowmobiles and recreational vehicles used by governmental agencies in the pursuit of their duties or during emergency use due to adverse weather. 
(Code 1999, § 78.070) 
Sec. 34-86. - Licensing of recreational vehicles. 
(a)  All owners of recreational vehicles must register such vehicles with the city and be issued registration letters or numbers to affix to the vehicles. The registration fee will be as provided in the city fee schedule. Letters or numbers shall be as supplied by the city. 
(b)  Upon receiving the registration numbers or letters, the owners of each recreational vehicle shall affix them in such a manner as to be easily visible and be kept free of snow or mud. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles licensed by the state are exempt from the licensing requirements of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 78.080) 
Secs. 34-87-34-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS 

Sec. 34-116. - Operation and regulation of motorized golf carts. 
    Persons who are physically handicapped, as defined in M.S.A. § 169.345, subd. 2, are authorized to operate motorized golf carts on designated roadways or portions thereof within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 79.010; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-117. - Permit required. 
    No person shall operate a motorized golf cart on city streets without obtaining a permit from the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 79.020; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-118. - Application. 
    Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The nature of the applicant's physical handicap. 
(4)  The roadways or portion thereof on which the motorized golf cart will be operated. 
(5)  The time of operation of the motorized golf cart. 
(6)  Such other information as the city may require. 
(Code 1999, § 79.030; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-119. - Permit. 
(a)  Term of permit. Permits shall be granted for a period not to exceed one year and may be renewed annually. 
(b)  Conditions of permit. No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant must demonstrate that they are a physically handicapped person as defined in M.S.A. § 169.345, subd. 2. 
(2)  The applicant must submit a certificate signed by a physician that the applicant is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways designated. 
(3)  The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with the provisions of M.S.A. § 65B.48, subd. 5. 
(c)  Permit fee. The fee for a permit shall be set by the city council as part of the annual fee resolution. 
(Code 1999, § 79.040; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-120. - Designation of roadways. 
    Golf carts may be operated on city streets as designated by the permit. 
(Code 1999, § 79.050; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-121. - Times of operation. 
    Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet. 
(Code 1999, § 79.060; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-122. - Slow moving vehicle emblem. 
    Motorized golf carts shall display the slow moving vehicle emblem, provided for in M.S.A. § 169.522, when operated on designated roadways. 
(Code 1999, § 79.070; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-123. - Application of traffic laws. 
    Every person operating a motorized golf cart under permit on designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of M.S.A. ch. 169, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts except as otherwise specifically provided in M.S.A. § 169.045, subd. 7. 
(Code 1999, § 79.080; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-124. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
    The city may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this section or M.S.A. ch. 169, or if there is evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart on the designated roadways. 
(Code 1999, § 79.090; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-125. - Sidewalks; trails. 
    No person shall operate a motorized golf cart on a public sidewalk or trail unless otherwise authorized. 
(Code 1999, § 79.100; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-126. - Liability. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the operation of a motorized golf cart by a permit holder or the failure by the city to revoke the permit. 
(Code 1999, § 79.110; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 34-127. - Penalty. 
    Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 79.120; Ord. No. 455, 9-2-1997) 
Secs. 34-128-34-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 34-153. - Purpose. 
    The city authorized by resolution the use of administrative citations for specific traffic offenses, as permitted by the legislature in M.S.A. § 169.999. The city is required by that statute to establish and maintain procedures through which motorists receiving administrative citations may obtain an independent hearing or judicial review of a citation. The city council finds that establishing a voluntary administrative citation procedure ensures the availability of an independent hearing and retains full opportunity to obtain judicial review of a citation. 
(Code 1999, § 80.010; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-154. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Citation means an administrative citation issued to a motorist for a designated traffic offense occurring within the city. 
    Designated traffic offense means those traffic offenses eligible for administrative citation as designated by M.S.A. § 169.999, subd. 1(b)(1), (2) and (3), as it may be amended from time to time. 
    Flyer means a document which informs a person receiving an administrative citation of: 
(1)  The recipient's right to challenge the citation or opt for a standard criminal citation; 
(2)  The city's process for handling challenges to administrative traffic citations; 
(3)  The process for paying a traffic citation; and 
(4)  The effect of an administrative traffic citation on a recipient's driving record. 
    Issuing officer means the licensed peace officer employed by or under contract with the city who issues any particular administrative citation. 
    Recipient means the person who receives an administrative citation under this article. 
(Code 1999, § 80.020; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-155. - Authorization. 
    Licensed peace officers employed or under contract with the city may issue administrative citations for designated traffic offenses occurring within the city. The fine for committing a designated traffic offense shall be the amount stated in M.S.A. § 169.999, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1999, § 80.110; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-156. - Form of citation. 
    An issuing officer must use the uniform administrative traffic citation form approved by the commissioner of public safety. The officer shall also serve upon the recipient the current version of the city's flyer and response form. 
(Code 1999, § 80.120; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-157. - Response to citation. 
(a)  A recipient shall respond to the citation within 14 days of receipt. The recipient may: 
(1)  Admit the violation stated in the citation and agree to pay the fine; 
(2)  Deny the violation stated in the citation and request a hearing; or 
(3)  Request that the administrative citation be converted to a standard traffic citation and filed for processing by the violations bureau of the county district court. 
(b)  The city shall approve a response form as part of the flyer which states these options and gives directions for returning the response form. A recipient shall deliver the response form, or similar writing, to an address stated on the form before the close of business on the 14th day (or next business day if the 14th day is a weekend or holiday) stating the recipient's choice for processing of the citation. 
(Code 1999, § 80.130; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-158. - Sheriff's department to coordinate citations. 
    The city designates the county sheriff's department as its agent for management of the administrative citations program. The department shall receive citation responses, assign administrative traffic cases to a hearing officer whose appointment the city has approved, collect fine revenue, account for the citation revenue and maintain funds as required by state law. The personnel assigned the duties of managing the program by the sheriff's department shall be referred to in this article as the city's designee. This designation is not intended to create, and shall not create, a joint powers relationship between the city and the department relating to the management of administrative citations. 
(Code 1999, § 80.140; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-159. - Standard citation issued if no response. 
    If the city's designee receives no written response to a citation within the 14-day response period, the peace officer who issued the citation shall convert the allegations into a standard traffic citation, file that regular citation at the district court and mail a copy to the recipient. 
(Code 1999, § 80.150; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-160. - Hearing officers. 
    The city shall maintain a list of hearing officers available to conduct hearings on the merits of an administrative citation if requested by a recipient. All hearing officers shall be approved by the city council. Hearing officers shall have executed a contract to provide hearing officer services with at least one of the following entities: Ramsey County; City of Arden Hills; City of Gem Lake; City of Little Canada; City of North Oaks; City of Shoreview; City of Vadnais Heights or Town of White Bear. 
(Code 1999, § 80.160; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-161. - Request for hearing. 
    If the recipient responds by requesting a hearing, the city's designee at the county sheriff's department shall assign the case to a hearing officer on the list. The designee assigning the case shall notify the hearing officer, the recipient and the issuing officer of the assignment in writing. The hearing officer shall schedule a hearing within 28 days of receiving the notice. Any delays in holding the hearing shall be reported to the city's designee by the hearing officer. 
(Code 1999, § 80.170; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-162. - Citation materials. 
    At assignment, the city's designee shall transmit a copy of the citation to the hearing officer. Within five days of assignment, the issuing officer or the officer's department shall transmit copies of all materials relating to the citation to the hearing officer, including, but not limited to, additional written reports; certificates of calibration, logs, and other documentation required to support the evidentiary use of speed detection equipment under M.S.A. § 169.14; relevant certificates of training for the citing officer; and any pictures showing the alleged offense. The hearing officer shall transmit a copy of any materials received to the recipient at the earliest opportunity but at least three days in advance of the hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 80.240; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-163. - Hearing. 
    At the hearing, the hearing officer shall receive the testimony of any witnesses, witness statements, and comments presented by the person cited. The hearing officer will consider these items alongside the materials submitted by the issuing officer, and may weigh the evidence and make credibility determinations to the best of the hearing officer's ability. The hearing officer is not required to apply the rules of evidence in making determinations about the evidence presented. The issuing officer is not required to attend the hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 80.250; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-164. - Decision; findings. 
    After considering all the evidence submitted, the hearing officer shall determine, by a preponderance of the evidence, whether the person cited did or did not violate the statute or statutes identified in the citation. The hearing officer shall make written findings supporting the determination and transmit them to the cited person and the city's designee within five days of closing the hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 80.260; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-165. - Payment following finding of violation. 
    If the hearing officer finds a violation, the fine for the designated traffic offense is due within 30 days of the date the findings are sent to the recipient. The hearing officer may not alter or reduce the fine for any offense or combine multiple offenses into a single fine. Payment of fines due shall be made to the city's designee. 
(Code 1999, § 80.270; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 34-166. - Standard citation issued if no payment. 
    If payment is not made within the 30 days, the city's designee shall request that the issuing officer or the officer's department issue a standard traffic citation for the offenses in the administrative citation, mail a copy of the citation to the individual, and file the citation along with the hearing officer's written findings with the county district court. 
(Code 1999, § 80.280; Ord. No. 614, 12-15-2009) 
Chapter 36 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Enforcement. 
    In addition to the penalty provided for in section 1-14, the city shall have the right to enforce this chapter by injunction or by any other available legal remedy, including the right to prohibit the use of the city water, sewer and surface water management systems by any person violating or operating contrary to these provisions. 
(Code 1999, § 63.010; Ord. No. 74, 9-19-1967) 
Secs. 36-2-36-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-21. - General operation; right of entry for inspection and maintenance. 
(a)  The city water system is operated as a public utility and convenience from which revenue is derived, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Subject to constitutional limitations, any authority city employee or agent shall have the right to enter and shall be admitted to any lands and property in the city to inspect materials, plumbing work and fixtures of all kinds used in connection with the city water system. This right of entry extends to all public and private hydrants for flushing and maintenance purposes. 
(Code 1999, § 55.010) 
Sec. 36-22. - Use of water restricted to authorized persons. 
    No person shall make, construct or install any water service installation or make use of any city water service. 
(Code 1999, § 55.020) 
Sec. 36-23. - Willful damage to water system. 
    No person shall remove, damage or operate any structure, appurtenance, or property of the water system or fill or partially fill any excavation, or raise or open any gate constructed or maintained for the water system. 
(Code 1999, § 55.030) 
Sec. 36-24. - Private water supplies. 
    No water pipe of the water system shall be connected with any pump, well, tank, or piping that is connected with any other source of water supply. A private well may be used for lawn irrigation purposes only but cannot be connected in any manner to the city water system. A complete physical separation must be maintained between the city and private water supply systems so that it is impossible to intentionally or unintentionally allow any water produced by a private system to be introduced into the city supply line system. 
(Code 1999, § 55.120) 
Sec. 36-25. - Use confined to premises. 
    No person shall permit water from the water system to be used for any purpose except upon their own premises unless written consent is obtained from the city. 
(Code 1999, § 55.130) 
Sec. 36-26. - Private wells. 
(a)  Private wells may be maintained and continued in use after connection is made to the water system, provided there is no means of cross-connection between the private well and city supply at any time. Hose bibbs, that will enable the cross-connection of the two systems, are prohibited on internal piping of the well supply system. The threads on the boiler drain of the well volume tank shall be removed or the boiler drain bibb replaced with a sink faucet. Where both private and city systems are in use, outside hose bibbs shall not be installed on both systems. 
(b)  All new homes or buildings shall connect to the city water system if a water main is available to the property. 
(c)  Where new homes or buildings do not have a water main available to the property, the council shall determine whether and under what conditions the city water systems will be extended to serve the property or a private well allowed. 
(d)  On notice from the city that the building official has declared a well to be abandoned, such wells shall be sealed within 30 days in the manner provided by state law and rules. 
(e)  The owner or occupant in charge of any premises shall supply the city with such information as the city may reasonably require related to the use of a private water system. 
(Code 1999, §§ 55.150, 55.152, 55.460) 
Sec. 36-27. - Sprinkling regulations. 
(a)  The use of the city's water supply system for customers or private wells for lawn and garden sprinkling shall be limited annually from June 1 to September 15, as follows: 
(1)  Even-numbered street addresses sprinkling is allowed only on even-numbered days. 
(2)  Odd-numbered street addresses sprinkling is allowed only on odd-numbered days. 
(3)  No watering may occur between 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  In the event of a drought, mechanical failure, or other water shortage, as determined by the city engineer, the city may declare a complete ban or additional limitations on water usage. 
(c)  A property owner who has a newly seeded or sodded lawn, or newly planted trees or landscape materials, may request a waiver of this provision from the city engineer, subject to his discretion. Waivers shall not exceed 30 days. 
(d)  Anyone that violates the city's sprinkling regulations shall pay an administrative fee as provided in the city fee schedule, for each violation, in addition to any other penalties as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 55.180) 
Sec. 36-28. - Deficiency of water and shutting off water. 
    The city shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections, or from any other cause whatsoever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, or in making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time and kept off as long as necessary. 
(Code 1999, § 55.050) 
Secs. 36-29-36-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 36-60. - Connection required. 
    Any building or structure using a water well system and located on property adjacent to or abutting any property line to a city waterline will be notified when water is available for individual hook up. Owners will be charged a quarterly water availability charge as provided in the city fee schedule. For those structures that currently do not have city water connections and have private wells, mandatory hookup to city water will be required prior to transfer or sale of property, or when the private well becomes nonpotable, whichever of the events happens first. 
(Code 1999, § 55.015) 
Sec. 36-61. - Supply from one service. 
    No more than one housing unit or building shall be supplied from one service connection except by permission of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 55.060) 
Sec. 36-62. - Tapping of mains prohibited. 
    No person except persons employed, hired, or licensed plumbers approved by the city shall tap any distributing main or pipe of the water supply system, or insert stop-cocks or ferrules therein. All water main taps must be inspected and approved by the city and made by a licensed plumber. 
(Code 1999, § 55.070) 
Sec. 36-63. - Supervision by plumber. 
    All piping connections from curb box to house supplying piping shall be made under the supervision of a licensed plumber. 
(Code 1999, § 55.260) 
Sec. 36-64. - Authority of building official. 
    The building official shall determine that the kind and manner of water connections are in conformance with this article. The building official shall have authority to direct the method and manner of water connections where not otherwise covered by this article. 
(Code 1999, § 55.500) 
Sec. 36-65. - Service pipes. 
(a)  Every service pipe must be laid sufficiently waving to allow not less than one foot of extra length and in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe must be placed no less than 71/2 feet below the surface and, in all cases, so arranged as to prevent rupture by freezing. Service pipes must extend from the curb box to the inside of the building, or, if not taken into a building, then to the hydrant or other fixtures which it is intended to supply. Type K copper tubing or plastic pipe approved by the state plumbing code shall be used up to and including two-inch services. All underground joints are to be mechanical, unless otherwise approved by the building official. Joints shall be kept to a minimum, with not more than one joint used for service to 70 feet in length. All joints and connections shall be left uncovered until inspected and tested at normal waterline pressure. All services over two inches shall be ductile iron. Connections with the mains for domestic supply shall be at least three-fourths of an inch. 
(b)  Four-inch ductile iron service connections with four-inch gate valves and boxes shall be the smallest size permitted from the water main to the property line. Each ductile iron service shall be rodded from the water main tee to the gate valve or restrained as directed by the building official. 
(Code 1999, § 55.100) 
Sec. 36-66. - Excavation and construction requirements. 
(a)  No excavation shall be made until a permit for the connection has been issued. 
(b)  No water service pipe or water connection shall be installed in the same trench, or closer than ten feet horizontally to a sewer trench or drain laid, or to be laid, either in the street or in private property, except that the water pipe on private property may be in a common trench with a sewer drain which is made of ductile iron soil pipe with push-on type joints with approved rubber gaskets, and provided further that the horizontal distances between the sewer pipe and the water service is at least ten feet at the property line, and provided that the water service pipe approaches the sewer trench at an angle with the property line of not less than 45 degrees and having bends with not less than a three-foot radius. 
(c)  Where it is desired to lay the water service pipe and the building drain or building sewer pipe in the same trench, or in separate trenches less than ten feet apart, the water service pipe shall be above the sewer pipe and, unless impractical, it shall be placed at least two feet above the sewer and on a solid shelf excavated at one side of the trench. The sewer pipe shall be ductile iron pipe with tested watertight joints. The water service pipe shall be watertight and corrosion resistant. Copper pipe and plastic water pipe with specially protected joints is acceptable for this construction. All service pipe shall conform to the American Water Works Association (AWWA) specifications for such pipe. Bell joint clamps with rubber gaskets are provisionally acceptable as extra protection for the joints on ductile iron water pipe. In all cases, precautions shall be taken to ensure a firm foundation for the pipes. The intervening space between the pipes shall be back filled with compact earth. 
(Code 1999, § 55.110) 
Sec. 36-67. - Damage to shut-off box. 
    If the shut-off box cannot be located or is found bent or in a damaged condition, the building official is to be called immediately. The contractor assumes all responsibility for damage to shut-off box unless the building official certifies that damage existed before excavation or grading started. 
(Code 1999, § 55.220) 
Sec. 36-68. - Location of stop boxes. 
    Curb stop boxes will be installed at a point on the property line most suitable to the property and shall be left in an accurate position when back filling is completed. Curb stop boxes will be installed at an approximate depth of seven feet below the grade established by the building official. Type K copper tubing or plastic pipe shall be used for installation of water services. 
(Code 1999, § 55.250) 
Sec. 36-69. - Water connection applications. 
(a)  All applications for service installations and for water service shall be made to the city building department on printed forms furnished by the city. 
(b)  All applications for service installations shall be made by the owner or agent of the property to be served and shall state the size and location of service connection required. The applicant shall, at the time of making application, pay to the city the amount of fees or deposit required for the installation of the service connection. Applications for services larger than one inch shall be accompanied by two sets of plans indicating preferred location of service pipe and size of service based on building demand. 
(c)  When service connections have been installed, application for water service may be made to the city by the owner of the premises. 
(d)  The size, kind and location of water service connections and meters shall be subject to approval of the city engineer or building official. 
(e)  The plumber shall notify the city within 24 hours after piping is complete and ready for meter installation, giving the street address and permit number. 
(f)  Water billing shall start at the time of installation of the water meter or, in the event the meter is not installed, seven days after completion of outside piping, and shall be calculated upon the minimum quarterly rate, prorated on a monthly basis. 
(Code 1999, § 55.200) 
Sec. 36-70. - Time for connections. 
    If, from any cause, the plumber or contractor laying the service pipe should fail to have the connection made at the time specified in their application, notice must be given the building official, fixing another day on which the plumber or contractor wishes to make connection. The notice must be given at least two days previous to the excavation for laying of the service pipe, and the connection must be made before 2:00 p.m., except in special cases, and then the work shall be done only upon a written order from the building official. 
(Code 1999, § 55.230) 
Sec. 36-71. - Repair of leaks. 
    In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in their pipe within 24 hours after verbal or written notice thereof, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on until the fee provided in the city fee schedule for water turn-on and water turn-off has been paid and the leak repaired. When the waste of water is excessive, or when other property damage is likely to result from the leak, the water may be turned off immediately pending repairs. 
(Code 1999, § 55.080) 
Sec. 36-72. - Use of water for air conditioning. 
    All air conditioning systems which are connected directly or backflow indirectly with the public water system must be equipped with water conserving and water regulating devices as are customary with industry standards. Permits shall be required for the installation of all new air conditioning systems to the public water system. The permit shall be on forms as provided by the city. 
(Code 1999, §§ 55.160, 55.170) 
Sec. 36-73. - Turning on water. 
    No person, except an authorized city employee, shall turn on or off any water supply at the curb stop without permission from the building official. 
(Code 1999, § 55.270) 
Sec. 36-74. - Existing services. 
(a)  When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase or change the old water service, no connections with the mains shall be made until all the old services shall have been plugged as approved by the city, and any expense of the city shall be charged to the property. 
(b)  After the initial connection has been made to the curb box, the owner or occupant shall be liable for all repairs required to the service from the water main to the connected structure, including repairs to the curb box and any necessary street repairs. The city may share in the street repair cost if deemed appropriate by the city engineer. The property owner must maintain the curb box so that it remains at the finished grade level of the land. 
(c)  All water breaks in a structure due to freezing are the responsibility of the property owner including damage to water service pipes, fixtures and water meters. 
(Code 1999, § 55.090) 
Sec. 36-75. - Connections beyond city boundaries. 
    Where water mains of the city are in any street or alley adjacent to or outside the corporate limits of the city, the council, at its discretion, may issue permits to the owners or occupants of properties adjacent or accessible to such water mains to make proper water service pipe connections with such water mains of the city and to be supplied with water in conformity with the applicable provisions of this article and subject to contract or joint powers agreement for the supply of water between the city and any other city. 
(Code 1999, § 55.140) 
Sec. 36-76. - Discontinuance of service for emergencies or violations. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to discontinue service to any customer of the water and sanitary sewer system: 
(1)  Without notice when necessary for repairs, additional connections or reconnections, or when, in the judgment of city officials, such action is necessary to protect the purity of the city water supply or the safety of the water systems and the life, health and safety of the city's utility customers. 
(2)  For disregard of any rules or regulations in connection with the use or operation of the city system. 
(3)  For any vacant property or structure without heat. 
(4)  For nonpayment of utility bills or charges. 
(b)  Water and sanitary sewer service shall not be shut off for nonpayment of amounts due until notice and an opportunity for a meeting have first been given to the occupant and owner of the premises involved. The notice shall be personally served or delivered by certified mail and shall state that, if payment is not made before the date stated in the notice, but not less than ten days after the date upon which the notice is served or mailed, the water supply to the premises will be shut off. The notice shall also state that the occupant may, before such date, speak at the next regular city council meeting, in which case, the supply will not be shut off until the discussion or meeting is held. 
(c)  If, after discussion, the city council finds that the amount claimed owing is actually due and unpaid and there is no legal reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may not be shut off, the city shall shut off the supply. 
(d)  If service has been discontinued pursuant to this section, it shall not be resumed except upon payment of all the amount due, together with interest at a rate specified in the city fee schedule and the disconnect and reconnect fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 55.040) 
Secs. 36-77-36-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTION CHARGES 

Sec. 36-96. - Water connection service charges. 
(a)  A permit must be obtained to connect to the existing water service leads at the curb box and interior plumbing. The fee shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Additional charges shall be paid at the time of making application for tapping and making connections with the water mains where a curb box and service lead is not installed, which charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  In case the installation is to be upon a surfaced street, the street shall be restored in accordance with specifications made by the city engineer, and the fee for supervising such work shall be paid to the city, in an amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(2)  For larger connections, the amount to be charged shall be fixed by the city engineer based upon the estimated cost of installing the service. 
(c)  For turning on water where service has been turned off for violation of any provision of this article, the service fee shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 55.210) 
Sec. 36-97. - Property assessments. 
    The permit fee for water main tapping shall be paid for each connection in the amount specified in the city fee schedule. In addition thereto, before any permit shall be issued, the following conditions shall be complied with: 
(1)  No permit shall be issued to tap or connect with any water main of the city directly or indirectly from any lot or tract of land unless: 
a.  Such a lot or tract of land has been fully assessed for the construction cost of the water system to which the connection is made; or 
b.  If no full assessment has been levied for such construction cost, the proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be completed in due course. 
(2)  If the above conditions have not been met, no permit to tap or connect to any water main shall be issued unless the applicant shall pay an additional connection fee which shall be equal to the portion of the construction cost of the water system which would have been assessable against the lot or tract to be served by such tapping connection. The assessable cost shall be determined upon the same basis as any assessment previously levied against other property for the water system, including interest at the same rate of interest as charged on the most recent city local improvement, which interest may be waived or decreased on determination by the city engineer that the improvement was not available for utilization to the subject property until a later date. If no such assessment has been levied, the assessable cost will be determined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have been or which shall be charged for similar tapping or connection with the main, determined on the basis of the total assessable cost of the main, allocated on a frontage basis, acreage basis, or both. 
(3)  If unit charges were uniformly levied against other improved property as part of the assessment proceedings for the water system, no permit to tap or connect to any water main shall be issued unless the applicant shall pay an amount equal to the unit charges, based upon the same formula, levied upon other improved property. 
(Code 1999, § 55.240) 
Sec. 36-98. - Additional unit assessments. 
(a)  Prior to making any improvement which requires a building permit to an existing commercial or business structure upon which unit charges were uniformly assessed, the owner shall be assessed an additional unit charge based on the square footage to be added. 
(b)  The unit charge shall be based upon the same criteria as the original unit charge, as certified by the city engineer. 
(c)  Such unit charge shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a building permit for such improvement. 
(Code 1999, § 55.242) 
Sec. 36-99. - City connections for hardships. 
    Whenever any building has not been connected to the city water system as required by section 36-60 and the council determines that it would be an extreme economic hardship for the owner to connect to the system, the council may, by resolution, direct that the water connection be made pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 36-274. 
(Code 1999, § 55.215) 
Secs. 36-100-36-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER METERS 

Sec. 36-127. - Water meters. 
    Except for extinguishment of fires, no person, except authorized city employees, shall use water from the water system or permit water to be drawn therefrom, unless the same is metered by passing through a meter supplied or approved by the city. No person not authorized by the city shall connect, disconnect, take apart, or in any manner change, or cause to be changed, or interfere with any such meter or the action thereof. 
(1)  Water meters provided in the city fee schedule shall be purchased from the city and become the property of the customer. Remote reading devices on water meters will be required except where otherwise determined by the city. The location of remote reading devices shall be determined by the city. 
(2)  The city shall maintain and repair all water meters of less than one inch in size when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and shall replace them, if necessary. However, where replacement, repair, or adjustment of any meter is rendered necessary by the act of neglect, including damage from hot water backup, freezing, or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, any expense caused the city thereby shall be charged against and collected from the water consumer. 
(3)  A consumer may, by written request, have their meter re-read by depositing an amount annually determined by the city with the clerk. In case a test should show an error of over five percent of the water consumed, the deposit will be refunded to the consumer, a correctly registering meter will be installed, and the bill will be adjusted accordingly if the meter erred in favor of the city. Such adjustment shall not extend back more than one billing period from the date of the written request. 
(4)  Authorized city employees shall have free access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with the water system for the reading of meters and inspections. 
(5)  Water meters shall be repaired or replaced from time to time as necessary to ensure accurate measuring of water flow. The cost for such repair or replacement shall be borne by the city unless the work is due to damage caused or permitted by the property owner or occupant. 
(Code 1999, § 55.400) 
Sec. 36-128. - Water meter setting. 
    All water meters shall be in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  The service pipe from the water main to the meter, when the same enters the building, shall be brought through the floor or bottom course of concrete block of foundation. 
(2)  The meter shall be located so that the bottom is from 12 inches to 24 inches above the finished floor line. The meter shall be set out not more than 12 inches measured horizontally from the inside line of the basement wall, unless an alternate method is approved by the building official. 
(3)  All meter installations shall have a stop and waste gate valve on the street side of the meter. In no case shall there be more than 12 inches of pipe exposed between the point of entrance through the basement floor and the stop and waste gate valve. A stop and waste gate valve shall also be installed on the house side of the meter. All fittings and pipe to be red brass or bronze. Gate valves shall be brass, 125 pounds standard. 
(Code 1999, § 55.410) 
Sec. 36-129. - Additional meters may be allowed or required. 
    If the city determines that a portion of the water measured by the water meter does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewer system, then the city may permit or require the installation of other additional meters in such a manner that the quantity of water which actually could enter the sewer system may be determined. 
(Code 1999, § 55.460) 
Secs. 36-130-36-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WATER USE RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 36-157. - Commencement of charges. 
    Water charges shall commence immediately once the inside water connection is available for use. 
(Code 1999, § 55.280) 
Sec. 36-158. - Billing account maintenance. 
    All accounts shall be kept by the house and street number and under the account number assigned thereto, and by the name of the owner or of the person signing the application for service. All bills and notices shall be sent to the house or street number of the property. If nonresident owners desire personal notice sent to a different address, they shall file an application with the city finance department. Any error in address shall be promptly reported to the city. 
(Code 1999, § 55.290) 
Sec. 36-159. - Water rates. 
    The rate due and payable by each user for water taken from the city water system shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 55.310) 
Sec. 36-160. - Water availability use charges. 
(a)  Purpose. The cost of making water available to property owners includes the cost to maintain storage tanks, elevated tanks, wells and hydrants, flushing and checking of lines. All of the foregoing enable the city to acquire and maintain a lower fire rating to all property owners. The purpose of the water availability charge is to ensure that all property owners that have the availability of water pay their fair cost of maintaining the distribution system. 
(b)  Charge. Each owner of a residential, commercial or industrial structure which has an available city waterline, whether connected or not, shall pay an availability use charge in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 55.312) 
Secs. 36-161-36-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - BILLING AND COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 36-189. - Payment of charges. 
    Any prepayment or overpayment of charges may be retained by the city and applied on subsequent quarterly statements. 
(Code 1999, § 55.320) 
Sec. 36-190. - Payment of charges. 
    Statements for water charges for the preceding quarterly period shall be mailed to each customer on or before January 10th, April 10th, July 10th and October 10th of each year. Such statements shall be due and payable to the city on or before the tenth day of the month following the month the bills were mailed. 
(Code 1999, § 55.330) 
Sec. 36-191. - Late fee 
    If the water charge is not paid when due, a late fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be added 
(Code 1999, § 55.320) 
Sec. 36-192. - Action to collect charges. 
(a)  Any delinquent amounts outstanding constitute a lien against the property pursuant to state law. Periodically, the city may certify delinquent amounts for collection with taxes. The timing and threshold for determining the accounts to be included in the certification process will be determined annually by the city. 
(b)  Owners of affected properties shall have the option of paying the balance due on the account until the date the notice of the certification is mailed. After the date of notice of certification hearing is mailed, payments will still be accepted, but the amount due will include a pre-certification penalty fee charged to affected accounts. The certification notice will provide an opportunity for the account holder to schedule a hearing to object to the proposed certification of unpaid utility charges. 
(c)  If no objection is raised, or if the objection is sustained, the delinquent amount due, plus additional certification penalties as determined annually by the city, may then be collected in an action brought for that purpose in the name of the city, or the city may certify to the county auditor the amounts due (with penalty), together with a legal description of the premises served, and the county auditor shall thereupon enter such amount as part of the tax levy on the premises to be collected during the ensuing year. 
(Code 1999, § 55.340) 
Secs. 36-193-36-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FIRE HYDRANT USE 

Sec. 36-223. - Use of fire hydrants. 
    No person other than an authorized city employee shall operate a fire hydrant or interfere in any way with the water system without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city as follows: 
(1)  A permit to use a fire hydrant shall be issued for each individual job or contract and for a minimum of seven days and for such additional seven-day periods as the city shall determine. The permit shall state the location of the hydrant and shall be for the use of that hydrant and none other. 
(2)  The user shall make a deposit in an amount annually determined by the city to guarantee payment for water used and to cover breakage and damage to hydrant, which shall be refunded upon expiration of the permit, less applicable charges for use. 
(3)  The user shall pay a rental charge as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 55.420) 
Sec. 36-224. - Temporary connection to fire hydrants. 
    An owner of a private water system may make a temporary aboveground connection to a fire hydrant, subject to the time periods, conditions and payment specified in this article. In addition, the method of connection to the private system shall conform to all existing requirements of this Code and the type of meter used shall meet the approval of the building official. 
(Code 1999, § 55.430) 
Sec. 36-225. - Hydrant location poles. 
    At the expense of the person constructing the waterline and appurtenances, each hydrant shall have thereon a location pole of a kind approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1999, § 55.450) 
Secs. 36-226-36-243. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-244. - General operation; right of entry for inspection and maintenance. 
    The entire city sanitary sewer system shall be operated as a public utility and convenience from which revenues will be derived as provided in this article. 
Sec. 36-245. - Right of entry for inspection and maintenance. 
    Subject to constitutional limitations, any authority city employee or agent shall have the right to enter and shall be admitted to any lands and property in the city to inspect materials, plumbing work and fixtures of all kinds used in connection with the city water system. This right of entry extends to all public and private hydrants for flushing and maintenance purposes. 
(Code 1999, § 59.010) 
Sec. 36-246. - Use of certain buildings restricted. 
    No person shall use any building, nor allow any other person to use such building, which building is not connected to the city sanitary system as required by this article. 
(Code 1999, § 59.030) 
Sec. 36-247. - Inspections. 
    Every property owner that owns improved real estate which is connected to the city's sanitary sewer system shall within 30 days after written notice from the city: 
(1)  Allow a representative of the city to inspect both the inside and outside of buildings located on the property to confirm that there is no prohibited discharge into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(2)  In lieu of having inspection by a city representative, the property owner shall furnish a certificate from a licensed plumber, in a form acceptable to the city, certifying that the property has no prohibited discharge into the city sanitary sewer system. Failure to provide such certificate of compliance within the above time shall make the property immediately subject to the surcharge provided in the city fee schedule until the property is inspected or compliance is met, including any penalties and remedies that the city has provided in its policies and codes, by way of assessments, and administrative expenses in achieving compliance. 
(3)  The council may, by resolution, provide for a waiver by reason of hardship from the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 59.062) 
Sec. 36-248. - Repairs. 
(a)  Compliance. Any property owner whose property is found in violation of this article shall make the necessary changes to comply with this article and shall furnish proof of these repairs or changes to the designated city representative within 90 days upon receiving notice of the violation. 
(1)  City installation. Where the property owner has been notified in writing to comply with this article fails, refuses or neglects to comply within 90 days of receipt of the notice, the council may, by resolution, direct the installation of the required pipes, plumbing fixtures and appliances. The cost of installation shall be paid by the city and the actual costs assessed against the property benefited. 
(2)  Notice. After the installation and connections are completed, there shall be served upon the owner of the property, a written notice of the assessment and an order directing the owner to pay the assessment within ten days after the service of the written notice. Upon proof of service of the notice and order, and proof that the assessment has not been paid within the ten days allowed, an assessment hearing shall be held by the city and the benefited property shall be assessed for all costs and administrative expenses incurred by the city in achieving compliance. 
(b)  Financial assistance for corrective action. There are a number of authorized methods to dispose of sump pump effluent. These include pumping the water into a cistern or discharging it within the property. The owner of any property that has an existing illegal connection may apply once for city financial assistance up to $150.00 by requesting a city inspector to verify the illegal connection, having the repair completion verified and submitting a receipts for labor or materials. Upon verification of the corrective action and costs, the city will remit to the property owner an amount as established by city council resolution for the costs up to $150.00 to correct the illegal connection. This financial assistance is limited to a one-time reimbursement per dwelling, building or structure. 
(c)  Surcharge. A surcharge in an amount established by city council resolution shall be imposed on the property owner's sanitary sewer utility bill for properties in violation of this article. The surcharge will be added to the property owner's utility bill until the property is found to be in compliance as determined by the city. The surcharge amount shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 59.064) 
Sec. 36-249. - Remedies. 
    The remedies provided in sections 36-247 and 36-248 are cumulative and do not limit the right of the city to pursue any available legal remedy, including an administrative search warrant. 
(Code 1999, § 59.066) 
Sec. 36-250. - Entry upon private property. 
    The city engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall, at reasonable times, be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in connection with the operation of the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1999, § 59.090) 
Sec. 36-251. - Tampering with city sewer system prohibited. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city sewer system. 
(Code 1999, § 59.070) 
Sec. 36-252. - Use of old house sewers. 
    Old house sewers, or portions thereof, may be approved for use by the city engineer. The city engineer may request that the old sewer be excavated for the purpose of facilitating inspection. No house sewer shall be laid across or over any existing cesspool or septic tank unless the existing cesspool or septic tank shall first be pumped clean and filled with earth to the surrounding ground level. Where a connecting sewer is laid across or over any existing cesspool or septic tank, only ductile iron solid pipe, conforming to the ASTM standard specification shall be used for that portion of the connecting sewer which is laid across or over the existing cesspool or septic tank. 
(Code 1999, § 61.120) 
Sec. 36-253. - Existing septic tank. 
    The contents of any existing septic tank shall not be discharged into the city sanitary sewer system at any point, but shall be disposed of outside the city limits. 
(Code 1999, § 61.130) 
Sec. 36-254. - Independent system required; exception. 
(a)  The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new work installed in an existing building shall be separate from and independent of that of any other building, except where provided in subsection (b) of this section, and every building shall have an independent connection with a public sewer when such is available. 
(b)  Where one building stands to the rear of another building on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building drain from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole will be considered as one building drain. Where such a building is extended, a cleanout shall be provided immediately inside the rear wall the front building. 
(Code 1999, §§ 61.160, 61.170) 
Secs. 36-255-36-271. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 36-272. - Connection required. 
    Any buildings used for human habitation and located on property adjacent to a sewer main, or in a block through which the system extends, shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system when a connection is available to any such property. All buildings constructed on property adjacent to a sewer main or in a block through which the system extends shall be provided with a connection to the city sanitary sewer system for the disposal of all human wastes. 
(Code 1999, § 59.020) 
Sec. 36-273. - Discontinuance of service for emergencies or violations. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to discontinue sanitary sewer service for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Without notice when necessary for repairs, additional connections or reconnections or when, in the judgment of the public works director, such action is necessary to protect the purity of the municipal sanitary sewer system or the safety of the sanitary sewer system or the life, health and safety of its customers. 
(2)  For disregard of any rules or regulations in connection with the use or operation of the city system. 
(3)  When service is for any vacant property or structure without heat. 
(4)  For nonpayment of utility bills or charges. 
(b)  Water and sanitary sewer service shall not be shut off for nonpayment of amounts due until notice and an opportunity for a meeting have first been given to the occupant and owner of the premises involved. The notice shall be personally served or delivered by certified mail and shall state that, if payment is not made before the date stated in the notice, but not less than ten days after the date upon which the notice is served or mailed, the sanitary sewer supply to the premises will be shut off. The notice shall also state that the occupant may, before such date, speak at the next regular city council meeting, in which case, the supply will not be shut off until the discussion or meeting is held. 
(c)  If, after discussion, the city council finds that the amount claimed owing is actually due and unpaid and there is no legal reason why the sanitary sewer supply of the delinquent customer may not be shut off, the city shall shut off supply. 
(d)  If service has been discontinued pursuant to this section, it shall not be resumed except upon payment of all of the amount due, together with interest at a rate specified in the city fee schedule and the disconnect and reconnect fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 59.021) 
Sec. 36-274. - City connections for hardship. 
    Whenever any building has not been connected to the city sanitary sewer system as required in section 36-272 and the council determines that it would be an extreme economic hardship for the owner to connect to the system: 
(1)  The council may, by resolution, direct that the sewer connection be made and the cost of the installation paid in the first instance by the city out of the general fund or sewer maintenance fund of the city, and the actual cost thereof shall be thereafter assessed against the property benefited. 
(2)  After such installation and connection is completed, the assessment shall be certified to the county auditor for collection as other assessment for benefits, except that such assessment may be spread over a term of three years, and the assessment shall become a lien on the property until paid. 
(3)  The owner of the benefited property must request and agree to the procedure set forth in this section. 
(Code 1999, § 59.025) 
Sec. 36-275. - Existing services and liability for repairs. 
(a)  When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase or change the old sanitary sewer service, no connections with the mains shall be made until all the features of the old services have been plugged as approved by the city, and any expense of the city shall be charged to the property. 
(b)  After the initial connection has been made to the sanitary sewer main, the applicant or owner, occupant or user of the premises shall be liable for all repairs required to the sanitary sewer line from the residence to the main, excluding the wye, and including any necessary street repairs. The extent of street repairs shall be determined by the city engineer. The city may share in the street repair cost if deemed appropriate by the city engineer. 
Sec. 36-276. - Certain connections prohibited. 
    No buildings located on property lying outside the city limits shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system unless express authorization therefor is obtained from the council by resolution. 
(Code 1999, § 59.080) 
Sec. 36-277. - Supervision. 
    The city engineer, or his representative, shall supervise all house sewer connections made to the city sanitary sewer system and excavations for the purpose of installing or repairing the same. 
(Code 1999, § 61.010) 
Sec. 36-278. - Costs and expenses. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection to the city sewer system shall be borne by the owner, and the owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the sewer connection, including restoring streets and street surface. 
(Code 1999, § 61.190) 
Secs. 36-279-36-304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTION PERMITS 

Sec. 36-305. - Permits. 
    Any person desiring a connection to the city sanitary sewer system for property not previously connected with the system shall apply to the city for a permit therefor. The application shall be submitted on forms furnished by the city clerk and shall be accompanied by plans, specifications and such other information as is desired by the city engineer, together with a permit and inspection fee as provided in the city fee schedule. When reinspection is necessary, a reinspection fee shall be charged. When an application is made for a house sewer connection permit, an application for a changeover permit shall also be submitted, and both permits shall be issued at the same time. 
(Code 1999, § 61.020) 
Sec. 36-306. - Restrictions on permits. 
    Permits shall be issued only to property owners or to such persons who are duly licensed by the city to engage in business as sewer contractors and who have filed the bonds and insurance certificates required by section 10-211. 
(Code 1999, § 61.040) 
Sec. 36-307. - Expiration of permits. 
    All permits issued under this article shall expire 90 days after the date of issuance, and the fee forfeited, unless the work contemplated and authorized thereby is in actual progress. 
(Code 1999, § 61.050) 
Secs. 36-308-36-332. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONNECTION CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 36-333. - Material and construction requirements to be observed. 
    The materials and construction methods specified in this article shall be exclusively used in making sewer connections to the city sewer system. 
(Code 1999, § 61.060) 
Sec. 36-334. - Materials. 
(a)  Unless otherwise required, a sanitary sewer of eight-inch diameter shall be installed as the minimum size and placed at grades approved by the engineer. The service pipe shall be at least a four-inch diameter. All sanitary sewer pipe shall conform to the following specifications: 
DescriptionClass Spec. Joint Polyvinyl chloride SDR 35 ASTM Elastomeric (PVC) Sewer pipe ASTM D3034 Gasket Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer service pipe Schedule 40 ASTM D1785 Gasket  
(b)  Depending on soil conditions, other pipe materials may be approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1999, § 61.070) 
Sec. 36-335. - Joints and connections. 
    Joints or connections between different types of pipes shall be in the manner and of the kind prescribed by the city engineer. The city engineer shall transmit to the clerk, in writing, various types and kinds of joints and connections which are approved, and all other kinds of joints or connections are prohibited. 
(Code 1999, § 61.080) 
Sec. 36-336. - Grades. 
    Unless otherwise authorized, all house sewers shall have a grade of not less than one-eighth inch per foot. A grade of one-fourth inch per foot should be used whenever practical. The contractor shall check grades before construction proceeds, and shall install the house sewer by exposing the wye at the sewer main or the service stub at the property line, connecting to that wye or service stub, and shall lay the house sewer pipe from the wye or service stub to the building. Wherever possible, the connecting sewer shall serve the building at an elevation which is below the basement floor of such building. 
(Code 1999, § 61.090) 
Sec. 36-337. - Alignment. 
    No connecting sewer shall contain bends or a combination of bends which at any point shall be greater than 45 degrees, and no more than two bends, regardless of angle, shall be permitted in any single house connection, except where manholes or cleanouts are constructed at such points and in the manner as directed by the city engineer. No connecting sewer shall be laid parallel to any bearing wall or footing unless further distant than three feet from any such bearing wall or footing. No connecting sewer shall be laid within 20 feet of any existing well unless ductile iron pipe is used. 
(Code 1999, § 61.100) 
Sec. 36-338. - Trenching and backfilling. 
    All excavations shall be open trench work unless otherwise authorized by the city engineer. The foundation in the trench shall be formed to prevent any subsequent settlement of the pipes. If the foundation is good and firm earth, the earth shall be pared or molded to give a full support to the lower third of each pipe. Bell holes shall be dug to provide ample space for bells. Care must be exercised in backfilling below the center line of the pipe in order to give it proper support. Backfilling shall be placed in layers and solidly tamped or packed up to two feet above the pipe. Backfilling shall not be done until the section to be backfilled has been inspected and approved by the city engineer or its representative. 
(Code 1999, § 61.110) 
Sec. 36-339. - Connections at wye only. 
    Every connecting sewer shall be connected to the city sewer system at the wye designated for the property served by the connection, except where otherwise expressly authorized by the city engineer. All connections made at points other than the designated wye shall be made only under the direct supervision of the city engineer and in such manner as directed. 
(Code 1999, § 61.140) 
Sec. 36-340. - Tunneling. 
    Tunneling for distance of not more than 20 feet is permissible in yards, courts or driveways of any building site. When pipes are driven, the drive pipe shall be at least one size larger than the pipe to be laid. 
(Code 1999, § 61.150) 
Sec. 36-341. - Repairs. 
    It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the wye to the house or dwelling. All repair work shall be done by a licensed plumber or contractor who has obtained a city permit. At the discretion of the city engineer, the city may participate in costs associated with street repair. 
(Code 1999, § 61.180) 
Secs. 36-342-36-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 

Sec. 36-371. - Types of wastes prohibited. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to discharge any of the following described waters or wastes into the city sanitary sewer system: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing more than 100 mg/l by weight of fat, oil or grease, whether or not emulsified. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel, oil or other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded such that it will be carried freely in suspension. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, plastic, wood, paunch manure, or other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage system. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(9)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when required by the state plumbing code or when, in the opinion of the building official, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in an excessive amount, or any inflammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private dwelling units which discharge only normal wastes therefrom. Such grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas and watertight. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at their expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(10)  Any waste prohibited by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES). 
(11)  Any waste containing concentrations in excess of the following: 
Pollutant Limitation (Maximum per operating day) Cadmium 2.0 mg/l Chromium, total 8.0 mg/l Copper 6.0 mg/l Cyanide, total 4.0 mg/l Lead 1.0 mg/l Mercury 0.1 mg/l Nickel 6.0 mg/l Zinc 8.0 mg/l Temperature 65 degrees C (150 degrees F) pH 5.00-10.00  
(12)  Any waste from septic tanks or on-site facilities. 
(13)  Any mineral acids, waste acid pickling or plating liquors from the pickling or plating of iron, steel, brass, copper or chromium or any other dissolved or solid substances that will or may endanger health or safety or attack or corrode any art of the sanitary sewer system. 
(14)  Liquids or vapors having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit immediately prior to discharge into the sewer system. 
(15)  Phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in concentrations that will or may cause the effluent from the treatment works or the water into which it is discharged to fail to meet applicable state or federal standards. 
(16)  Materials that exert or cause unusually high concentrations of inert suspended solids or of dissolved solids, excessive discoloration, or unusually high volume of flow or concentration of waste exceeding five times the average daily concentration of flow during normal operation. 
(17)  Unusually high concentrations of suspended solids, BOD, COD or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the treatment works. 
(18)  Any substance that is not amenable to treatment to reduction by the type of sewage treatment processes employed to a degree sufficient to permit the effluent from the treatment works and the water into which it is discharged to meet applicable state and federal standards. 
(Code 1999, § 59.040) 
Sec. 36-372. - Industrial wastes. 
(a)  It is unlawful to discharge into the city sanitary sewer system any industrial wastes unless the prior approval of the city engineer, the state pollution control agency and the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES) is obtained. The city engineer shall approve the discharge of industrial wastes when, in its opinion, the proposed wastes will not be of an unusual amount or character. 
(b)  When it is determined that any waste discharged, or to be discharged, has certain characteristics or elements that are or may be harmful to the structures, processes or operation of the sanitary sewer system or persons operating it, such discharge shall be discontinued or that waste shall be treated prior to its discharge into the system in a manner approved by the Metropolitan Council of Environmental Services, the state pollution control agency and the city. 
(Code 1999, § 59.050) 
Sec. 36-373. - Discharge of surface waters prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall cause to be discharged into the city sanitary sewer system, either directly or indirectly, any roof water, stormwater, surface water or groundwater of any type. Prohibited discharges include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Direct or indirect drainage of flooded streets or intersections through manhole openings or other openings into a sanitary sewer or any part of the sewer system. 
(2)  Direct or indirect drainage of groundwater from footings or foundation drainage systems. 
(3)  Groundwater or surface water from buildings or basements without footings or foundation drainage systems or with an ineffective system. 
(4)  Direct or indirect discharge of wastewater from air conditioners, dehumidifiers or similar appliances or devices. 
(5)  Sump pumps serving any dwelling or structure. 
(b)  Compliance. Any person, business, firm or corporation having a roof drain, rain leader, sump pump, cistern overflow pipe or surface drain now connected or discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect or remove the same. Any disconnections or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in a workman-like manner with proper materials and as approved by the city building official. 
(Code 1999, § 59.060) 
Secs. 36-374-36-404. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - USE CHARGES, BILLING AND COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 36-405. - Commencement of charges. 
    The sewer charges set forth in this article shall commence immediately once the sewer connection is in use. 
(Code 1999, § 59.014) 
Sec. 36-406. - Rates and charges. 
    The annual charge for use of the city sanitary sewer system for all users shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 59.100) 
Sec. 36-407. - Strength charges for industrial use. 
(a)  Recitals. The Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES) Department has determined to impose an industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the Metropolitan Disposal System. In order for the city to pay such costs based upon strength of industrial discharge and allocated to it each year by the commission, it is necessary to establish sewer strength charges and a formula for the computation thereof for all industrial users receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city. 
(b)  Establishment of strength charges. There is established, in addition to the sewer charge based upon the volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon each person receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city, based upon strength of industrial waste discharged into the sewer system of the city. 
(c)  Establishment of strength charge formula. The computation of the strength charge shall be in compliance with federal law. 
(d)  Strength charge payment and penalties. The strength charge established by subsection (b) of this section shall be paid by each industrial user receiving waste treatment services and subject thereto as a part of and in the same manner as the regular use charge and be subject to the same penalty for late payment. 
(e)  Tax lien. If the strength charge is not paid before the 60th day next succeeding the date of billing thereof to the industrial user by or on behalf of the city, the charge, plus accrued interest established pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, shall be deemed to be a charge against the owner, lessee and occupant of the property served, and the city or its agent shall certify such unpaid delinquent balance to the county auditor for collection is the same manner as other taxes are collected; provided, however, that such certification shall not preclude the city's right to proceed for collection under any other remedy available to it under the law and this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 59.110) 
Sec. 36-408. - Waste traps and separators. 
(a)  Oil, grease and sand waste traps and separators shall be installed for the proper discharge of wastewater containing excessive amounts of oil, grease, sand or flammable liquids when required by the state plumbing code or the regional administrator of the Metropolitan Council, or when the city determine such traps or separators are necessary. 
(b)  Waste traps and separators shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions by the owner and at the owner's expense, through the periodic removal of any accumulated residue. Failure to maintain traps and separators may result in an administrative fine as set by council resolution. If a trap or separator is not property maintained, the city may have the system, including affected city sewers, cleaned at the owner's expense. 
Sec. 36-409. - Payment of charges. 
    Statements for sewer charges for the preceding quarterly period shall be mailed to each customer on or before January 10th, April 10th, July 10th, and October 10th of each year. Such statements shall be due and payable to the city treasurer on or before the tenth day of the month following the month the bills were mailed. 
(Code 1999, § 59.120) 
Sec. 36-410. - Penalty for late payment. 
    If the sewer charge is not paid when due, in accordance with section 36-409, then a penalty annually determined by the city shall be added. 
(Code 1999, § 59.122) 
Sec. 36-411. - Action to collect charges. 
    Any delinquent amounts outstanding constitute a lien against the property pursuant to state law. Periodically, the city may certify delinquent amounts for collection with taxes. The timing and threshold for determining the accounts to be included in the certification process will be determined annually by the city. Owners of affected properties shall have the option of paying the balance due on the account until the date the notice of the certification is mailed. After the date of notice of certification hearing is mailed, payments will still be accepted, but the amount due will include a pre-certification penalty fee charged to affected accounts. The certification notice will provide an opportunity for the account holder to schedule a hearing to object to the proposed certification of unpaid utility charges. If no objection is raised, or if the objection is sustained, the delinquent amount due, plus additional certification penalties as determined annually by the city, may then be collected in an action brought for that purpose in the name of the city, or the city clerk may certify to the county auditor the amounts due (with penalty), together with a legal description of the premises served, and the county auditor shall thereupon enter such amount as part of the tax levy on the premises to be collected during the ensuing year. 
(Code 1999, § 59.130) 
Sec. 36-412. - Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES) fee. 
    In addition to building permit and sewer connection fees, the city has established a fee to pay and reimburse the city for all sums which the city shall be required to pay the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES). 
(1)  Recitals. The Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES) has determined to reserve unused capacity in the metropolitan disposal system local government units in which new buildings to be connected to the system and new connections to the system are commenced during such year, and to allocate the debt service costs of such unused capacity for the year among various local government units, including the city. 
(2)  Establishment of charges. For the purpose of paying costs of reserve capacity allocated to the city each year by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES), there is hereby established a charge for: 
a.  The availability of treatment works and interceptors comprising the metropolitan disposal system; and 
b.  Connections, direct and indirect, to the metropolitan disposal system. The charge is imposed on each building or structure in the city, and each connection to the metropolitan disposal system directly or through the city's system The charge shall be payable upon the issuance of a building permit or a connection permit, as the case may be, but no charge shall be due upon the issuance of a connection permit if a charge was paid upon issuance of a building permit. The charge for each building or structure shall be as established by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES). A unit of sewage volume shall be 100,000 gallons per year and shall be assigned as follows: 
1.  Single-family houses, townhouses and duplex units shall each comprise one unit. 
2.  Condominiums and apartments shall each comprise 80 percent of a unit. 
3.  Manufactured homes shall each comprise 80 percent of a unit. 
4.  Other buildings and structures shall be assigned one unit for each 100,000 gallons of flow or part thereof which it is estimated they will discharge. 
5.  Public housing units and housing units subsidized under any federal program for low and moderate income housing shall be counted as 75 percent of the unit equivalent for that type of housing. 
6.  Units existing or for which building permits were issued prior to January 1, 1973, shall be counted as one-half the unit equivalent for that type of housing, if connected to the metropolitan disposal system prior to January 1, 1974, and shall be counted at the full rate thereafter. 
(3)  Administration. The city clerk shall prepare or revise building permit or sewage connection permit application forms to provide information necessary for the computation of the number of units assignable to the building or structure in question, and shall collect the applicable charge before issuance of a permit. The clerk shall make such information available to the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES), as required. If, upon filing a report covering such permit with the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES), the council determines that a greater number of units is assignable to the building or structure in question, any additional amount of cost allocated to the city as a result shall be paid by the person or company to whom the permit was granted. 
(Code 1999, § 61.025) 
Sec. 36-413. - Property assessments. 
    The permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for connection to the city sanitary sewer system shall be paid for each connection. In addition thereto, before any permit shall be issued, the following conditions shall be complied with: 
(1)  No permit shall be issued to connect with any sanitary sewer system of the city directly or indirectly from any lot or tract of land unless the city clerk shall have certified: 
a.  That such lot or tract of land has been assessed for the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main with which the connection is made; 
b.  If no assessment has been levied for such construction costs, that the proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be completed in due course; 
c.  If no assessment has been levied, and no assessment proceedings will be completed in due course, that a sum equal to the portion of cost of constructing the sanitary sewer main which would be assessable against the lot or tract has been paid to the city; or 
d.  If an assessment for the construction cost of the sewer has been levied which included a unit connection charge for each structure then in existence, that a monetary sum equal to such unit connection charge has been paid for structures not in existence at the time of the assessment. The amount of the unit connection charge shall be as established in the assessment proceeding, or, if not so established for any particular type of structure, the unit connection charge shall be based on the following formula, using a single-family dwelling as one unit (residential equivalent charge): 
Each single-family dwelling One unit Each hotel or motel unit One-third unit One manufactured home or apartment unit One-half unit Industrial or commercial One-half unit subject to a minimum of two unit structures, each 1,000 square feet  
(2)  If no such certificate can be issued by the city clerk, no permit to connect to any sanitary sewer main shall be issued unless the applicant shall pay an additional connection fee, which shall be equal to the portion of the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main which would be assessable against the lot or tract to be served by such connection. The assessable cost is to be determined by the city engineer upon the same basis as any assessment previously levied against other property for the main. If no such assessment has been levied, the assessable cost will be determined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have been or which shall be charged for similar connection with the main, determined on the basis of the total assessable cost of the main, allocated on a frontage basis, acreage basis, or both. 
(Code 1999, § 61.030) 
Secs. 36-414-36-439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PRIVATE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 36-440. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect and promote the health safety and general welfare of the city residents by regulating sewage discharges and the location, installation, alteration, operation, maintenance, and monitoring of all individual sewage treatment systems, to minimize the spread of communicable disease, and to prevent and avoid other health and ecological hazards attributable to bacterial and chemical contamination of lands and waters. 
(Code 1999, § 64.010; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-441. - Definitions. 
    The provisions of Minn. R. 7080.0020 are hereby incorporated. 
(Code 1999, § 64.020; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-442. - Scope. 
    This division shall apply to the installation or renovation of individual sewage treatment systems undertaken following the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and the operation, maintenance, correction and inspection of all individual sewage treatment systems, irrespective of when they were installed. 
(Code 1999, § 64.030; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-443. - Permissible systems. 
(a)  Only standard on-site sewage treatment systems may be installed or renovated. All installations or renovations shall be reviewed by the city building official and the appropriate county official. Individual sewage treatment systems shall be designed to receive all sewage from the dwelling served by the system. Surface, roof or foundation drainage and other stormwater shall not be allowed to enter any part of the system. 
(b)  Not more than one dwelling unit shall be connected to the same individual sewage treatment system. 
(c)  Where it can reasonably be anticipated that the construction of additional structures, dwellings, or bedrooms will increase the amount of sewage discharge or affect the operation of the system, a system to be installed or renovated shall comply with the requirements applicable to such additional needs. 
(Code 1999, § 64.040; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-444. - Public sewer availability. 
(a)  No individual sewage treatment system shall be installed or renovated on lands to which public sewer service is available. 
(b)  Where a private sewer system has been installed before the public sewer system was accessible to the premises served by the private system, after the public system is available, connection of the premises to the public system must be made within 90 days after such private system fails to function properly in violation of Minn. R. 7080.0060. It is unlawful to repair or pump a failing private system after such time as the public sewer system is accessible to the premises without written permission from the city building official. 
(Code 1999, § 64.050; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-445. - Permits. 
    No person shall install, alter, repair or extend any individual sewage treatment system without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city for each specific installation, alteration, repair or extension, and at the time of applying for the permit, shall pay a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. Such permits shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. No building permit or occupancy permit will be issued at locations where sanitary sewer is not available until an on-site sewage system permit is approved and issued. 
(Code 1999, § 64.060; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-446. - Minimum technical standards and criteria for individual sewage treatment systems. 
    The provisions in Minn. R. 7080.0060 through 7080.0176 are hereby incorporated. 
Sec. 36-447. - Failing systems. 
    An individual sewage treatment system posing an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be upgraded, replaced or repaired, or its use discontinued, within an appropriate time no greater than ten months. 
(Code 1999, § 64.070; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-448. - Licensing. 
    All design, installation, alteration, repair, maintenance, pumping, and inspection activities for an individual sewage treatment system shall be completed by a licensed contractor unless exempt under Minn. R. 7080.0700, subpt. 1. 
(Code 1999, § 64.090; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-449. - Lots created after January 23, 1996. 
    On lots where service by sanitary sewer is not available, the owner shall have a minimum of one additional soil treatment area which can support a standard soil treatment system. 
(Code 1999, § 64.100; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-450. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that an unlawful activity continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  The city may suspend or revoke any individual sewage treatment system permit upon information indicating that the permit has been issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or inadequate information, or that work is not being performed in compliance with this division. 
(c)  The city may issue an order to the owner or occupant of any premises utilizing an individual sewage treatment system to cease and desist the use of any system which is creating a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(d)  The city may cause to be assessed against the property on which an individual sewage treatment system is located, the cost of proper closure, restoration and cleanup of pollution occurring as a result of a system failure. 
(Code 1999, § 64.110; Ord. No. 495, 12-7-1999) 
Secs. 36-451-36-468. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORM AND SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-469. - Purpose; scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to set forth minimum requirements for stormwater management to diminish threats to public health, safety, public and private property and natural resources of the city by establishing standards that will: 
(1)  Protect life and property from dangers associated with flooding; 
(2)  Protect public and private property from damage resulting from runoff or erosion; 
(3)  Ensure site design minimizes the generation of stormwater and maximizes pervious areas for stormwater treatment; 
(4)  Promote regional stormwater management by watershed; 
(5)  Protect, maintain or restore water quality from nutrients, pathogens, toxins and debris; 
(6)  Promote infiltration and groundwater recharge; 
(7)  Stormwater management must comply with requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) General Permit for Construction Activities and city or watershed guidelines for total maximum daily waste load allocations; 
(8)  Meet requirements set forth by the Vadnais Lakes Area Watershed Management Organization (VLAWMO) or Ramsey-Washington Metro Watershed District (RWMWD), depending on the appropriate boundaries. 
(b)  No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional uses without having provided the stormwater management measures set forth herein to control or manage runoff from such development. All water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands, unless explicitly exempted by the city, shall be protected from illegal disposal/discharge and illegal connections. 
(c)  Appropriation of water from public water basins within the city shall be below the state department of natural resources threshold of 10,000 gallons per day and 1,000,000 gallons per year. 
(Code 1999, § 66.010; Ord. No. 621, 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 36-470. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person that applies for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a permit to allow land-disturbing activities. The term "applicant" also means that person's agents, employees, and others acting under this person's direction. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means erosion and sediment control and water quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and minimizing the degradation of surface water, including construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices published by state, watershed, or designated area-wide planning agencies. 
    Buffer means a protective vegetated zone located adjacent to a natural resource, such as a water of the state, that is subject to direct or indirect human alteration. Such a buffer strip is an integral part of protecting an aquatic ecosystem through filtering, pollutants and providing adjacent habitat. The width of a buffer strip is the width along each bank of a stream. Therefore, a 30-foot wide stream with 100-foot buffer strips has a total width of 230 feet. Acceptable buffer vegetation includes preserving existing predevelopment vegetation or planting locally distributed native Minnesota trees, shrubs and grassy vegetation. Alteration of buffers is strictly limited. Buffer areas should be designated with permanent markers. 
    Developer means a person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land-disturbance activity. 
    Discharge means the release, conveyance, channeling, runoff, or drainage of stormwater, including snowmelt, from a construction site. 
    Energy dissipation means the methods employed at pipe outlets to prevent erosion. Examples include, but are not limited to, aprons, riprap, splash pads and gabions that are designed to prevent erosion. 
    Erosion means any process that wears away the surface of the land by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
    Erosion and sediment practice specifications or practice means the management procedures, techniques, and methods to control soil erosion and sedimentation as officially adopted by the state, county, city or local watershed group, whichever is most stringent. 
    Erosion control means and refers to methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples include, but are not limited to, soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing. 
    Exposed soil areas means all areas of the construction site where the vegetation (trees, shrubs, brushes, grasses, etc.) or impervious surface has been removed, thus rendering the soil more prone to erosion. The term "exposed soil areas" includes topsoil stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the construction site. The term "exposed soil areas" does not include stockpiles or surcharge areas of gravel, concrete or bituminous. Once soil is exposed, it is considered exposed soil, until it meets the definition of the term "final stabilization." 
    Filter strips means a vegetated section of land designed to treat runoff as overland sheet flow. They may be designed in any natural vegetated form from a grassy meadow to a small forest. Their dense vegetated cover facilitates pollutant removal and infiltration. 
    Final stabilization means that all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 75 percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed. Simply sowing grass seed is not considered final stabilization. 
    Hydric soils means soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper strata. 
    Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic (large enough to be observed by the naked eye) plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. 
    Illicit discharges means any discharge to a city separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Impervious surface means a constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil, and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than existed prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads. 
    Land-disturbance activity means any land change that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or lands within the city's boundaries or jurisdiction, including clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. Within the context of this rule, the term "land-disturbance activity" does not mean: 
(1)  Individual home gardens, minor landscaping, repairs, and maintenance work. 
(2)  Construction, installation, and maintenance of fences, signs, posts, poles, and electric, telephone, cable television, utility lines or individual service connections to these utilities, which result in creating under 5,000 square feet of exposed soil. 
(3)  Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or silvicultural (forestry) crops. 
(4)  Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency repairs, unless the land-disturbing activity would have otherwise required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, but for the emergency. If such a plan would have been required, then the disturbed land area shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the city's requirements immediately after the emergency had been addressed. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) means the permit program as authorized by the Clean Water Act. 
    Native vegetation means the presettlement group of plant species native to the local region, that were not introduced as a result of European settlement or subsequent human introduction. 
    Ordinary high water mark means the boundary elevation where the vegetation changes from predominately aquatic to terrestrial. This elevation delineates the highest water level, which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. Water often reaches this elevation in spring. For rivers and streams, the ordinary high water mark is usually the top of the bank. It is less well defined for lakes and wetlands. M.S.A. § 103G.005, subd. 14 provides that, the term "ordinary high water level" means the boundary of waterbasins, watercourses, public waters, and public waters wetlands, and: 
(1)  The ordinary high water level is an elevation delineating the highest water level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly the point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial; 
(2)  For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel; and 
(3)  For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool. 
The term "ordinary high water mark" is further defined in Minn. R. 6120.2500, subpt. 11. The state department of natural resources' area hydrologist determines ordinary high water marks. 
    Paved surface means a constructed hard, smooth surface made of asphalt, concrete or other pavement material. Examples include, but are not limited to, roads, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots. 
    Permanent cover means final stabilization. Examples include grass, gravel, asphalt, and concrete. 
    Receiving waters means the water where the discharge is released. 
    Sanitary waste facility means all property, real or personal, including negative and positive easements and water and air rights, which is or may be needed or useful for the processing or disposal of waste, except property for the collection of the waste and property used primarily for the manufacture of scrap metal or paper. Waste facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer stations, processing facilities and disposal sites and facilities. 
    Sediment means the by-product of an erosion process and solid material both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by water, wind, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below water level. 
    Sediment control means the methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving a disturbed site. Sediment control practices may include silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent sedimentation basins. 
    Sedimentation means the process or action of depositing sediment. 
    Soil means the unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth. For the purposes of this Code, stockpile of gravel, aggregate, concrete or bituminous materials are not considered soil stockpiles. 
    Stabilized means the exposed ground surface after sod, erosion control blanket, riprap, or other material that prevents erosion has covered it. 
    Stormwater, under Minn. R. 7077.0105, subpt. 4(1)(b), means precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and any other surface runoff and drainage. The term "stormwater" does not include construction site dewatering. 
    Stormwater pollution protection plan (SWPPP) means a joint stormwater and erosion and sediment control plan that is a document containing the requirements of section 4 of the NPDES permit, that, when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and off-site nonpoint pollution. It involves both temporary and permanent controls. 
    Stormwater sewer utility and surface water management utility are used interchangeably by the city to refer to its stormwater utility system. 
    Structure means anything manufactured, constructed or erected, which is normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcel is less than five acres in area, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, including the location and dedication of necessary streets to serve such lots. 
    Surface water management utility. See Stormwater sewer utility. 
    Temporary protection means short-term methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples of such protection include, but are not limited to, straw, mulch, erosion-control blankets, wood chips, and erosion netting. 
    Vegetated or grassy swales means a vegetated earthen channel that conveys stormwater, while treating the stormwater by biofiltration. Such swales remove pollutants by both filtration and infiltration. 
    Waters of the state, as defined in M.S.A. § 115.01, means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
    Wet detention/retention facility means a permanent manmade structure, containing a permanent pool of water, used for the temporary storage of runoff. 
    Wetlands means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by water as determined by Minn. R. ch. 8420. Constructed wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are not waters of the state. Wetlands must have the following attributes: 
(1)  A predominance of hydric soils; 
(2)  Be inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and 
(3)  Support a prevalence of such vegetation under normal circumstances. 
(Code 1999, § 66.020; Ord. No. 621, 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 36-471. - Stormwater and urban runoff control. 
(a)  Illegal disposal/dumping. 
(1)  No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, or keep any substance upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land, so that the substance might be or become a pollutant, except in containers, recycling bags, or other lawfully established waste disposal facilities. 
(2)  No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt, or landscape material into a water resource, buffer, street, road, alley, catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, flood control channel, canal, storm drain or any fabricated natural conveyance. 
(b)  Illicit discharges and connections. 
(1)  No person shall cause any illicit discharge to enter the storm sewer system or any surface water unless such discharge: 
a.  Consists of nonstormwater that is authorized by an NPDES point source permit obtained from the MPCA; 
b.  Is associated with firefighting activities or other activities necessary to protect public health and safety; or 
c.  Is one of the following exempt discharges: waterline flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pools and any other water source not containing pollutant. 
(2)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the city prior to the time of the test. 
(3)  No person shall use any illicit connection to convey nonstormwater to the city's storm sewer system. 
(4)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(5)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(c)  Maintenance requirements. Any owner or occupant of property within the city shall comply with the following maintenance requirements: 
(1)  No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any foreign object, chemical or septic waste in an area where discharge to streets or storm sewer system may occur. This section shall apply to both actual and potential discharges. 
a.  Septic systems must be maintained to prevent failure. 
b.  No part of any individual septic system requiring on-land or in-ground disposal of waste shall be located closer than 150 feet from the ordinary high water level in the case of DNR protected waters, or 25 feet from the wetland boundary in the case of all other water bodies, unless it is proven by the applicant that no effluent will immediately or gradually reach the water bodies because of existing physical characteristics of the site or the system. 
c.  Recreational vehicle sewage shall be disposed of at a proper sanitary waste facility. Waste should not be discharged in an area where drainage to streets or storm sewer systems may occur. 
d.  For recreational pools, water shall be allowed to sit seven days without the addition of chlorine to allow for chlorine to evaporate before discharge. 
(2)  Runoff of water from residential property shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the washing down of paved areas in commercial or industrial property is prohibited unless necessary for health or safety purposes and not in violation of any other provisions in city codes. 
(3)  Mobile washing companies (carpet cleaning, mobile vehicle washing, etc.) shall dispose of wastewater to the sanitary sewer. Wastewater shall not be discharged where drainage to streets or storm sewer systems may occur. 
(4)  Storage of materials, machinery, and equipment shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil or other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous materials, shall not be stored in areas susceptible to runoff. 
b.  Any machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to runoff shall be placed in a confined area to contain leaks, spills, or discharges. 
(5)  Debris and residue shall be removed, as noted below: 
a.  All motor vehicle parking lots and private streets shall be swept at a minimum of once a year in the spring to remove debris. Such debris shall be collected and properly disposed. 
b.  Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially harmful material such as animal waste, garbage or batteries shall be removed as soon as possible and disposed of properly. Hazardous waste must be disposed of at an appropriate disposal site and shall not be placed in a trash container. 
c.  Industrial or construction activity discharges. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the storm sewer system. All facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity, must adhere to the following guidelines: 
1.  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the storm sewer system or watercourses through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. 
2.  Any person responsible for a property or premises which is the source of an illicit discharge shall be required to implement, at the person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system. These BMPs shall be part of a SWPPP as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(d)  Construction and building site activity. Construction sites and landscaping projects are especially susceptible to erosion and pollution. For this reason, construction site operators must control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, petroleum products, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. The developer shall be held responsible for adherence to these required prevention and control measures: 
(1)  A designated area shall be provided onsite for concrete truck washout. The area shall be constructed so as to contain washout material and be located at least 50 feet away from any storm drain inlet or receiving water during construction. Upon completion of construction activities, the concrete washout material will be removed and properly disposed of prior to the area being restored. 
(2)  The guidelines below must be followed concerning debris storage and disposal: 
a.  Daily cleanup of construction site shall be performed to ensure that all litter is contained in an appropriate enclosure or container so as not to accumulate on the ground. 
b.  Operators must keep solid waste materials in either a container or an enclosed waste collection area. 
c.  Empty/unused chemical containers must be disposed of in accordance with label instructions and all state and federal requirements. 
d.  Potentially hazardous waste must be separated from nonhazardous waste. 
e.  Recycling of waste materials is encouraged when possible. 
f.  All construction site wastes must be disposed of at authorized disposal facilities. 
(3)  Rock construction entrances shall be constructed at all city-approved entrances. Construction accesses not approved by the city should be adequately blocked to prevent unwanted traffic. 
a.  Site access roads shall be graded or otherwise protected with silt fences, diversion channels, or dikes and pipes to prevent sediment from exiting the site via the access roads. 
b.  Individual lots shall each be required to install and maintain a rock construction entrance throughout building construction until a dust-free access has been installed. Silt fence or bio logs shall be placed and maintained as appropriate. At the completion of turf establishment, all erosion control measures shall be removed. 
(4)  Sanitary waste facilities shall be provided onsite and be located as far from storm sewer inlets and receiving waters as practical on the construction site. 
(5)  Chemicals, paint, petroleum, fertilizer, and pesticides must be stored in a covered enclosure and as far from receiving waters as practical on the construction site. 
(e)  Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting, or may result, in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into the storm sewer system or waters of the state, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the city no later than 24 hours on the next business day. 
(f)  Access to buildings for inspection, monitoring or dye testing. 
(1)  The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect all buildings under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Code. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, dye testing, examination and copying of records that relate to the discharge of stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up at any building such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring, sampling or dye testing of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The city has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(6)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(g)  Suspension of storm sewer system access. 
(1)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend storm sewer system discharge access to a person or property when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents, or may present, imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm sewer system or waters of the state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer system or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(2)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the storm sewer system in violation of this article may have their storm sewer system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates storm sewer system access to premises terminated, pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 66.030; Ord. No. 621, 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 36-472. - Post construction stormwater management. 
    The purpose of this section is to comply with the state's goal of obtaining a pollutant loading water quality model that will provide, at minimum, changes in average annual flow volume, total suspended solids, and phosphorus. This modeling will be based on two time periods: from 1988 to 2010 and from 2010 to 2040, or ultimate development, whichever will occur first. 
(1)  Stormwater management performance. The applicant shall consider reducing the need for stormwater management performance standards by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover. It shall also: 
a.  Minimize impact to significant natural features. 
b.  Review the site for wetlands, wooded areas of significance, rare and endangered species habitat or areas designated by the county biological survey, city or watershed district that are deemed to be important and require special protection. These areas should not be developed without all appropriate approvals from the regulating agencies. 
c.  Minimize impervious surface coverage to the maximum extent practicable. 
d.  In designated shoreland areas, the development shall meet the impervious surface requirements of the shoreland ordinance, regardless of conveyance systems. 
e.  Have a proposed design, suggested location and phased implementation of effective, practicable stormwater management measures for plans designed, engineered and implemented to achieve the following results: 
1.  Meet or exceed NPDES permit regulations as outlined by the MPCA general permit for construction activities. 
2.  Oil and grease control. For all stormwater plans for commercial or industrial developments and all other uses where the potential for pollution by oil or grease, or both, exists, the first one-half inch of runoff will be treated using the best oil and grease removal technology available. This requirement may be waived by the city when the applicant can demonstrate that installation of such practices is not necessary. 
3.  Runoff rate control for all stormwater facilities shall be designed, installed and maintained to effectively accomplish that there is no increase to the peak stormwater runoff rate from the site, under predevelopment conditions, for anything less than a 24-hour precipitation event with a return frequency of one, two, ten and 100 years. The project must comply with the requirements of the MPCA's general permit for construction activities. 
4.  Volume control for stormwater runoff retention shall be achieved onsite in the amount equivalent to the runoff generated from one-half inch of water over the impervious surfaces of the project or as specified by the appropriate watershed. 
(2)  Outlets. Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable outlet capable of carrying designed flow at a non-erosive velocity. Outlet design must consider flow capacity and flow duration for a two-year event. This requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to the storm sewer system or waterbody. Measures to trap floatables for energy dissipation must also be constructed. 
(3)  Minimize impervious surface area and maximize infiltration. Where directed by the city and based on site feasibility, projects shall use existing natural drainageways and vegetated soil surfaces to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge into public waters or a storm sewer system. Permanent pool areas of wet ponds tend to lose infiltration capacity and will not be accepted as an infiltration practice. The applicant shall attempt to limit the impervious surface of the developed site or subdivision by incorporating the following design considerations, consistent with zoning, subdivision, and PUD requirements: 
a.  Natural vegetation preserved wherever practical. 
b.  Street widths that meet city standards and project needs. 
c.  Reducing parking lot space that meet city standards. 
d.  Sidewalk locations. 
e.  Reducing setbacks and driveways that meet city standards. 
f.  Maximizing open space while incorporating smaller lot sizes to conserve natural areas and reduce the amount of stormwater runoff generated at the site. 
g.  Using landscaping and soils to treat and infiltrate stormwater runoff. 
h.  Limit curb and gutter where practicable, and use vegetated swales or equivalent. 
i.  Look for vegetated areas that can filter sheet flow, removing sediment and other pollutants, and increasing the time of concentration. 
j.  Disconnect impervious areas by allowing runoff from small impervious areas to be directed to pervious areas where it can be infiltrated or filtered. 
k.  Runoff from downspouts, driveways and other impervious areas shall be directed to pervious surfaces, where feasible, or unless the applicant can demonstrate that the practice is likely to result in groundwater contamination. 
l.  Increase buffers around streams, steep slopes, and wetlands to protect from flood damage and provide additional water quality treatment. 
m.  Use shared parking facilities consistent with zoning requirements. 
n.  Install semi-permeable/permeable or porous paving in areas where appropriate. 
(4)  Pond requirements. For all projects creating more than one acre of impervious surface, ponding shall be required. At a minimum, all pond design specifications shall conform to the city's engineering design standards, appropriate watershed district requirements, and the current requirements found in the NPDES construction permit. 
(5)  Regional ponding. If the city determines the site is not suitable for on-site ponding, off-site stormwater management and associated fees may be established, provided that provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility, and provided that all the following conditions for the off-site facility are met: 
a.  The facility is in place or the city has knowledge of future regional ponding onsite; 
b.  The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that at least meets the standards of this article; 
c.  The city is satisfied that the facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance; 
d.  The appropriate watershed approves the ponding area. 
(6)  Accepted alternative stormwater treatments. Alternative stormwater treatments, including, but not limited to, rain gardens and infiltration basins, may be installed and shall be reviewed and approved by the city and the appropriate watershed district. 
(7)  Maintenance of private stormwater facilities. All private stormwater facilities shall be maintained by the owner in proper condition consistent with the performance standards for which they were originally designed. 
a.  All settled materials from sumps, grit chambers, and other devices, including settled solids, shall be removed and properly disposed of on an annual basis. One- to five-year waivers from this requirement may be granted by the city when the owner presents evidence that the facility has additional capacity to remove settled solids in accordance with the original design capacity. 
b.  Ponds shall be inspected at least once every five years to determine if settled materials should be removed. Settled materials shall be removed and properly disposed of when the pond is no longer functioning at the original design capacity. 
c.  When requested by the city, a maintenance plan must be provided that defines who will conduct the maintenance, the type of maintenance and the maintenance intervals of a private stormwater facility before the facility is approved. 
d.  All stormwater facilities must be designed to minimize the need for maintenance, to provide easy vehicle and personnel access for maintenance purposes, and to be structurally sound. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to the facilities for inspection or maintenance. 
e.  The city shall have the right to request and review inspection and maintenance records and shall have the right to perform an inspection of stormwater facilities at any time if the city has probable cause to believe that the facilities are not being properly maintained or inspected. 
(Code 1999, § 66.040; Ord. No. 621, 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 36-473. - Enforcement; notice of violation. 
(a)  Upon discovering that a person or property owner has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the city engineer, code enforcement officer, or his designee, shall serve a notice upon the owner of the property upon which the nuisance exists. Such notice shall be given by certified mail at the last-known address as shown on the property tax records of the county. Such notice shall advise that a nuisance exists and require the property owner to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time, as established by the city engineer, code enforcement officer, or his designee, and stated in the notice. Such time shall not be less than 14 days. Such notice may require, without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  Such notice shall also advise the property owner of the right to request a hearing before the city council or his designee to contest the contents of the notice. 
(c)  If requested by the person upon whom the notice is served under subsection (a) of this section, a hearing before the city council, or his designee, shall be held, at which the person may contest the contents of the notice. The request for such a hearing must be made within five days after receipt of the notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section. After such hearing and as directed by the city council, the city administrator, or his designee, may affirm the notice, modify the notice or quash the notice. 
(d)  If the property owner does not abate the nuisance as required by the notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section and has not requested a hearing before the city council, or his designee, under subsection (c) of this section, authorized agents of the city shall abate the nuisance. The cost of such abatement shall be collected as a special assessment against the property upon which the nuisance was located. 
(e)  If the property owner requests a hearing before the city council, or his designee, under subsection (c) of this section, no abatement actions shall be taken until the hearing is held. If, after the hearing, the city council, or his designee, affirms or modifies the notice and the nuisance is not abated as provided in the notice as affirmed or modified, authorized agents of the city shall abate the nuisance. The cost of such abatement shall be collected as a special assessment against the property upon which the nuisance was located. 
(f)  Nothing in this section prevents abatement by the city of a public nuisance without notice and hearing in the case of an emergency in which there is an immediate and direct threat to the public health or safety. The expense of such an emergency abatement shall be collected as a special assessment against the property upon which the nuisance was located. The city shall make every available effort to contact the property owner and afford them the opportunity to make emergency repairs immediately. 
(Code 1999, § 66.050; Ord. No. 621, 5-18-2010) 
Secs. 36-474-36-499. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORGANIZATION AND FINANCING 

Sec. 36-500. - Surface water management utility established. 
    The city's surface water management utility (also referred to as storm sewer utility) shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to M.S.A. § 444.075. 
(Code 1999, § 65.010) 
Sec. 36-501. - Purpose and deposit of funds. 
    The purpose of all funds derived from the stormwater drainage utility is to pay for all or part of the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement or other alteration in the maintenance, operation and use of the storm sewer utility as established by the city. All revenues derived from the stormwater drainage utility fees shall be credited to the appropriate stormwater sewer fund. 
(Code 1999, § 65.090) 
Sec. 36-502. - Definitions. 
(a)  The terms "surface water management utility" and "storm sewer utility" are used interchangeably in this division. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Surface water management budget means the annual budget approved by the city council for surface water management including planning, engineering, monitoring, capital expenditures, personnel and equipment and operation of the surface water utility, in accordance with established city policy. 
    Surface water management fee means the quarterly charge for each parcel on non-exempt property in the city for the management of surface water as provided in the city fee schedule. 
    Utility factor means the ration of runoff volume, in inches, for a particular land use, to the runoff volume, in inches, for a residential household, assuming a two-inch rainfall and soil conservation service (SCS) Type B soil conditions. 
(Code 1999, § 65.020) 
Sec. 36-503. - Surface water management fee. 
    A just and equitable surface water management (or storm sewer utility) fee to pay for the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement or other activity in the maintenance, operation or use of the facilities, and of obtaining and complying with permits required by law shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council and the amount included in the city fee schedule. 
(1)  A charge for storm sewer service may be imposed for all premises and the charges made for service rendered shall be as nearly as possible proportionate to the cost of furnishing the service. 
(2)  Charges made for the use of the stormwater facilities may be fixed by reference to a reasonable classification of the types of premises to which the service is furnished or by reference to the quantity, pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the water or on any other equitable basis, including, but without limitation, any combination of those referred to in this subsection (2). 
(3)  The utility factors for various land uses are as follows: 
Classification Land Use Utility Factor 1 Residential 1.00 2 Townhomes, condominiums 2.52 3 Apartments, industrial office, manufactured home parks, institutions (churches, schools, government, buildings, hospitals) 2.25 4 Business/commercial 2.88 5 St. Paul Water Utility Property 0.89 6 Parks, cemeteries, golf courses 0.89 7 Parking lots 4.14 8 Railroad right-of-way 0.31  
(4)  The surface water management fee shall be determined by first determining the percentage of total runoff in the city which is attributed to residential property. The total fee for all residential property in the city is computed by multiplying the runoff percentage by one-quarter of the annual surface water management budget. The residential surface water management fee, per acre, is determined by dividing the total residential fee by the estimated total acres of residential land use in the city. 
(5)  The surface water management fee for all individual parcels shall be defined as the product of the residential surface water management fee (per acre), the appropriate utility factor based on land use, and the total acreage of the parcel. 
(6)  The surface water management fee for residential townhomes/condominiums, apartments and manufactured home parks may be determined on a per-household basis rather than a per-acre basis. The fee per household is determined by first determining the total fee for each land use. The total fee for each land use is determined by multiplying the total fee for all residential property by the appropriate utility factor based on land use. The total fee is then divided by the total number of households for the particular land use, resulting in cost per household. Alternatively, the fee may be billed in aggregate on a per-acre basis to townhomes/condominiums, apartments and manufactured home parks. 
(7)  On an annual basis, the city may adjust the computed fees by a similar percentage for inflationary increases. 
(Code 1999, § 65.030) 
Sec. 36-504. - Cost of removal of obstructions. 
    Fees shall be charged to property owners for the maintenance and clearing of drainage and utility easements where obstructions have been placed in the easement areas. Affected property owners shall be provided with reasonable notice and opportunity to remove the obstructions, vegetation, gardens, fences and related items before city personnel or contractors are directed to remove such items. All actual expenses incurred by the city for the removal of such items shall be billed to the affected property owner. Nonpayment of such charges will result in collection in the same manner as for other unpaid utility charges. Within six months of payment of a fee assessed under this section, the owner may request a recomputation of the amount by filing a written request therefor with the city engineer. 
Sec. 36-505. - Credits. 
    The council may adopt policies, by resolution, for adjustment of the surface water management fees. Information to justify a fee adjustment must be supplied by the property owner. Such adjustments of fees shall not be retroactive. 
(Code 1999, § 65.040) 
Sec. 36-506. - Exemptions. 
    The following land uses are exempt from the surface water management fee: 
(1)  Public right-of-way. 
(2)  Undeveloped (unimproved) land, excluding St. Paul Water Utility Property. 
(3)  Lakes and wetlands. 
(Code 1999, § 65.050) 
Sec. 36-507. - Payment of fee. 
    The surface water management fee shall be invoiced quarterly. The amount due as shown on the invoice shall be payable on or before the tenth day of the month following the billing month. 
(Code 1999, § 65.060) 
Sec. 36-508. - Penalty for late payment. 
    The penalty for late payment shall be the same as for late sanitary sewer payments, in accordance with section 36-410. 
(Code 1999, § 65.070) 
Sec. 36-509. - Certification of delinquent fees. 
    Any delinquent amounts outstanding constitute a lien against the property pursuant to state law. Periodically, the city may certify delinquent amounts for collection with taxes. The timing and threshold for determining the accounts to be included in the certification process will be determined annually by the city. Owners of affected properties shall have the option of paying the balance due on the account until the date the notice of the certification is mailed. After the date of notice of certification hearing is mailed, payments will still be accepted, but the amount due will include a pre-certification penalty fee charged to affected accounts. The certification notice will provide an opportunity for the account holder to schedule a hearing to object to the proposed certification of unpaid utility charges. If no objection is raised, or if the objection is sustained, the delinquent amount due, plus additional certification penalties, as determined annually by the city, may then be collected in an action brought for that purpose in the name of the city, or the city clerk may certify to the county auditor the amounts due (with penalty), together with a legal description of the premises served, and the county auditor shall thereupon enter such amount as part of the tax levy on the premises to be collected during the ensuing year. 
(Code 1999, § 65.080) 
Chapter 38 - ZONING, PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal Planning Act, M.S.A. §§ 462.351 to 462.365. 
(Code 1999, § 4.060) 
Sec. 38-2. - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the city and its people through the establishment of minimum regulations governing development and use. This chapter shall divide the city into use districts and establish regulations in regard to location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of structures and land. Such regulations are established to protect such use areas; to promote orderly development and redevelopment; to provide adequate light, air and convenience of access to property; to prevent congestion in the public right-of-way; to prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating land, buildings, yards and density of population; to provide for compatibility of different land uses; to provide for administration of this chapter; to provide for amendments; to prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations; and to define powers and duties of the city staff, the planning commission, and the city council in relation to this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 4.020) 
Sec. 38-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building and accessory structure mean a subordinate building or portion of the main building which is located on the same lot as the main building and the use of which is clearly incidental to the use of the main building. 
    Accessory use means a use accessory or incidental to the principal use or a building located on the same lot as the accessory use. 
    Agriculture means land and associated structures used exclusively for the purpose of growing produce, including fruits, vegetables, trees, plants, flowers and other similar crops, and excluding gardens and landscaping for personal use. 
    Alley means a public thoroughfare less than 30 feet in width. 
    Antenna means a device for the reception of television or radio signals. 
    Apartment building means a building other than a hotel or motel containing five or more dwelling units which have primary entrances from the same common hallways. 
    Assisted living apartment means an apartment within a group residential facility that combines housing, personalized supportive services, daily meals, health care and 24-hour oversight designed to meet the individual needs of persons age 55 years or older who need help with the activities of daily living, but who do not need the skilled medical care provided in a nursing home. See also Senior housing. 
    Auto reduction yard means a lot or yard where three or more unlicensed motor vehicles, or the remains thereof, are kept for the purpose of dismantling, sale of parts, sale as scrap, storage, or abandonment. 
    Auto service establishment means a building, or portion thereof, with facilities on the property for dispensing gasoline or diesel fuel and for repairing automobiles. 
    Auto washing establishment means a building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing more than two automobiles using production line methods. 
    Automobile agencies means a business selling new vehicles and maintaining parts and service departments, all onsite. 
    Automobile detailing establishment means a building, or portion thereof, containing facilities on the property for cleaning the interior and exterior of automobiles using handheld equipment and not drive-through full vehicle mechanical washing equipment. 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground but having less than half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Body art means physical body adornment, including, but not limited to, the piercing of body parts other than ears and tattooing. 
    Body art establishment means any premises where body art is offered or performed. 
    Brewpub means a restaurant establishment holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license in which malt liquor is brewed or manufactured solely for sale and consumption on tap on the licensed premises that shall be owned by the brewer. 
    Buffer means the use of land, topography (difference in elevation), space, fences or landscape plantings to screen, or partially screen, a tract or property from another tract or property and thus reduce undesirable influences, such as sight, noise, dust and other external effects which a land use may have upon other adjacent or nearby land uses. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the average of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot immediately adjacent to the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Building and structure, means any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. When separated by party walls without openings, each portion of such buildings so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Business means any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold or rented, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for compensation. 
    Carport means an automobile shelter having one or more sides open. 
    Cellar means that portion of the building having more than one-half of the floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Chicken means a domesticated bird of the species Gallus gallus domesticus, or other related birds, that serves as a source of eggs or meat. 
    Chicken coop means a structure for the keeping or housing of chickens. 
    Church means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
    Club, private (nonprofit), means a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building, or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. 
    Cocktail room means an area on the premises of a microdistillery, or on premises adjacent to a microdistillery, and owned by the distiller in which the distiller sells or otherwise provides exclusively distilled spirits produced by the distiller for consumption within the cocktail room. 
    Collector street means a street which carries traffic from local streets to or from arterial streets or from arterial-to-arterial. The term "collector street" includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development and those principal streets used for circulation within such a development. 
    Comprehensive plan, unless otherwise stated, means the general plan for land use, transportation, and community facilities prepared and maintained pursuant to state law. 
    Convenience food restaurant means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-eat state for consumption either within the premises or for carry-out with consumption either on or off the premises, and whose design or principal method of operation includes both of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in edible containers or in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers. 
(2)  The customer is not served food at his table by an employee but receives it at a counter, window, or similar facility for carrying to another location on or off the premises for consumption. 
    Corner lot means a lot situated at the junction of and fronting on two or more streets. 
    Curb level means the grade elevation established by the city council of the curb in front of the center of the building. Where no curb level has been established, the engineering staff shall determine a curb level, or its equivalent, for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Depth of lot means the mean horizontal distance between the mean front street and the mean rear lot line. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its depth and its lesser frontage is its width. 
    Depth of rear yard means the mean horizontal distance between the rear line of the principal building and the centerline of an alley (where an alley exists), otherwise a rear lot line. 
    District means a section of the city for which the regulations governing the height, area, use of buildings and premises are the same. 
    DRC means the city development review committee, established in section 38-34. 
    Drive-in business means any business in which people are provided a service or a sale is made without the customer being required to leave the vehicle. Such businesses include, but are not limited to, the following: drive-in theater, drive-in bank, drive-in laundry or dry-cleaning pick-up station, drive-in cafe, and any business offering take-home food services. 
    Dwelling means any building or part thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes by one or more human beings either permanently or transiently. 
    Dwelling, attached, means a dwelling which is joined to another dwelling. 
    Dwelling, detached, means a dwelling, (including its attached private garage, if any) which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by one household. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed for or occupied by two households. 
    Dwelling unit means a residential accommodation, including complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one household and not more than an aggregate of two roomers or boarders. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it shall be considered as part of the building in which the dwelling unit is located. 
    Family. Any of the following shall apply: 
(1)  A person related by blood, marriage or adoption, together with their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. 
(2)  Group or foster care of not more than six wards, together with their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, all maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit approved and certified by the appropriate public agency. 
(3)  A group of not more than five persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. 
    Fence means a barrier constructed of materials other than evergreen shrubbery erected for the purpose of protection, confinement, enclosure, or privacy. The term "fence" includes barriers of at least 25 percent opacity, screening walls, and opaque lines of plantings exceeding 30 inches in height. 
    Floodplain means the area adjoining a river, stream, channel, lake or low area which is subject to flooding as defined by the city engineer. 
    Floor area. The floor area of a building shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of such building, exclusive of cellars or basements, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles of the household resident upon the premises, and in which no business service or industry is carried on; provided that not more than one-half of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one or two more capacity may be so rented. 
    Garage, public, means any premises except those described as a private or community garage, used for the storage or care of power-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repair, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Home occupation means any occupation of a service character which is clearly secondary to the main use of the premises as a dwelling, and does not change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use. This occupation shall be carried on or conducted only by members of a family residing in the dwelling. 
    Hotel, motel, means any building, or portion thereof, where lodging is offered to transient guests for compensation and in which there are more than five sleeping rooms in an individual room or apartment. 
    Household means any number of individuals living together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, or hotel, as defined herein. 
    Independent living apartment means an apartment within a group residential facility that is marketed only to people age 55 years or older in which some congregate meals or other personal assistance with daily living or health maintenance may be provided on an individual, as-requested basis. 
    Junkyard means an open area where waste, used, or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires, and bottles. A junkyard includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
    Kennel means a place which provides for boarding, training or otherwise caring for or providing services to dogs, cats or any other domestic pets. The term "kennel" includes any place where more than three domestic animals are kept for any purpose, with the exception of a litter of domestic animals up to six months from birth. 
    Laboratories means space utilized and equipped for research, development, and testing for technical, medical, scientific, and other reasons; or a space to test drugs or chemicals, such as medical marijuana. 
    Landscaping means planting of trees, grass, and shrubs and grading of land. 
    Light industry means any operation which assembles, improves, treats, compounds, or packages goods or materials in a manner which does not create a noticeable amount of noise, dust, odor, smoke, glare or vibration outside of the building in which the activity takes place, which does not require outside storage or goods or materials and which does not generate (in the opinion of the city council) objectionable amounts of truck traffic. 
    Livestock means the keeping of one or more farm animals, whether kept for slaughter or for a pet. 
    Loading space means that portion of a lot or plat designed to serve the purpose of loading or unloading all types of vehicles. 
    Local street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood. 
    Lot means one unit of a recorded plat or subdivision occupied, or to be occupied, by a building and its accessory buildings and including, as a minimum, such open spaces as are required under this chapter and having frontage on a public street. The term "lot" is synonymous with the term "plot." 
    Lot area means the land area within the lot lines. The area of public rights-of-way is not included in the lot area. 
    Lot area per family means the lot area required by this chapter to be provided for each family in a dwelling. 
    Lot, corner. See Corner lot. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line means a property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that, where a portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley line. 
    Lot line, front, means that boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated street. The owner of a corner lot may select either street lot as the front lot line. 
    Lot line, rear, means that boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is or is approximately parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side, means any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line. 
    Lot of record means any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed, or one unit of an auditor's subdivision or a registered land survey; or a parcel of land. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within the lot boundary and at the minimum required front setback line. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected onsite, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured homes" includes any structure which meets all the requirements and, with respect to which the manufacturer, voluntarily files a certification and complies with the standards established under this chapter. 
    Manufactured home lot means a section of ground in a manufactured home park of not less than 3,600 square feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for one manufactured home, off-street parking space for one automobile and other uses considered pertinent to the establishment and use of a manufactured home residence. In case of multi-story structures, a unit means an area of not less than 1,680 square feet of unoccupied floor space to be used as the location for one manufactured home. Off-street parking space for one automobile per unit shall be provided adjacent to the multi-story structure. 
    Manufactured home park means any park, trailer park, trailer court, trailer camp or campsite, lot, parcel, tract of land or multi-story structure designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for any manufactured home, coach or manufactured home coaches and upon which any manufactured home coach or manufactured home coaches are parked and includes all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of the manufactured home park and its facilities or not. The term "manufactured home park" shall not include automobile or manufactured home sales lots on which unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for purposes of inspection and sale, except as herein provided for in manufactured home sales lots. 
    Manufacturing, light, means the processing or fabrication of certain materials or products where no process involved will produce noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emission which will disturb or endanger neighboring properties. 
    Massage therapy or therapeutic massage means a scientific health care or health maintenance technique or procedure carried out by a massage therapist involving the rubbing, tapping, pounding or kneading of a person's skin, muscles, and tissues or the stretching of body limbs (e.g., Thai massage) for the purpose of easing mental and physical tension, the breaking up of fatty tissues, relaxing muscles, or alleviating muscle spasms, and the improvement of circulation through the body. 
    Massage therapy business means: 
(1)  Any enterprise, establishment, or operation, whether under control of an individual or legal entity, providing or offering to provide massage therapy services within the city for a fee or other consideration paid either directly or indirectly, that: 
a.  Has one or more massage therapists, including the owner, employed or contracted to provide massage therapy services for the massage therapy business; or 
b.  Is located in a fixed location in a nonresidential district within the city wherein massage therapy services are provided. 
(2)  Any health or medical facility, office, or clinic operated by state-licensed medical professionals or any health or medical-related business operated by state-licensed medical professionals, which provides therapeutic massage to its patients, shall not be deemed as a massage therapy business. 
    Medical marijuana means any species of the genus cannabis plant, or any mixture or preparation of them, including whole plant extracts and resins and is delivered in the form of liquid, but not limited to oil; pill; or a vaporized delivery method with the use of liquid or oil, but which does not require the use of dried leaves or plant form that has been approved by the commissioner of the state department of health under M.S.A. § 152.25. 
    Medical marijuana distribution facility means an establishment engaged in the sale and distribution of medical marijuana that is validly registered and approved by the state. 
    Medical uses means those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and care of human beings. These include: hospitals, dental services, medical services or clinics, nursing or convalescent homes, orphans' homes, rest homes, and sanitariums. 
    Memory care apartment means an assisted living apartment with a high level of oversight for people with Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia. 
    Microbrewery means a malt liquor beverage production facility which manufactures less than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year, pursuant to M.S.A. § 340A.301, subd. 6(i) and (j). 
    Microdistillery means a distillery producing premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year, consistent with M.S.A. § 340A.22. 
    Minor arterial street, as designated by the functional classification system of the city comprehensive plan, means County Road 49, TH 96, TH 61, and County Road E, east of Interstate 35E. 
    More restricted, less restricted. The meaning and application of the terms "more restricted" and "less restricted," when used with reference to two or more zoning districts, shall be determined by the city council in an instance where applicable with reference to the uses, performance standards and building, lot and setback requirements and restrictions of the applicable zoning districts, provided that, in all cases, a residential zoning district shall be deemed more restricted than a business or industrial zoning district. 
    Motor freight terminal means a building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is transferred, assembled or stored for routing in intra-site or inter-state shipment by motor truck. The term "motor freight terminal" includes the storage of the motor trucks themselves. 
    Multiple residence (apartment building) means a structure containing three or more dwelling units, but not a townhouse cluster. 
    Nonconforming use means any lawfully-established use of a building or premises which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment thereof, does not comply with the use regulations of the zoning district in which such building or premises shall be located. 
    Noxious matter or material means material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction. 
    Nursery, day, means a use where care is provided for pay for three or more children for a period of four hours or more per day, subject to the requirements of the state for such use. 
    Nursing home means a facility that provides residential accommodations with skilled nursing care 24 hours per day and rehabilitation services on a short-term or long-term basis either for the elderly or younger persons. Outpatient rehabilitation services may also be provided in the same building. 
    Office showroom means a building in which at least 20 percent of the floor space is devoted to office activities, the remainder being used for either warehousing, display, light manufacturing, or research and testing. Floor-to-ceiling joist heights in the warehouse would be not more than 14 feet in height, except by conditional use permit, in the city center district, where such floor-to-ceiling joist heights may be up to 24 feet, with the building facade design being approved by the city council. 
    Offices means structures, or portions of structures, in which commercial activities take place but where goods are not produced, sold, or repaired. These include banks, general offices, governmental offices, insurance offices, real estate offices, and taxicab offices, but not taxi stands, travel agency or transportation ticket offices, telephone exchange, utility offices, radio broadcasting and similar uses. 
    Open sales (or rental) lot means any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, and rental for use away from the premises, any goods, materials, or merchandise, and for the storing of the same under the open sky prior to sale or rental. 
    Open terrace means a flat area adjacent to a building that is constructed of concrete, stone or pavers, not elevated from the earth, used for seating or walking and without an adjacent fence, wall or balustrade. 
    Parking space means a suitably-surfaced and permanently-maintained area on privately-owned property, either within or outside of a building, of sufficient size to store one standard automobile. 
    Pharmacy means a facility where pharmaceuticals, medications, and medical supplies are sold. 
    Planned unit district or planned unit development means a tract of land which is developed as a unit under single or unified ownership control and which generally includes two or more principal buildings or uses, but which may consist of one building containing a combination of principal and supportive uses. Uses not otherwise allowed in the zoning district are prohibited within a planned unit district unless specific provisions are otherwise made by ordinance or by resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. 
    Place of assembly means a facility providing for the assembly of persons to gather for deliberation, worship, or celebration. An assembly may be either religious or secular, but specifically includes a religious institution or place of worship, and does not include uses that may fall under separate definitions in this Code. 
    Plot means a tract other than one unit of a recorded plat or subdivision and occupied and used, or intended to be occupied and used, as a home site and improved, or intended to be improved, by the erection thereon of a dwelling and accessory buildings and having a frontage upon a public street or upon a thoroughfare or upon a way or upon a traveled or used or planned road and including, as a minimum, such open spaces as are required under this chapter. 
    Pole barn/post and beam means wooden post and beam acting as the main structural support for roof and walls, where there are no concrete/masonry support under posts and the walls and roof are covered with metal skin. 
    Premises means a lot or plot with the required front, side and rear yards for a dwelling, including any structure. 
    Professional service means work done for others, predominately on the premises of the office, by someone trained and engaged in such work for a career, e.g., doctors, lawyers, and accountants. 
    Public land or use means land owned or operated by municipal, school district, county, state or other governmental units. 
    Public utility uses means underground or overhead transmission facilities of electric power, gas, steam, water, telephone and railroad companies. These include: electric power transmission lines and gas pipelines, but not substations; telephone facilities; water pumping, reservoir, and distribution facilities; railroad trackage, but not storage and switching gears; sewers, pipes, poles, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and similar equipment, but not buildings. 
    Quad home means a single structure containing four dwelling units. 
    Rear yard means an open space unoccupied except for accessory buildings on the same lot with a building between the rear lines of the building and the rear line of the lot, for the full width of the lot. 
    Recreation equipment (residential) means play apparatus, such as swing sets and slides, sandboxes, poles for nets, unoccupied boats and trailers, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and similar equipment or structures, but not including tree houses, swimming pools, playhouses or sheds utilized for the storage of equipment. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV) means any building, structure, or vehicle designed or used for living or sleeping or recreational purposes and equipped with wheels to facilitate movement from place-to-place, and automobiles when used for living or sleeping purposes, and including pick-up coaches (campers), motorized homes, boats, travel trailers, and camping trailers not meeting the specifications required for manufactured home or mobile home. 
    Research means medical, chemical, electrical, metallurgical or other scientific research conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Resale business means a business for which the stock of goods is primarily used, donated by or purchased from an individual or previously returned to another retail store, including, but not limited to, consignment and thrift shops. 
    Rest home (nursing home) means a private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of acute disease, or recent injury, nor does it include maternity care. 
    Restaurant means a building where prepared food is sold to the public for consumption on the premises, including brewpubs, but not including convenience food restaurants as defined in this chapter. 
    Retail business means a business that primarily sells new carry-out goods. 
    Roofline means either the edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette, and, where a building has several roof eaves, this roof or parapet shall be the one belonging to that portion of the building on whose wall a sign is located. 
    School. Unless otherwise specifically described in this chapter or ordinances of the city of other applicable laws or regulations, the term "school" means any building used for educational purposes by five or more persons and meeting the state educational requirements. 
    Senior housing means housing designed and marketed only to people age 55 years or older. The term "senior housing" may include independent living apartments, assisted living apartments or memory care apartments, but is not the same as a nursing home. 
    Service station means a place where gasoline, kerosene, or other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles. The term "service station" includes greasing and oiling and the sale of automobile accessories on the premises. The term "service station" also includes minor repairing, incidental body and fender work, replacement of parts and motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks; collision services, including body, frame or fender straightening, or repair; general printing or paint jobs; and vehicle steam cleaning. Business sidelines, such as trailer rentals, discount stores, etc., are not included as ordinary service station activity unless specifically permitted by conditional use permit. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the street or lot line. 
    Side yard means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between the building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front lot line to the rear of the backyard. 
    Single-family dwelling. See Dwelling, one-family. 
    Sponsor sign means a permanent wall sign that announces the name of a company, organization or individual that contributes financial or in-kind support at the highest level of sponsorship to support the facility. 
    Stable means any building which is used to shelter horses. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above grade for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade at any point, such basement, cellar or unused under-floor space shall be considered a story. 
    Street means a public right-of-way at least 30 feet in width which affords a primary means of access to abutting property. 
    Street line means the dividing line between the lot and the street. 
    Structural alterations means any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
    Taproom means an area on the premises of a microbrewery, or on premises adjacent to a brewery owned by the brewer, in which the brewer sells or otherwise provides exclusively malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption within the taproom. 
    Temporary family health care dwelling means a mobile residential dwelling providing an environment facilitating a caregiver's provision of care for a mentally or physically impaired person, as defined and regulated by M.S.A. § 462.3593. 
    Theaters means a building or room filled with a stage or screen and seats for spectators, including movie theaters, dinner theaters and playhouses. 
    Townhouse means a single structure consisting of three or more dwelling units having the first story at the ground level with no other dwelling units or portions thereof directly above or below. 
    Transportation/transit facility means a property containing a principal building with office and maintenance functions to provide transportation/transit services, including outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, and bulk storage of liquids. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
    Use, accessory, means a use incidental or accessory to the principal use of a lot or a building located on the same lot as the accessory use. 
    Use, conditional/special, means either a public or private use as listed which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district. After consideration, in each case of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location, a permit for such conditional use may or may not be granted by the city council. A conditional use may be a principal use or an accessory use. To be consistent with state statutes, any prior references contained in this chapter to a conditional use permit shall be a conditional use permit. 
    Use, interim, means a temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit the use. 
    Use, permitted, means a use which is lawfully established in a particular district and which conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards of such district. A permitted use may be a principal use or an accessory use. 
    Use, principal, means a use or structure which determines the predominant or major use of the lot on which it is located. A principal use may be either a permitted or a conditional use. 
    Variance means a modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter, as applied to a specific piece of property, except that modification in the allowable uses within a district shall not be considered a variance. 
    Veterinary establishment means a place where the diagnosis, treatment, and care of animals is conducted and where animals are boarded. 
    Warehousing means the storage of materials, goods, or equipment within an enclosed building as a principal use. 
    Wholesaling means the selling of goods, equipment and materials to another business that, in turn, sells to the other customers. 
    Width of lot means the width of a lot is its own mean width measured at right angles to its mean depth. 
    Yard means a required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest level to the sky, except as permitted in this chapter. The yard extends along the lot line at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting street right-of-way line to a depth required in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, rear, means the portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building located between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line and extending for the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side, means the yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards to a depth or width required by setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
    Zero lot line dwelling means a home that is sited so that it abuts one property line. They may be attached (common wall) structures or detached. 
    Zoning district means an area within the limits of the city for which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform. 
(Code 1999, §§ 5.010-5.890; Ord. No. 663, 1-15-2014; Ord. No. 680; Ord. No. 693; Ord. No. 699, 9-7-2016; Ord. No. 702, 2-1-2017; Ord. No. 705, 1-4-2017; Ord. No. 708, 3-15-2017; Ord. No. 710, 3-15-2017; Ord. No. 715, § XII(5.812)-(5.815); Ord. No. 723, § I(5.030), 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 724, § XXX, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-4. - Relation to comprehensive plan. 
    It is the policy of the city that the enforcement, amendment, and administration of this chapter be accomplished with due consideration of the recommendations contained in the city comprehensive plan, as developed and amended from time to time by the planning commission and city council. 
(Code 1999, § 4.030) 
Sec. 38-5. - Standard requirements. 
(a)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by another ordinance, rule or regulation of the city, the ordinance, rule or regulation which imposes the more restrictive condition, standard, or requirement shall prevail. 
(b)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose, nor in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Except as herein provided, no building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building permit shall be granted that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Affected by public property acquisition as to setback requirements, the reduced setbacks will be recognized as a legal variance and become the basis for evaluating future expansion or modification of the building, use, driveways and parking areas as part of the site plan review process. Landscaping and parking may be permitted in the easements by city approval with a liability, trespass, and restoration responsibility waiver. The acquisition shall be considered a hardship and be processed as a minor variance application with review by the DRC and action by the city council. There will be no application fee. 
(Code 1999, § 4.040) 
Sec. 38-6. - Uses not provided for within zoning districts. 
    Whenever in any zoning district a use is neither specifically permitted nor denied, the use shall be considered prohibited. In such case, the city council or the planning commission, on their own initiative or upon request, may direct the city planner to conduct a study to determine if the use is acceptable and, if so, what zoning district would be most appropriate, as well as what conditions and standards should be imposed relating to development of the use. The city council, planning commission or property owner, upon receipt of the city planner's study shall, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to this chapter to provide for the particular use under consideration or shall find that the use is not compatible for development within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 4.050) 
Sec. 38-7. - Separability. 
    If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of the provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in the judgment. 
(Code 1999, § 4.070) 
Secs. 38-8-38-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 38-33. - Power of city council. 
    The council may, on its own motion, on request of the planning commission, or on petition of the affected property owners: 
(1)  Rezone a parcel of land from one classification to another. 
(2)  Amend the regulations of this chapter. 
(3)  Review site plans for applicable developments. 
(4)  Hold public hearings on minor site plans, planned unit developments and planned unit development amendments. 
(5)  Hear and decide appeals by any person affected by any alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by any administrative officer in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(6)  Consider requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 6.010; Ord. No. 715, § I(6.010), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-34. - Development review committee. 
    The development review committee (DRC) consists of the following personnel, for the following purposes, and with the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Personnel. The DRC shall consist of the city administrator, the city planner, the fire chief and the city engineer. Each person may assign a designee to act in his place. 
(2)  Purpose. The DRC shall be responsible for: 
a.  Reviewing land use applications, maintaining a schedule for processing the application within the time frames of this chapter and of state law, meeting with applicants, and soliciting comments of other city officials; and 
b.  Assisting city commissions and the council as to land use applications. 
(3)  Meetings. The DRC shall normally meet weekly, but is not required to do so. Applicants are encouraged to attend the DRC meeting, but the city will not be responsible for giving notice of such meetings. 
(4)  Completeness of application. Within 15 days of receiving an application, the DRC will review and determine whether the application is complete, and if not, notify the applicant, in writing, of what deficiencies exist. 
(Code 1999, § 6.025; Ord. No. 715, § III(6.025), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-35. - Zoning amendments. 
(a)  Generally. In accordance with the provisions of state law, the city council may, from time to time, adopt amendments to this chapter. An amendment to this chapter may involve changes in its text and wording, including, but not limited to, changes in the regulations regarding uses, setbacks, heights, lot areas, definitions, administration, and procedures. Zoning amendments do not, however, include the rezoning of property. Amendments may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by petition by the owner of the property affected by the amendment. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for an amendment to this chapter shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city, including all required materials and applicable fees. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. No amendment to this chapter shall be adopted until a public hearing on the matter has been held by the planning commission. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the amendment relates. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(d)  Review and recommendation by planning commission. A zoning amendment not initiated by the planning commission or a petitioner shall be referred to the planning commission by the city council for study and recommendation. In its deliberations on the matter, the planning commission shall consider oral or written statements from the petitioner, the public, city staff, and its own members. The planning commission may recommend approval, denial, or table the zoning amendment application. Within 60 days after the date of reference by the city council, a written report shall be transmitted to the city council by the city planner on behalf of the planning commission stating its findings and recommendation. 
(e)  Decision by the city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission. The city council may, by majority vote, deny the application for a zoning amendment by resolution with findings, approve it by ordinance, or table action to a future meeting, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of such action, including any conditions of approval. If approved, the applicable zoning chapters shall be revised accordingly. 
(Code 1999, § 6.030; Ord. No. 715, § IV(6.030), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-36. - Comprehensive plan amendments. 
(a)  Generally. In accordance with the provisions of state law, the city council may, from time to time, adopt amendments to the comprehensive plan within the city. Amendments to the comprehensive plan are for the purpose of meeting the land use needs of the residents in the city. Amendments may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by petition by the owner of the property affected by the amendment. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for an amendment to the comprehensive plan shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city, including all required materials and fees. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. No comprehensive plan amendment shall be adopted until a public hearing on the matter has been held by the planning commission. A notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the comprehensive plan amendment relates. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(d)  Hearing and recommendation by the planning commission. A comprehensive plan amendment, not initiated by the planning commission or a petitioner, shall be referred to the planning commission by the city council for study and recommendation. In its deliberations on the matter, the commission shall consider oral or written statements from the petitioner, the public, city staff, and its own members. The planning commission may recommend approval, denial, or table the comprehensive plan amendment application. A written report shall be transmitted to the city council by the city planner on behalf of the planning commission stating its findings and recommendation. 
(e)  Decision by the city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission. The city council may, by majority vote, deny the application for comprehensive plan amendment by resolution with findings, approve it by resolution, or table action to a future meeting, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of such action, including any conditions of approval. Except for amendments to permit affordable housing development, a resolution to amend the comprehensive plan shall be approved by a two-thirds majority vote of all city council members. If approved, the city shall submit the comprehensive plan amendment to the Metropolitan Council for its review and consideration. If approved by the Metropolitan Council, the applicable comprehensive plan text and maps shall be revised accordingly. 
(Code 1999, § 6.035; Ord. No. 715, § V(6.035), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-37. - Rezoning. 
(a)  Generally. In accordance with the provisions of state law, the city council may, from time to time, change the zoning of parcels of land within the city. These changes in zoning classification are for the purpose of meeting the land use needs of the residents of the city in conformance with the city's comprehensive plan. Rezonings may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by petition of the owner of the property to be considered for rezoning. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a rezoning shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city, including all required materials and applicable fees. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. No rezoning shall be adopted until a public hearing on the matter has been held by the planning commission. A notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the rezoning relates. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(d)  Hearing and recommendation by the planning commission. A rezoning not initiated by the planning commission or a petitioner shall be referred to the planning commission by the city council for study and recommendation. In its deliberations on the matter, the planning commission shall consider oral or written statements from the petitioner, the public, city staff, and its own members. The planning commission may recommend approval, denial, or table the rezoning application. A written report shall be transmitted to the city council by the city planner on behalf of the planning commission stating its findings and recommendation. 
(e)  Decision by the city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission. The city council may, by majority vote, deny the rezoning application by resolution with findings, approve it by ordinance, or table action to a future meeting, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of such action. Any action that changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or industrial requires a two-thirds majority vote of all city council members. If approved, the official city zoning map shall be revised accordingly, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the action taken by the city council, including any conditions of approval. If the rezoning has been granted, the notification shall state the zoning district to which land has been reclassified, the legal description of the property, and the date upon which the rezoning may lapse if not exercised as described below. 
(f)  Conditions for rezoning approval. The city council recognizes that rezoning is ordinarily requested when a property owner has present intent to either develop or redevelop the property for a particular use or by stages under a phasing plan. If such a phasing plan should be approved by the city council at the time of rezoning, a condition may be included allowing for periodic progress review. If construction is not commenced within 12 months, or within the phasing schedule as approved by the city council, then the city council may, on its own initiative and with notice to the property owner and applicant, commence proceedings under this section to rezone the property back to its original classification. 
(Code 1999, § 6.040; Ord. No. 715, § VI(6.040), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-38. - Variances. 
(a)  Generally. The city council may allow a departure from the literal provisions of this chapter by the granting of a variance. Variances shall only be granted when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intents of this Code and consistent with the comprehensive plan. Variances may be granted when the applicant for the variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with the official controls. The term "practical difficulties," as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by an official control; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a practical difficulty if reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of this chapter. The term "practical difficulties" also includes, but is not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. Variances may be granted for earth-sheltered construction, as defined by state law, when in harmony with this chapter. The city council may not permit as a variance any use that is not permitted under this chapter for property in the zone where the affected person's land is located, except where the city council is considering a variance from nonconforming use requirements under section 38-45 on land zoned residential at the time it became nonconforming. The city council may permit as a variance the temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling. The city council may impose conditions in the granting of variances to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties. A condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a variance shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city, including all required materials and applicable fees. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. No variance shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held by the planning commission. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the variance relates. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(d)  Review and recommendation by the planning commission. In its deliberations on the matter, the planning commission shall consider oral or written statements from the petitioner, the public, city staff, and its own members. The planning commission may recommend approval, denial, or table the variance application. A written report shall be transmitted to the city council by the city planner on behalf of the planning commission stating its findings and recommendation. 
(e)  Decision by the city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission. In considering applications for variance, the city council shall consider the effect of the proposed variance upon the health, safety, and welfare of the community, traffic conditions, light and air, danger of fire, risk to the public safety, the effect on values of property in the surrounding area, and the effect of the proposed variance upon the city's comprehensive plan. The city council may, by majority vote, deny the application for a variance by resolution with findings, approve it by resolution, or table action to a future meeting, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of such action, including any conditions of approval. 
(f)  Time limits. If construction is not commenced within one year from the time a variance has been granted by the city council, then the variance shall be null and void unless an extension is granted by the city council. Only one such extension shall be permitted, and it shall not be for more than six additional months. 
(Code 1999, § 6.050; Ord. No. 715, § VII(6.050), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-39. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Generally. The city council declares it necessary and appropriate to require site plan approval of development in certain districts to preserve and promote attractive, well-planned, stable urban conditions. This includes all proposed multiple-family dwellings (three or more units), commercial and industrial developments, and all proposed developments in the water management overlay district. Site plan approval by the city council shall be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for site plan approval shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city, including all required materials and applicable fees. 
(c)  Minor site plan review. Under the following circumstances, to be considered as minor site plans, the city council, upon recommendation from the development review committee, shall consider action without review and recommendation by the planning commission and conduct a public hearing in accordance with the procedures for a site plan as in subsection (d) of this section: 
(1)  An accessory building or building addition that meets all requirements of section 38-605 and is not more than 5,000 square feet in size or ten percent of the total building footprint, whichever is less. 
(2)  A parking lot expansion that is no more than 10,000 square feet in size or 25 percent of the total existing parking surface of a site, whichever is less. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. No site plan, besides a minor site plan as in subsection (c) of this section, shall be approved until a public hearing has been held by the planning commission. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the site plan relates. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(e)  Review and recommendation by the planning commission. A site plan application shall be reviewed by the planning commission, unless the request qualifies as a minor site plan in subsection (c) of this section. In its deliberations on the matter, the planning commission shall consider oral and written statements from the applicant, the public, city staff, and its own members. The planning commission may recommend approval, denial, or table the site plan application. A written report shall be transmitted to the city council by the city planner on behalf of the planning commission stating its findings and recommendation. 
(f)  Decision by city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission. The city council may, by majority vote, deny a site plan application by resolution with findings of fact, approve it by resolution, or table action to a future meeting, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of such action, including any conditions of approval. 
(g)  Review considerations and conditions. In consideration of site plan applications under this section, the planning commission and city council shall consider the following: interrelationship with the site plan elements to conditions both on and off the property; conformance to the city's comprehensive plan; the impact of the plan on the existing and anticipated traffic and parking conditions; the adequacy of the site plan with respect to land use; pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress; building location and height; architectural and engineering features; landscaping; lighting; provisions for utilities; site drainage; open space; loading and unloading areas; grading; signage; screening; setbacks; and other related matters. The planning commission may recommend, and the city council may impose, conditions of approval that are deemed necessary. 
(Code 1999, § 6.060; Ord. No. 715, § VII(6.060), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-40. - Detailed landscaping plans. 
    Detailed landscape plans shall be required and shall be produced on a separate sheet from those for drainage and utilities per the council adopted site application checklist. They shall be prepared and signed by a registered landscape architect or professional equivalent and meet or exceed the standards in section 38-601. 
(Code 1999, § 6.064) 
Sec. 38-41. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)  Notice of hearing. No site plan, besides a minor site plan as in section 38-39(c), shall be approved until a public hearing has been held by the planning commission. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the site plan relate. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(b)  Review and recommendation by the planning commission. A site plan application shall be reviewed by the planning commission, unless the request qualifies as a minor site plan in section 38-39(c). In its deliberations on the matter, the planning commission shall consider oral and written statements from the applicant, the public city staff, and its own members. The planning commission may recommend approval, denial, or table the site plan application. A written report shall be transmitted to the city council by the city planner on behalf of the planning commission stating its findings and recommendations. 
(c)  Decision by city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission. The city council may by majority vote deny a site plan application by resolution with findings of fact, approve it by resolution, or table action to a future meeting and the applicant shall be notified in writing of such action, including any conditions of approval. 
(d)  Review considerations and conditions. In consideration of site plan applications under this section, the planning commission and city council shall consider the following: interrelationship with the site plan elements to conditions both on and off the property; conformance to the city's comprehensive plan; the impact of the plan on the existing and anticipated traffic and parking conditions; the adequacy of the site plan with respect to land use; pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress; lighting; provisions for utilities; site draining; open space; loading and unloading areas; grading; signage; screening; setbacks; and other related matters. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose conditions of approval that are deemed necessary. 
(Code 1999, § 6.066) 
Sec. 38-42. - Developer's agreement. 
    Prior to issuing a building permit, the city council may require the applicant to sign an agreement with the city, approved by the city council and recorded against the property, that assures that particular elements of the applications proposed by the applicant or imposed by the city shall be carried out. 
(Code 1999, § 6.068) 
Sec. 38-43. - Conditional use permit. 
(a)  Generally. Certain uses, while generally not suitable in a particular zoning district, may, under certain circumstances, be acceptable. When such circumstances exist, a conditional use permit may be granted in compliance with this section. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city, including all required materials and applicable fee. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. No conditional use permit shall be approved until a public hearing has been held by the planning commission. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the conditional use permit relates. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(d)  Review and recommendation by the planning commission. A conditional use permit application shall be reviewed by the planning commission. In its deliberations on the matter, the planning commission shall consider oral and written statements from the applicant, the public, city staff, and its own members. The planning commission may recommend approval, denial, or table the site plan application. A written report shall be transmitted to the city council by the city planner on behalf of the planning commission stating its findings and recommendation. 
(e)  Decision by city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission. The city council may, by majority vote, deny a conditional use permit application by resolution with findings of fact, approve it by resolution, or table action to a future meeting, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of such action, including any conditions of approval. 
(f)  Review considerations and conditions. In considering applications for a conditional use permit under this section, the planning commission and city council shall consider the following: economic and aesthetic impact upon surrounding properties; interrelationship with the plan elements to conditions both on and off the property; conformance to the city's comprehensive plan; the impact of the plan on the existing and anticipated traffic and parking conditions; the adequacy of the plan with respect to land use; pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress; building location and height; architectural and engineering features; landscaping; lighting; provisions for utilities; site drainage; open space; loading and unloading areas; grading; signage; screening; setbacks; and other related matters. The city council may impose conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permit or periodic review may be required. The conditional use permit shall be granted for a particular use and not for a particular person or firm. The conditional use permit shall remain in effect as long as the conditions agreed upon are observed, but nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from enacting or amending this Code to change the status of a conditional use. 
(Code 1999, § 6.070; Ord. No. 715, § X(6.070), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-44. - Interim use permit. 
(a)  Generally. Interim uses may be considered in any zoning district, subject to the applicable conditions and procedures in this section. The uses may not be consistent with the comprehensive plan and may also fail to meet all of the applicable zoning district standards. The purposes for allowing interim uses are to: 
(1)  Allow for use of property for a limited time, under specific conditions, until the property is developed as guided and zoned. 
(2)  Allow a use for a limited period of time until a permanent location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction. 
(3)  Allow a use that is presently acceptable, but that, with anticipated development or redevelopment, may not be acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the respective zoning district. 
(4)  Allow a use that is seasonal or temporary in nature. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for site plan approval shall submit the proper application forms made available by the city, including all required materials and applicable fees. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. No interim use permit shall be approved until a public hearing has been held by the planning commission. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the interim use permit relates. The city shall be responsible for placing and mailing such notices. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(d)  Review and recommendation by the planning commission. An interim use permit application shall be reviewed by the planning commission. In its deliberations on the matter, the planning commission shall consider oral and written statements from the applicant, the public, city staff, and its own members. The planning commission may recommend approval, denial, or table the site plan application. A written report shall be transmitted to the city council by the city planner on behalf of the planning commission stating its findings and recommendation. 
(e)  Decision by city council. The city council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting after receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission. The city council may, by majority vote, deny a conditional use permit application by resolution with findings of fact, approve it by resolution, or table action to a future meeting, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of such action, including any conditions of approval. 
(f)  Review considerations and conditions. In considering applications for an interim use permit under this section, the planning commission and city council shall consider if the date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty; permission of the use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the future; the use will not unreasonably delay anticipated development or redevelopment of the site; economic, environment, and aesthetic impact upon surrounding properties; interrelationship with the plan elements to conditions both on and off the property; conformance to the city's comprehensive plan; the impact of the plan on the existing and anticipated traffic and parking conditions; the adequacy of the plan with respect to land use; pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress; building location and height; architectural and engineering features; landscaping; lighting; provisions for utilities; site drainage; open space; loading and unloading areas; grading; signage; screening; setbacks; and other related matters. The city council may attach conditions to interim use permits, including, but not limited to, hours of operation, provisions for land restoration, as appropriate, any circumstances and conditions for extension of the interim use permit duration, and other conditions or events that will terminate the interim use of the property. The city shall consider the public health, welfare, and safety impacts and provide for mitigation of any adverse impacts particularly as they relate to noise, dust, odor, traffic, and other operations. Performance guarantees by letters of credit, bonds, or cash may be required to ensure the property will be restored for its designated permanent use. 
(g)  Permit expiration. An interim use permit shall expire, and the use shall cease operation at the earliest of the following: 
(1)  Four years from the date of approval. 
(2)  Upon an expiration date established as a condition of approval. 
(3)  Upon reaching some other expiration threshold established as a condition of approval. 
(h)  Permit revocation. An interim use permit is revoked by any of the following, whichever occurs first: 
(1)  A violation of any condition set forth in an interim use permit. 
(2)  A violation of any federal or state law or this Code. 
(3)  If, after approval, it is discovered the permit was issued based on false, misleading, or fraudulent information. 
(4)  An amendment to this Code which prohibits the use. 
(5)  The use becomes in conflict with this Code. 
(6)  The expiration date or occurrence of any events stated in the permit for termination of the use. 
(7)  The use has ceased for a continuous period of at least six months. 
(8)  The use has not commenced or a building permit for a structure to support the use has not been issued within one year after approval. 
(i)  Notice of revocation. Upon occurrence of the date or event for termination of the interim use permit, the permittee shall be notified in writing that the permit shall terminate not later than six months after the date of such notice. In the case of a violation of the conditions of the interim use permit, the permit is subject to immediate revocation after such notice. 
(j)  Permit review. An interim use permit may be reviewed by the city council at any time to verify compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(k)  Effect of permit. The interim use permit shall be granted for a particular use, not for a particular person or firm, and does not confer on the property any vested rights. Any transfer of an active permit to another property owner is subject to approval by the city planner. 
(l)  Permit extension. The permittee may request an extension of the interim use permit for such additional periods as are consistent with the terms and conditions of the original permit, under the same notice and review requirements as the original permit. 
(Code 1999, § 6.080; Ord. No. 715, § XI(6.080), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-45. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Definition. A nonconforming use is any use or arrangement of land or structures legally existing prior to the enactment of a Code provision prohibiting such use. 
(b)  Rights. Pursuant to M.S.A. § 462.357, subd. 1e: 
(1)  Any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time a city Code amendment created the nonconformity, may be continued with any necessary approvals, including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvements, but not including expansion unless otherwise authorized in this chapter. 
(2)  Normal maintenance of a structure which is a nonconforming use, or which contains a nonconforming use is permitted including repair, replacement, restoration or improvement, provided that it does not extend or intensify the nonconforming use. 
(c)  Expansion prohibited. Nonconformities may not be expanded unless expressly permitted as described below. 
(1)  Nonconforming uses may expand upon issuance of a conditional use permit, only when such expansion is expressly listed as a conditional use within the applicable zoning district. 
(2)  Nonconforming lots may expand only upon approval of a variance or planned unit development zoning that allows the proposed level of nonconformity. 
(3)  Nonconforming structures may expand only upon approval of a variance or planned unit development zoning that allows the proposed level of nonconformity. 
(4)  Nonconforming site characteristics may expand only upon approval of a variance of a planned unit development zoning that allows the proposed level of nonconformity. 
(5)  A legal nonconforming industrial or commercial use may be expanded once by no more than ten percent of its floor area or 1,200 square feet, whichever is greater, with a conditional use permit pursuant to subsection (c)(6) of this section. 
(6)  Any expansion allowed herein must include findings that the proposed expansion will reduce the impact of the legal nonconforming use on the surrounding properties in terms of activity, noise, traffic, light, appearance, outside storage of vehicles, equipment or materials, or other issues pertinent to the specific property and use involved. 
(d)  Termination of rights. 
(1)  A legal nonconforming use must not resume when: 
a.  The use is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or 
b.  The use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than 50 percent of its market value and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property was damaged. The assessed market value (including buildings and land) must be determined by the most recent valuation of the city assessor. 
(e)  Conformance triggers. Nonconformities must be brought into conformance upon the following events: 
(1)  Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses must be brought into conformance with current requirements of this chapter upon: 
a.  Change of the use; 
b.  Discontinuance of the use for a period of more than one year; or 
c.  Destruction of the use, provided that no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of the date of destruction. The city may impose reasonable conditions on the building permit to mitigate newly created impacts on adjacent properties. 
(2)  Nonconforming lots. Nonconforming lots must be brought into conformance with current lot requirements of this chapter upon subdivision or replatting of the lot. 
(3)  Nonconforming structures. Nonconforming structures must be brought into conformance with current structure requirements of this chapter upon: 
a.  Destruction or removal of the structure; or 
b.  Relocation of the structure. 
(4)  Nonconforming site characteristics. Nonconforming site characteristics must be brought into conformance with current site characteristic requirements of this chapter upon: 
a.  Redevelopment of the site or expansion of total floor area on the site by 25 percent or greater. 
b.  Destruction or removal of the site characteristic. 
c.  Issuance of a permit for a related site characteristic if conformance is stipulated as a condition of permit approval. 
d.  Change of use of the site (only for use-generated requirements, including, but not limited to, the number of parking spaces and trash storage requirements). 
e.  A determination by the city that the site characteristic must be brought into conformance to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(f)  Unimproved lots. Any platted lot existing on September 15, 1970, and then held in separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots, may be used for the erection of a lawful structure, even though its area and width are less than the current minimum requirements, so long as setback requirements are met (or as a variance may permit) and subject to the requirements of subsection (c)(6) of this section. 
(g)  Unsafe structures. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the continued use of a structure or site found to be in violation of building, basic life safety or health codes of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 6.110) 
Sec. 38-46. - Development agreement. 
    Prior to issuing a building permit, the city council may require the applicant to enter into an agreement with the city, approved by the city council and recorded against the property, which ensures that particular elements of the applications referenced in this section, either proposed by the applicant or imposed by the city, shall be carried out. 
(Ord. No. 715, § IX(6.120), 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 38-47. - Interpretation of this chapter. 
    In interpreting and applying the provision of this chapter, the provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety health, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. It is not the intention of this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of a building or 
premises or upon height of building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1999, § 6.130) 
Secs. 38-48-38-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-68. - Districts established. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the city shall be divided into the following districts, and the uses of structures and land, the height of buildings and the area of premises for buildings are to be uniform in each district: 
(1)  Residence one (R-1). 
(2)  Residence two (R-2). 
(3)  Residence three (R-3). 
(4)  Residence four (R-4). 
(5)  Commercial one (C-1). 
(6)  Commercial one-A (C-1A). 
(7)  Commercial two (C-2). 
(8)  Commercial two-A (C-2A). 
(9)  Commercial three (C-3). 
(10)  Office (O). 
(11)  Office-business (OB). 
(12)  Industrial (I). 
(13)  City center (CC). 
(14)  Planned unit development (PUD). 
(15)  Water management (WM). 
(16)  Waterworks (WW). 
(Code 1999, § 7.010) 
Sec. 38-69. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the districts shall be shown on the official zoning map in the city hall. No building shall be erected or premises used for any purpose unless in compliance with the restrictions prescribed for the district in which the building or premises are located. 
(Code 1999, § 7.020) 
Secs. 38-70-38-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENCE ONE (R-1) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-97. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-1 district is to provide for low-density single-family detached and two-family dwelling uses and directly related complementary uses. 
(Code 1999, § 9.010; Ord. No. 723, § IV(9.010), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-98. - Uses in the R-1 district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings connected to public sanitary sewer containing not more than one dwelling unit, and having direct access to a public street, but not including manufactured homes. 
(2)  Recreational facilities as follows: 
a.  Athletic fields, parks and playgrounds. 
b.  Golf clubs. 
(3)  Crop or truck farming, but not including commercial feed lots or other commercial operations. 
(4)  Nurseries, tree farms, and greenhouses, but not including retail sales. 
(5)  Public utility uses, public parks, provision of underground utilities, and the use of solar energy systems, including solar collectors for the use of the particular site, storage facilities, and distribution components for space heating and cooling and domestic water heating. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Detached private garages 1,200 square feet or less, in compliance with section 38-605. 
(2)  Greenhouses related to private residential use. 
(3)  Accessory buildings up to 200 square feet for the storage of domestic supplies, provided that no more than two of these types of structures shall be allowed per single-family dwelling or lot. 
(4)  Privately-owned swimming pools and tennis courts for the use and convenience of the residents. 
(5)  Rectories, parsonages and parish houses. 
(6)  Signs, in compliance with article VI of this chapter. 
(7)  Chickens, in compliance with section 6-212. 
(8)  Home occupations according to the following conditions: 
a.  The home occupation shall be carried on by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit. 
b.  The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal or accessory structures. 
c.  Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, odor, heat, or glare shall not be produced. 
d.  Articles not produced on the premises shall not be sold on the premises. 
e.  Hours of operation shall be limited from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
f.  On-site advertising is prohibited. 
g.  Home occupations operating in violation of the applicable conditions contained herein or elsewhere in this Code shall cease operation upon notice from the city, unless a conditional use permit is approved, as in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings not connected to public sanitary sewer, subject to environmental constraints as determined by the city engineer. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings, when the structure is considered generally compatible and harmonious with the surrounding dwellings in terms of scale, height, and exterior design, as determined by the city council. 
(3)  Home occupations that do not qualify as an accessory use under the applicable conditions in subsection (b)(8) of this section. 
(4)  Riding stables or horse raising according to the following conditions: each horse kept primarily for riding shall be maintained on at least one acre of land per horse, and the land where such horse is kept shall be entirely fenced so as to contain the horse within such land, and adequately drained so as to cause no health hazard or nuisance to adjacent property. The fence shall be constructed within all zoning setback lines and be more than 100 feet from any adjacent residential structure. 
(5)  Accessory buildings in excess of 200 square feet, according to the following conditions: 
a.  No more than one oversized shed shall be allowed per single-family home or lot; 
b.  The height of these sheds shall be limited to single-story and shall not exceed the height of the principal building; 
c.  The shed shall be used for the storage of domestic supplies, and may include the storage of lawn equipment and mowers, snowmobiles, ATVs or similar small personal recreation vehicles. The storage of private passenger vehicles/automobiles shall be prohibited; and 
d.  Any new shed must be architecturally compatible or made with similar materials as the principal building. 
(6)  Detached private garages in excess of 1,200 square feet, according to the following conditions: 
a.  Compliance with applicable standards contained in section 38-605; and 
b.  Any new detached private garage must be architecturally compatible or made with similar materials as the principal building. 
(7)  Retail sale of nurseries, tree farms, greenhouses, or related products, but only if a given percentage of the total site area is devoted to the growing of nursery stock within the soil, to conservation use, or is wholly unimproved, such percentage to be determined by the city council based on the criteria in section 38-43. 
(8)  Kennels, for detached single-family homes of more than five domestic animals. 
(9)  Public buildings. 
(10)  Churches. 
(11)  Schools. 
(12)  Beekeeping, in compliance with the following conditions: 
a.  The maximum colony density per lot shall be as follows: 
Lot Size Colonies Permitted 1/2 acre or less 2 1/2 acre to 3/4 acre 4 3/4 acre to 1 acre 6 1 acre or larger 8  
b.  Buildings, hives, apiaries, or other areas containing bees are only permitted in rear yards and shall have minimum setbacks of 50 feet from an adjacent principal dwelling and 20 feet from any property boundary line. 
c.  Colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames that shall be kept in sound and usable condition and shall not exceed six feet in height. 
d.  A convenient source of water is available at all times that the colony remains active outside of the hive. 
e.  Wax comb or other materials stored outside shall be within closed containers with lids. 
f.  An inactive hive shall be removed within 30 days if no longer occupied by a colony. 
g.  The use shall not constitute a public nuisance and shall be in compliance with the applicable code requirements. 
h.  Honey produced on the property shall be for personal use and consumption by the owners of the premises and shall not be sold or offered for sale. 
i.  Any use and/or structure permitted under this section may be inspected at any reasonable time by the animal control officer, or other agent of the city, to verify compliance with the applicable performance standards. 
(13)  Small wireless facilities, in compliance with section 38-606 and chapter 30, article III. 
(Code 1999, § 9.020; Ord. No. 723, § V(9.020), 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 725, § I(9.020), 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 732, § II, att.(38-98), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-99. - Lot area and dimension standards. 
UseMinimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit Minimum Lot Width Minimum Lot Depth Single-family detached dwelling connected to public sanitary sewer 10,200 square feet 85 feet; 
105 feet (corner lot) 120 feet Single-family detached dwelling not connected to public sanitary sewer 21,780 square feet 1 150 feet 2 200 feet Two-family dwelling 7,000 square feet 100 feet; 
120 feet (corner lot) 120 feet All other principal uses N/A 120 feet 110 feet  
1 Lot area to be dictated by building area, parking requirements, lot dimension requirements, and setbacks. 
2 Subject to environmental constraints as determined by the city engineer. 
(Code 1999, § 9.030; Ord. No. 723, § VI(9.030), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-100. - Setback and building height standards. 
    The minimum building setback shall be measured from the applicable lot line or public street right-of-way line. 
UseFront Yard
Setback Side Yard 
Setbacks 2 Rear Yard
Setback Building
Height Single-family detached and two-family dwellings 30 feet (local street) 
35 feet (collector street) 
45 feet (arterial street) 10 feet; 
20 feet (corner) 25 feet 35 feet Public buildings, schools, and churches 1 30 feet 20 feet; 
30 feet (corner) 40 feet 36 feet Accessory building, including detached garage in rear yards 30 feet (local street) 
35 feet (collector street) 
45 feet (arterial street) 5 feet; 
10 feet (corner) 10 feet 20 feet 3  
1 Including accessory building. 
2 Measured from roof projections, as in section 38-101(3). 
3 Cannot exceed the height of the principal structure, as in section 38-605(c). 

(Code 1999, § 9.040; Ord. No. 723, § VII(9.040), 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 732, att.(38-100), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-101. - Additional setback standards. 
    The above listed setback and yard requirements are subject to the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Front street setback. When more than 25 percent of the frontage on the side of a street between intersections is occupied by structures having setbacks from street rights-of-way of greater or lesser amounts than herein required, the average setback of all existing buildings between the intersections shall be maintained by all new or relocated structures. In the event a building is to be built where there is such an established average setback different from that required hereinafter and there are existing buildings on one side only, the front setback of the new building need be no greater than that of the next adjoining existing building. In case the building is to be built where there is such an established average setback and there are existing buildings on both sides of the new building, the front setback shall not be required to be greater than that which would be established by connecting a straight line between the forward most portion of the first adjacent building on each side. 
(2)  Corner side street setback. The required setback from a side street property line for a single family residence or its accessory uses shall be increased from 20 feet to that required for front street setbacks when there is an adjoining interior lot facing on the same street. When a garage fronts on a side street, the garage must maintain at least a 20 foot setback from the street right-of-way line. 
(3)  Roof projections into required side yards. Roof projections must conform to section 38-100. 
(4)  Conflicting provisions. This section shall control over any inconsistency with swimming pool setbacks in chapter 8, article 3, division 4. 
(5)  Accessory uses in corner side areas. All accessory uses in corner side area shall not exceed the fence height pursuant to section 38-607. 
(Ord. No. 723, § VII(9.042), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-102. - Wetland setbacks. 
    For purposes of the above setbacks, a delineated wetland edge shall be considered the same as a property line or right-of-way line; provided that rear yard attached decks up to ten feet in depth may intrude into the rear yard setback area. Variances to wetland setbacks may be considered by the city council when reasonable use of the land would be difficult or impossible if the standard were strictly adhered to considering the following factors: 
(1)  The lot is a minimum of 20,400 square feet and a large proportion of non-wetland area exists on the site; 
(2)  The proposed structures could be shown to minimize effects on the surrounding neighborhood and blend in with the character of the locality; 
(3)  The slope of the yard from the structures to the wetland is six to one or less; 
(4)  The existing significant trees or vegetation could be saved by reducing setbacks; 
(5)  The need for protection for various types of wetlands; 
(6)  The intrusion into the wetland is minimal, as determined by the appropriate watershed district; or 
(7)  The applicant can mitigate any intrusion on or offsite, as determined by the appropriate watershed district. 
(Code 1999, § 9.045) 
Sec. 38-103. - Minimum buildable area. 
    At least 5,100 square feet of the minimum lot area shall be non-wetland. 
(Code 1999, § 9.047) 
Sec. 38-104. - Special limitations and conditions on uses. 
    All uses in the R-1 district shall be subject to special limitations and conditions with respect to each as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family dwellings shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer, unless otherwise allowed and approved by conditional use permit in compliance with section 38-43. 
(2)  Single-family and two-family dwellings shall have direct access to a public street. 
(Code 1999, § 9.070; Ord. No. 723, § VIII(9.050), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-105. - Minimum requirements for single-family dwellings. 
Minimum lot area per dwelling 21,780 sq. ft. 10,200 sq. ft. 7,000 sq. ft.
    All single-family dwellings in residence one, two, and three districts shall: 
(1)  Have a width of at least 20 feet, measured at the narrowest dimension regardless of how it is oriented on the lot, and such width shall not include bay windows, overhangs, seasonal use rooms, garages or car ports; 
(2)  Have 960 square feet of interior room; 
(3)  Be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system and to the municipal water system, if available; 
(4)  Be set on a standard frost footing and a foundation with standard hold-down bolt requirements, and foundation insulations as per governmental energy standards and the applicable state building code; and 
(5)  Have a roof of gable or hip design and be covered with a city-approved roofing material. 
(Code 1999, § 9.060) 
Sec. 38-106. - Common wall dwellings. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 38-100, one developer may construct two single-family dwellings with a common wall and boundary line for which there may be no building setback from the common boundary, provided: 
(1)  Each lot shall meet all other setback requirements for a two-family dwelling; 
(2)  Separate services shall be furnished and provided to each dwelling for sanitary sewer and water; 
(3)  No fence or shrubbing divider shall be installed or maintained on the common boundary line. 
(Code 1999, § 9.070) 
Sec. 38-107. - Parking requirements. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with section 38-610. Parking areas or circulation drives shall be setback at least five feet from any lot line. 
(Code 1999, § 9.080) 
Secs. 38-108-38-127. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENCE TWO (R-2) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-128. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-2, residential district is to provide for moderate density residential development through any of a variety of housing types. 
(Code 1999, § 10.010) 
Sec. 38-129. - Uses in the R-2 district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  All permitted uses in the R-1 district. 
(2)  Residences containing two dwelling units. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 district. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses permitted of the R-1 district, subject to the same applicable conditions, except kennels. 
(2)  Townhouses or condominiums containing three to eight dwelling units. 
(Code 1999, § 10.020; Ord. No. 723, § IX(10.020), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-130. - Lot area and dimension standards. 
UseMinimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit Minimum Lot Width Minimum Lot Depth Single-family detached dwelling 9,000 square feet 75 feet; 
95 feet (corner lot) 120 feet Duplex 6,000 square feet 100 feet; 
110 feet (corner lot) 120 feet Three to eight-family dwelling 4,750 square feet N/A N/A  
(Code 1999, § 10.030; Ord. No. 723, § X(10.030), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-131. - Setback and height standards. 
    The minimum building setback shall be measured from the applicable lot line or public street right-of-way line. 
Use Front Yard
Setback Side Yard 
Setbacks 2 Rear Yard
Setback Between
Buildings Building
Height Single-family detached dwelling 25 feet (local street); 
35 feet (collector street); 
40 feet (arterial street) 10 feet; 
25 feet (corner) 25 feet Equal to the height of the exterior wall or 15 feet, whichever is greater 35 feet Two-family dwelling 25 feet (local street); 
35 feet (collector street); 
40 feet (arterial street) 10 feet; 
25 feet (corner) 40 feet Three to eight-family dwelling 30 feet (local street); 35 feet (collector street); 
40 feet (arterial street) 20 feet 1 ; 
25 feet (corner) 40 feet  
1 Add six inches for each one foot the average height of the building exceeds 20 feet. 
2 Measured from roof projections, as in section 38-101(3). 
(Code 1999, § 10.040; Ord. No. 723, § XI(10.040), 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 732, att.(38-131), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-132. - Wetland setbacks. 
    For purposes of the above setbacks, a delineated wetland edge shall be considered the same as a property line or right-of-way line; provided that rear yard attached decks up to ten feet in depth may intrude into the rear yard setback area. Variances to wetland setbacks may be considered by the city council where reasonable use of the land would be difficult or impossible if the standard were strictly adhered to considering the following factors: 
(1)  When the lot is a minimum of 18,000 square feet and a large proportion of non-wetland area exists on the site; 
(2)  When the proposed structures could be shown to minimize effects on the surrounding neighborhood and blend in with the character of the locality; 
(3)  When the slope of the yard from the structures to the wetland is six to one or less; 
(4)  When existing significant trees or vegetation could be saved by reducing setbacks; 
(5)  The need for protection for various types of wetlands; 
(6)  When the intrusion into the wetland is minimal, as determined by the appropriate watershed district; or 
(7)  When the applicant can mitigate any intrusion on or offsite, as determined by the appropriate watershed district. 
(Code 1999, § 10.045) 
Sec. 38-133. - Minimum buildable area. 
    At least 4,500 square feet of the minimum lot area shall be non-wetland. 
(Code 1999, § 10.047) 
Sec. 38-134. - Parking requirements. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with section 38-610. Parking areas or circulation drives shall be setback at least five feet from any lot line. 
(Code 1999, § 10.050) 
Sec. 38-135. - Accessory buildings. 
(a)  Accessory buildings for single-family dwellings shall be as set forth in section 38-100. 
(b)  Accessory buildings for multiple residential dwellings shall observe the same setback as established for the multiple residential dwellings, except that the accessory buildings located within the rear yard may be located to within ten feet of the rear of interior side property line. The city council may require common walls for accessory buildings where common walls will eliminate unsightly and hazardous areas. 
(Code 1999, § 10.060; Ord. No. 723, § XII(10.060), 2-20-2018) 
Secs. 38-136-38-153. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENCE THREE (R-3) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-154. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-3 district is to provide for medium- to high-density housing in multiple-family structures and directly related complementary uses. 
(Code 1999, § 11.010) 
Sec. 38-155. - Uses in the R-3 district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Multifamily residential structures containing four or less dwelling units. 
(2)  All permitted uses in the R-2 district. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  All accessory uses in an R-1 district. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Multifamily residential structures containing five or more dwelling units including apartments. 
(2)  Housing intended for the elderly, which may include independent living, assisted living or memory care housing, congregate dining rooms, rooms or facilities shared among the residents, shops selling gifts or sundries, nursing services and help with daily activities. 
(3)  Nursing homes, in compliance with section 38-159. 
(4)  Public buildings. 
(5)  Churches. 
(6)  Schools. 
(7)  Small wireless facilities, in compliance with section 38-606 and chapter 30, article III. 
(Code 1999, § 11.020; Ord. No. 723, § XIII(11.020), 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 725, § II(11.020), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-156. - Lot area and dimension standards. 
UseMinimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit Minimum Lot Width Minimum Lot Depth Single-family detached dwelling 8,400 square feet 70 feet; 
90 feet (corner lot) 120 feet Two-family dwelling 5,000 square feet 80 feet; 
100 feet (corner lot) 120 feet Three to eight-family dwelling 4,000 square feet N/A N/A Apartment building 1 Bedrooms/unit: 
0: 2,500 square feet; 
1-2: 3,000 square feet; 
3: 3,500 square feet N/A N/A Senior housing Independent living: 2,000 square feet; 
assisted living/memory care: 1,500 square feet N/A N/A  
1 May be adjusted for certain uses by the schedule of allowances, as in section 38-157. 
(Code 1999, § 11.030; Ord. No. 723, § XIV(11.030), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-157. - Schedule of allowances. 
(a)  For each parking stall in or under the apartment building or otherwise completely underground, subtract 400 square feet from the total minimum lot area. 
(b)  For each unit with a balcony of not less than 45 square feet, subtract 200 square feet from the total minimum lot area. 
(c)  This schedule of allowances does not apply to senior housing. 
(Code 1999, § 11.040) 
Sec. 38-158. - Setback and height standards. 
    The minimum building setback shall be measured from the applicable lot line or public street right-of-way line. 
Use Front Yard 
Setback Side Yard 
Setbacks 1 Rear Yard 
Setback Between 
Buildings Building 
Height Single-family detached dwelling and two-family dwelling 25 feet; 
40 feet (arterial street) 10 feet; 
25 feet (corner) 40 feet N/A 36 feet Three to eight-family dwelling and townhouse 30 feet; 
40 feet (arterial street) 20 feet 2 ; 
30 feet (corner) 30 feet Equal to the height of the building Senior housing 30 feet 20 feet 2 ; 
30 feet (corner) 30 feet Apartment building No less than 35 feet, or 40 feet on an arterial street, or the average height of the building, whichever is greater  
1 Measured from roof projections, as in section 38-101(3), for single-family detached and two-family dwellings. 
2 Add six inches for each one foot over 20 feet that the average height of the building exceeds. 
(Code 1999, § 11.050; Ord. No. 723, § XV(11.050), 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 729 , § XV, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 732, att.(38-158), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-159. - Nursing home regulations. 
    The following standards will be considered when reviewing an application for a conditional use permit for a nursing home: 
(1)  Access will be via a collector or arterial street, as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Nearby housing will be buffered from parking, loading, pick-up areas and trash handling by location, orientation, setback, plantings, fencing and building. 
(3)  Nearby housing will be shielded from exterior lighting glare. 
(4)  Parking will be provided in compliance with section 38-610(e). 
(Code 1999, § 11.052; Ord. No. 723, § XVI(11.052), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-160. - Wetland setbacks. 
    For purposes of the above setbacks, a delineated wetland edge shall be considered the same as a property line or right-of-way line; provided that rear yard attached decks up to ten feet in depth may intrude into the rear yard setback area. Variances to wetland setbacks may be considered by the city council where reasonable use of the land would be difficult or impossible if the standard were strictly adhered to considering the following factors: 
(1)  When the lot is a minimum of 16,800 square feet and a large proportion of non-wetland area exists on the site; 
(2)  When the proposed structures could be shown to minimize effects on the surrounding neighborhood and blend in with the character of the locality; 
(3)  When the slope of the yard from the structures to the wetland is six to one or less; 
(4)  When existing significant trees or vegetation could be saved by reducing setbacks; 
(5)  The need for protection for various types of wetland; 
(6)  When the intrusion into the wetland is minimal, as determined by the appropriate watershed district; or 
(7)  When the applicant can mitigate any intrusion on or off site, as determined by the appropriate watershed district. 
(Code 1999, § 11.055) 
Sec. 38-161. - Minimum buildable area. 
    At least 4,200 square feet of the minimum lot area shall be non-wetland. 
(Code 1999, § 11.057) 
Sec. 38-162. - Parking requirements. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with section 38-610. Parking areas or circulation drives shall be setback at least five feet from any lot line. 
(Code 1999, § 11.060) 
Sec. 38-163. - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall observe the same setback requirements established for the multiple-residence building, except that accessory buildings located within the rear yard of the multiple-residence building may be located to within ten feet of the rear or interior side property line. The city council may require common walls for accessory buildings where common walls will eliminate unsightly and hazardous areas. 
(Code 1999, § 11.070) 
Sec. 38-164. - Condominiums. 
    Condominiums, as defined and regulated by M.S.A. ch. 515, shall be considered as multiple-family dwelling structures in this chapter and shall be subject to all residence three district requirements, except as modified by the following: 
(1)  Approval of condominiums floor plan. The condominium floor plan required in M.S.A. § 515.13 shall not be filed with the register of deeds until the same has been tendered to and approved by the city. A transparency of the floor plan shall be given to the city along with a copy of declaration required by M.S.A. § 515.11. 
(2)  Converting existing structure to condominium use. Where any existing multiple-family dwelling is proposed for conversion to a condominium use: 
a.  The proposed condominium use shall comply with all present zoning and building requirements. 
b.  A certificate of occupancy for each unit shall be obtained under section 8-107 prior to approval of the floor plan. 
(3)  Condominium minimum unit size. Each unit of a condominium shall have minimum dimensions and minimum number of rooms as set forth in section 8-57. 
(Code 1999, § 11.080; Ord. No. 732, § III, 2-5-2019) 
Secs. 38-165-38-181. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENCE FOUR (R-4) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-182. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-4 district is to provide for the creation of medium-density manufactured home communities. 
(Code 1999, § 12.010) 
Sec. 38-183. - Establishing an R-4 district. 
    An area proposed for rezoning to R-4 shall be at least 20 acres in size. The proposed dwelling unit density shall be compatible with the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1999, § 12.020; Ord. No. 723, § XVII(12.020), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-184. - Uses in the R-4 district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Public utility uses, public parks, provision of underground utilities, and the use of solar energy systems including solar collectors for the use of the particular site, storage facilities, and distribution components for space heating and cooling and domestic water heating. 
(b)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Manufactured homes. 
(2)  Community buildings for use by manufactured home park residents. 
(3)  Offices for the administration of the manufactured home park. 
(4)  Laundry facilities for use by manufactured home park residents. 
(5)  Public buildings. 
(6)  Churches. 
(7)  Schools. 
(8)  Small wireless facilities, in compliance with section 38-606 and chapter 30, article III. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Private storage buildings. 
(Code 1999, § 12.030; Ord. No. 723, § XVIII(12.030), 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 725, § III(12.030), 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 732, att.(38-184), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-185. - Lot dimension standards. 
Use Minimum Lot Width Minimum Lot Depth Single-wide manufactured home 40 feet 110 feet Double-wide manufactured home 90 feet 73 feet  
(Code 1999, § 12.040; Ord. No. 723, § XIX(12.040), 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 38-186. - Setback and height standards. 
    The minimum building setback shall be measured from the applicable lot line or public street right-of-way line. No manufactured home, off-street parking space, or building shall be located within 30 feet of the exterior boundary of any manufactured home park: 
Use Front Yard 
Setback Side Yard 
Setbacks Rear Yard 
Setback Building 
Height Single-wide manufactured home 20 feet 10 feet (one side); 
25 feet (entry side) 10 feet Greater of 14 feet or the height of 1 manufactured home Double-wide manufactured home 20 feet 10 feet (each) 25 feet  
(Ord. No. 723, § XIX(12.041), 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 729 , § XVI, 9-18-2018) 
Sec. 38-187. - General requirements. 
(a)  A license and building permit must be obtained from the city building department to establish, construct, or maintain a manufactured home park in the city. 
(b)  The use of an area for the establishment of a manufactured home park shall be a compatible use with the surrounding community. 
(c)  Such park shall be serviced by a central sanitary sewer and water system connected to the public sewer and water system of the city, subject to such additional requirements as the city may impose. 
(d)  The manufactured home park ground shall be lighted from sunset to sunrise. The plan of maintenance procedures and grounds supervision shall be as approved by the city council. Streets shall be lit in a manner similar to that of other multiple-family residential areas of the city. 
(e)  Dogs and other animals shall not be permitted to run at large or commit nuisances or other disturbances. Dogs shall be controlled in accordance with chapter 6, pertaining to animals. 
(f)  No public address or loudspeaker system shall be permitted. 
(g)  City-approved fire hydrants shall be located no more than 300 feet from any manufactured home. 
(h)  Storage sheds of a design compatible with the main structure shall be provided for each manufactured home site. 
(i)  All manufactured home parks must have a fenced and screened area set aside for dead storage and over-load parking. All boats, boat trailers, hauling trailers, and all other equipment not stored within the manufactured homes or the utility enclosure that may be provided shall be stored in a separate place provided by the park owner and not upon the plots occupied by manufactured homes, nor upon streets within the manufactured home park. 
(j)  All land areas shall be landscaped in accordance with approved plans and be properly maintained, adequately drained, and kept clean and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris. 
(k)  There shall be no outdoor camping anywhere in the manufactured home park. 
(l)  There shall be no commercial manufactured home sales located on park premises. 
(m)  The city may add such other conditions and requirements as it may determine. 
(Code 1999, § 12.042) 
Sec. 38-188. - Location outside parks. 
    No person shall park any manufactured home on any street, alley, or highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, except as provided in this chapter. 
(1)  Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley, or highway for not longer than three hours subject to further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or code provisions. 
(2)  No person shall park or occupy any manufactured home on the premises of any occupied dwelling or any lot which is not part of the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside of any approved manufactured home park, except the parking of only one manufactured home unoccupied in any accessory private garage building, or in a rear yard in any district, is permitted providing no living quarters shall be maintained while such manufactured home is so parked or stored. 
(3)  Temporary special permits may be issued by the council for the temporary use of a manufactured home as a dwelling or an office where the manufactured home is located outside of an authorized manufactured home park. Such temporary special permit shall be limited to periods of not more than 90 days and must be renewed at the end of each period. A fee as provided in in the city fee schedule must accompany each application for a temporary special permit. Each temporary special permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous location on the outside of the manufactured home. 
(Code 1999, § 12.043) 
Sec. 38-189. - Landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Each lot shall be properly landscaped with grass, trees, and shrubs. Except for the areas used for the mobile home, patio, sidewalk, and off-street parking, the entire lot shall be sodded and maintained. 
(b)  At least one shade tree (minimum caliper: two inches) shall be planted and maintained with each unit. 
(c)  A concrete sidewalk not less than 30 inches in width shall be constructed adjacent to the concrete curb and on the unit side thereof. This sidewalk shall be connected to the manufactured home patio by a concrete walk not less than 24 inches in width. If the paved parking spaces abut the patio, these may substitute for the 24-inch concrete walk. 
(d)  An effective year-round visual screen shall be provided along the exterior boundary of the manufactured home park using plant materials or a fence. Such screen shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 12.050) 
Sec. 38-190. - Roadway requirements. 
(a)  All streets, driveways and rights-of-way shall be constructed as approved by the council. Street rights-of-way shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width. All streets shall be public unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
(b)  Access drives to all parking spaces, manufactured home sites and buildings shall be paved. 
(c)  All streets shall have a concrete (surmountable) curb and gutter. 
(d)  Ingress and egress from manufactured home parks shall be approved by the city. 
(e)  All streets must be properly named, and signs must be installed with the name designation. 
(f)  All streets and roadways shall be passable for emergency vehicles at all times. 
(g)  Each manufactured home must have a house number placed on the unit so as to be visible from the street providing access to that unit. 
(Code 1999, § 12.060) 
Sec. 38-191. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Each lot shall have a paved off-street parking area for two automobiles. 
(Code 1999, § 12.070) 
Sec. 38-192. - Community building requirements. 
(a)  Each manufactured home park shall have one or several central community buildings with a minimum floor area of 30 square feet per manufactured home lot served, one building to serve not more than 200 units. Parking spaces will be provided at the rate of one space per four manufactured home lots. One-half of the floor area is underground for use as a storm shelter. 
(b)  Such building shall have central heating and be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition. Artificial lighting shall be provided as required. 
(c)  There shall be provided in the community building a general assembly and party room, public telephone, public toilets and lavatories, and laundry washing and drying areas. There shall be provided at least one washer and one dryer for each 20 lots. 
(Code 1999, § 12.080) 
Sec. 38-193. - Community recreation requirements. 
    A recreation area shall be established, constructed, and maintained within the manufactured home park site of not less than five percent of the total site. 
(Code 1999, § 12.090) 
Sec. 38-194. - Planned unit development. 
    To provide for a more creative and flexible response to the site conditions and natural resources, a manufactured home community may be developed under the planned unit development provisions of article III, division 14 of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 12.100) 
Sec. 38-195. - License revocation. 
    Failure to comply with any provision or requirement of this chapter or with any provision or requirement imposed upon the manufactured home park or owner or operator by terms of the conditional use permit or the terms of any contract agreement or stipulation entered into or imposed by the city council as part of or in connection with the license shall be cause for revocation of the manufactured home park permit by the council. A 15-day mailed notice of the violation and of the time and place of a hearing shall be accorded to the owner and operator by the council. Upon revocation of a permit by the council, no additional occupancies of the manufactured home in the park shall be allowed, but the council may allow a reasonable time for termination of occupancy. 
(Code 1999, § 12.110) 
Secs. 38-196-38-213. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COMMERCIAL ONE (C-1) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-214. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the C-1, neighborhood business district, is to provide for the establishment of local centers for convenient retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. These centers are to provide services and goods primarily for the surrounding neighborhoods and are not intended to draw customers from the entire community. 
(Code 1999, § 13.010) 
Sec. 38-215. - Uses in the C-1 district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Bakeries. 
(2)  Barber shops and beauty parlors. 
(3)  Candy and ice cream stores. 
(4)  Clothes pressing and tailoring shops. 
(5)  Convenience food stores without accessory gas pumps. 
(6)  Pharmacies. 
(7)  Dry cleaning and laundry receiving and pick-up stations, excluding laundering and dry cleaning. 
(8)  Florist shops. 
(9)  Hardware stores. 
(10)  Launderettes and dry cleaning establishments that provide automatic, self-service facilities only. 
(11)  Libraries. 
(12)  Liquor stores, off-sale. 
(13)  Offices (business, professional, or institutional) not to exceed 1,500 square feet in floor area for professional services. 
(14)  Repair stores and fix-it shops that provide services for the repair of home, garden, yard and personal use appliances. 
(15)  Tobacco shops. 
(16)  Variety, gift, notion and soft good stores. 
(17)  Game rooms, not to exceed 1,500 square feet in total floor area. 
(18)  Convenience food restaurants, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such restaurants shall not exceed 1,500 square feet in floor area; 
b.  Limited indoor seating is allowed, subject to meeting the following parking requirements: 
1.  Two parking spaces for each table; 
2.  One space for each 500 square feet in floor area; and 
3.  One space per two employees. 
c.  Personal delivery services allowed: 
1.  Shall not include drive-through and/or window pick-up services; and 
2.  Shall not include any outdoor seating. 
(19)  Public utility uses, public parks, provision of underground utilities, and the use of solar energy systems including solar collectors for the use of the particular site, storage facilities, and distribution components for space heating and cooling and domestic water heating. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Convenience food stores with gas pumps, subject to the following conditions: Pump islands shall be set back at least 25 feet from any street right-of-way, at least 40 feet from any non-street property line, and not less than 100 feet from any noncommercial district boundary. 
(2)  Medical marijuana distribution facilities, in compliance with section 38-624. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Signs, in compliance with the applicable standards in article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Off-street parking facilities, in compliance with the applicable standards in section 38-610. 
(3)  Temporary greenhouse/seasonal garden centers, as an accessory use to florist shops and hardware stores only, under the following conditions: 
a.  A temporary greenhouse/seasonal garden center permit may be approved by the city council, upon recommendation of the city planner, city engineer and fire marshal. 
b.  Only one temporary structure is allowed, with a maximum size of 750 square feet in area. The covered portion of a seasonal garden center may be no more than 12 feet in height, professionally designed and constructed, and maintained in a neat and attractive manner. Such a structure must be predominantly a single color that is compatible with the surrounding development. Colors, stripes or patterns may be permitted on no more than eight percent of the surface area of the sides and roof of the temporary structure. 
c.  A seasonal garden center may occupy no more than 2,500 square feet of ground area. 
d.  A seasonal garden center must be located in a portion of the site that will not disrupt typical parking needs, required service or vehicular movement, emergency access, or other site requirement, as determined by the city administrator in consultation with the city planner, city engineer and fire marshal. 
e.  A seasonal garden center may be permitted at the discretion of the city council for up to 180 days in a calendar year, in the spring, summer and/or autumn months. The garden center must be removed and the site cleaned and restored to its original condition within 72 hours after the expiration of the permit. 
f.  Only trees, shrubs, plants and flowers, and associated gardening merchandise may be sold or displayed in a seasonal garden center. The display of motorized, fuel-powered, electrical or mechanical gardening/lawn equipment shall be forbidden within the garden center. 
g.  The outdoor portion of a seasonal garden center must be maintained in a neat and attractive manner, surrounded by an aesthetically approved fence that if temporary, may be no more than four feet in height, except at entrance openings. Plants and merchandise may not be displayed more than six feet above the ground. Boxes, cartons, bins or other similar storage devices are not permitted in the outdoor portion of the garden center. 
h.  Signage for any seasonal garden center shall be limited to no more than a combined 32 square feet of area, which must be located adjacent to the outdoor area or affixed to the temporary building. No off-premises signage will be permitted. 
i.  The conditions listed herein and/or additional conditions from city staff shall be complied with during the term of the approved permit. Any deviation from or violations of these conditions shall result in the immediate revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1999, § 13.020; Ord. No. 724, § I(13.020), 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 729 , § IX, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 732, § IV, att.(38-215), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-216. - Special limitations and conditions on uses. 
    All uses permitted in the C-1 district shall be subject to special limitations and conditions with respect to each as follows: 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments that deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. 
(2)  Establishment of convenience food-type restaurants, selling, serving or offering goods or services directly to customers either waiting in parked vehicles, or to customers who return to their vehicles, to consume goods while on the premises of the principal use shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Businesses located in a C-1 district that abuts any residential district shall restrict their hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 13.030; Ord. No. 724, § II(13.030), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-217. - Access. 
(a)  Access to commercial activities shall be allowed only on arterial or collector streets, or a street specifically designed for such development. 
(b)  Curb cuts within a single proposed site shall not be spaced closer than 100 feet. Commercial developments of a small scale shall be encouraged to develop a common access drive and parking facilities. Incentives to promote development of shared parking facilities and access, such as reduction in setback or parking requirements, may be approved by the city council. 
(c)  A turning lane and its appropriate right-of-way must be provided if the city council determines that one is needed. 
(Code 1999, § 13.040) 
Sec. 38-218. - Lot coverage. 
(a)  To calculate lot coverage, the following areas shall be added together: area of the building as determined by the foundation plan; parking areas and driveways; loading, storage, trash areas, and all other areas covered with impervious material not purposely used for landscaping. 
(b)  The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be 85 percent of the lot. 
(Code 1999, § 13.050) 
Sec. 38-219. - Setback and height standards. 
(a)  Setbacks. The minimum building setback shall be measured from the applicable lot line or public street right-of-way line. Street designations are based on the current comprehensive plan. 
SetbackBuildingParking Lot or Circulation Drive Arterial or collector street 40 feet 25 feet Local street 35 feet 20 feet Interior lot line 15 feet 10 feet Residential zone boundary 50 feet 25 feet  
(b)  Building height. The maximum height of buildings shall be 18 feet. 
(Code 1999, § 13.060; Ord. No. 724, § III(13.060), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 38-220-38-246. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - COMMERCIAL ONE-A (C-1A) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-247. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the C-1A, neighborhood business A district is to provide for the establishment of local centers for convenient retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. The uses allowed in this district are to provide services and goods primarily at the neighborhood scale, and secondarily at the city market scale in areas adjacent to Interstate 694. 
(Code 1999, § 13A.010) 
Sec. 38-248. - Uses in the C-1A district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  All permitted uses of the C-1 district 
(b)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses of the C-1 district, subject to the same applicable conditions. 
(2)  Automobile detailing establishments, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Automobile detailing establishments site improvements such as buildings or structures (permanent or temporary) or parking areas shall be separated from any R-1, R-2, or R-3 district by at least 50 feet. 
b.  All detailing equipment shall be used and enclosed within a building. 
c.  No automobile detailing establishments on a site contiguous to any R-1, R-2, or R-3 district shall be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
d.  Sufficient off-street area to provide space for a minimum of two spaces for every service bay and one space for each employee on the maximum work shift. Parking stall dimensions shall meet the applicable standards in section 38-610(b)(1). 
e.  All wash water disposal facilities, including sludge, grit removal and disposal equipment shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and shall conform with all city ordinances regarding sewerage and health, and shall be so designed so as not to affect detrimentally the city sewer system. 
f.  Service facilities, machinery, overhead doors, etc., shall be placed to provide minimum noise and disruption to adjacent land uses. 
g.  Automobile detailing establishments shall be limited to one overhead door that is located at the rear of the building for the purposes of ingress and egress. 
h.  The maximum square footage allowed within any building for automobile detailing use shall be 4,000 square feet. 
(3)  Automobile repair and tire sales establishments, subject to the same conditions as automobile detailing establishments, plus: 
a.  All new and/or used automotive parts (including tires) or repair equipment shall be kept in the principal building at all times. 
b.  No customer's vehicle shall remain on the premises for more than 14 consecutive days. 
c.  Auto repair work shall not include auto body repair. 
d.  All vehicles on the premises shall be currently licensed. 
e.  No parked vehicles shall appear to be heavily damaged. 
f.  There shall be no vehicle sales from the premises. 
g.  Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided for a minimum of four spaces for every service bay, and one space for each employee on the maximum work shift. 
h.  A plan for parking customers' and employees' vehicles must be submitted as part of the application for a conditional use permit. If the parking area is also used for traffic movement around the building, it is essential that trucks and emergency vehicles be able to drive around the building at all times. 
i.  The parking lot must be striped. 
j.  Fencing must be provided as required under section 38-601 if adjacent to an R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district. 
k.  Trash dumpsters shall be screened on all four sides with the same materials. The doors must remain closed except when items are being placed into or taken out of the enclosure. 
l.  No work shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
m.  The maximum floor area shall be 1,500 square feet. 
n.  The service bay door shall remain closed except when vehicles are entering or exiting. 
o.  Any other reasonable conditions included by the city council as part of the conditional use permit. 
(Code 1999, § 13A.020; Ord. No. 724, § IV(13A.020), 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 732, § V, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-249. - Special limitations and conditions on uses. 
    All uses permitted in the C-1A district shall be subject to the same special limitations and conditions specified in section 38-216. 
(Code 1999, § 13A.030) 
Sec. 38-250. - Access. 
    Access shall be subject to the same requirements of the C-1 district, as in section 38-217. 
(Code 1999, § 13A.040; Ord. No. 724, § V(13A.040), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-251. - Lot coverage. 
    Lot coverage shall be subject to the same requirements of the C-1 district, as in section 38-218. 
(Code 1999, § 13A.050; Ord. No. 724, § VI(13A.050), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-252. - Setback and heights standards. 
    Setbacks and heights shall be subject to the same requirements of the C-1 district, as in section 38-219. 
(Code 1999, § 13A.060; Ord. No. 724, § VII(13A.060), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-253. - Signs. 
    Signs shall be subject to the same requirements of the C-1 district, as in section 38-695. 
(Code 1999, § 13A.070; Ord. No. 724, § VIII(13A.070), 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 732, att.(38-253), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-254. - Other references. 
    Other references to C-1 district standards throughout this chapter shall also pertain to the C-1A district, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 724, § IX(13A.080), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 38-255-38-271. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - COMMERCIAL TWO (C-2) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-272. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the C-2, retail-service business district is to provide for low-intensity retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. The uses allowed in this district are to provide goods and services on a community market scale and located in areas which are well served by collector or arterial street facilities. 
(Code 1999, § 14.010) 
Sec. 38-273. - Uses in the C-2 district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  All permitted uses of the C-1 district, subject to the same applicable conditions. 
(2)  Amusement and recreation establishments, such as commercial bowling alleys, pool halls, skating rinks, and tennis courts. 
(3)  Animal hospitals, excluding establishments with outside animal runs. 
(4)  Antique shops. 
(5)  Art galleries. 
(6)  Automobile accessory stores without on-site service facilities. 
(7)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(8)  Book and stationary stores. 
(9)  Business machine sales and service shops. 
(10)  Camera and photographic supply stores. 
(11)  Catering establishments. 
(12)  Clothing stores. 
(13)  Clothing and costume rentals. 
(14)  Daycare centers. 
(15)  Department stores. 
(16)  Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio and television sales and service. 
(17)  Employment agencies. 
(18)  Exercise spas or clubs. 
(19)  Fabric stores. 
(20)  Frozen food stores, including the rental of lockers in conjunction therewith. 
(21)  Furniture stores, including upholstering when conducted as an incidental part of the principal use. 
(22)  Greenhouses. 
(23)  Household furnishings, fixtures, appliances, and accessory stores. 
(24)  Interior decorating stores and shops. 
(25)  Jewelry stores. 
(26)  Locksmith shops. 
(27)  Musical instrument stores and repair shops. 
(28)  Optical stores. 
(29)  Office supply stores. 
(30)  Paint and wallpaper stores. 
(31)  Pet shops. 
(32)  Photography studios. 
(33)  Picture framing and picture stores. 
(34)  Public utility service stores. 
(35)  Resale businesses. 
(36)  Restaurants, including those having an on-sale liquor license. 
(37)  Rental agencies for the rental of clothing, appliances, tools, household fixtures, furnishings and accessories. 
(38)  Schools such as those for teaching music, dance and business vocations. 
(39)  Sporting and camping goods stores, excluding on-site sales of recreational vehicles and trailers. 
(40)  Supermarkets and grocery stores. 
(41)  Taverns. 
(42)  Toy shops. 
(43)  Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Convenience food stores with accessory gas pumps, subject to the following conditions: pump islands shall be setback at least 25 feet from any street right-of-way, at least 40 feet from any non-street property line, and not less than 100 feet from any noncommercial district boundary. 
(2)  Automobile service stations, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Automobile service station site improvements such as buildings or structures (permanent or temporary) or parking areas shall be separated from any R-1, R-2, or R-3 district by at least 50 feet. 
b.  Pump islands shall be setback not less than 25 feet from any street right-of-way, not less than 40 feet from any non-street property line and not less than 100 feet from any noncommercial district boundary. 
c.  Hydraulic hoists, pits, and all lubrication, greasing, washing, repair and diagnostic equipment shall be used and enclosed within a building. 
d.  No automobile service station on a site contiguous to any R-1, R-2, or R-3 district shall be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(3)  Automobile parts stores with on-site service facilities, subject to the following conditions: hydraulic hoists, pits, and all lubrication, greasing, washing, repair, and diagnostic equipment shall be used and enclosed within a building. 
(4)  Convenience food restaurants, subject to the following conditions: convenience food restaurants shall be subject to the same limitations and conditions as are specified in subsections (b)(2)a, b, and d of this section for automobile service stations. 
(5)  Hotels and motels that have dining facilities open to the public and/or have facilities to accommodate public meetings and/or banquets. 
(6)  Rental of trucks and trailers, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The rental of trucks and trailers for personal use on a daily basis shall only be performed from an automobile service station. 
b.  Trucks for rental shall be limited to single rear-axle vehicles. 
(7)  Motor vehicle body shops, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  All damaged vehicles, vehicle parts and trash shall be stored out of sight from any location off-site. 
b.  All repair work shall be confined to an enclosed building, and overhead doors shall remain closed, except when vehicles are entering or exiting. 
c.  The city council shall have determined that the building and site have been designed and will be maintained in a manner that will not detract from the value, use or enjoyment of nearby properties (particularly residential) nor create a public nuisance. 
(8)  Kennels of more than five domestic animals. 
(9)  Motorcycles, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, personal watercraft and other similar personal recreation vehicles, trailers as accessory uses to the uses and accessories thereto, sales and services subject to the following conditions: 
a.  All vehicles, equipment and accessories shall be stored and displayed within a building. 
b.  Servicing of all vehicles, equipment, and accessories, except for fueling, shall occur within a building. 
c.  All vehicles, equipment, and accessories scheduled for service shall be stored inside a building overnight or in an area with architecturally compatible screening. Screened, short-term, outdoor service staging areas shall observe setbacks and not be located in the front yard. 
d.  The building facade shall be equal on all sides and be of the following materials, or a combination of: 
1.  Glass; 
2.  Face-brick; 
3.  Rock-face or split-face concrete block, if integrally colored; 
4.  Pre-cast concrete panels; or 
5.  Natural stone. 
e.  No outdoor public address system shall be allowed. 
f.  All doors shall remain closed, except when receiving or dispensing merchandise or while vehicles/equipment are entering or exiting for service. 
g.  No lighting glare over 0.5 footcandle shall go off-site, as measured at the property line. 
(10)  Medical marijuana distribution facilities, in compliance with section 38-624. 
(11)  Microbreweries and microdistilleries, in compliance with section 38-623. 
(12)  Offices with accessory storage, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The floor area of the office portion of an office building shall not exceed 6,000 square feet. 
b.  Accessory storage shall be totally within the principal building, shall be limited to use by the occupants of the office building, and shall not exceed the size of the office floor area in that building. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Signs, in compliance with the applicable standards in article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Off-street parking facilities, in compliance with the applicable standards in section 38-610. 
(3)  Storge of merchandise, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
(Code 1999, § 14.020; Ord. No. 724, § X(14.020), 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 729 , § X, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 732, §§ VI, VII, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-274. - Special limitations and conditions on uses. 
    All uses permitted in the C-2 district shall be subject to special limitations and conditions with respect to each as follows: businesses located within 100 feet of any residential district shall restrict their hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(Code 1999, § 14.030) 
Sec. 38-275. - Access. 
(a)  Access to commercial activities shall be allowed only from minor arterial or collector streets or a street specifically designed for such development. 
(b)  Curb cuts within a single proposed site shall not be spaced closed than 100 feet. Commercial developments of a small scale shall be encouraged to develop common access drives and parking facilities. Incentives, such as reduction in setback or parking requirements, may be provided at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  A turning lane and its appropriate right-of-way must be provided if the city council determines that one is needed. 
(Code 1999, § 14.040) 
Sec. 38-276. - Lot coverage. 
(a)  To calculate lot coverage, the following areas shall be added together: area of the building as determined by the foundation plan; parking areas and driveways; loading, storage, trash areas, and all other areas covered with impervious material not purposely used for landscaping. 
(b)  The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be 90 percent of the lot. 
(Code 1999, § 14.050) 
Sec. 38-277. - Setback and height standards. 
(a)  Setbacks. The minimum building setback shall be measured from the applicable lot line or public street right-of-way line, as set forth below, or the average height of the height of the building, whichever is greater. Street designations are based on the current comprehensive plan. 
Setback Building Parking Lot or Circulation Drive Arterial or collector street 40 feet 25 feet Local street 35 feet 20 feet Interior lot line 20 feet 10 feet Residential zone boundary 50 feet 25 feet  
(b)  Building height. The maximum height of buildings shall be 25 feet. 
(Code 1999, § 14.060; Ord. No. 724, § XI(14.060), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 38-278-38-302. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - COMMERCIAL TWO-A (C-2A) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-303. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the C-2, retail-service business A district is to provide for low-intensity retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are 
furnished. The uses allowed in this district are to provide goods and services on a community market scale and located in areas which are well served by collector or arterial street facilities. 
(Code 1999, § 14.010) 
Sec. 38-304. - Uses in the C-2A district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  All permitted uses of the C-2 district. 
(2)  Body art establishments. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The conditional uses are all conditional uses of the C-2 district, subject to the same applicable conditions. 
(c)  Accessory uses. The accessory uses are all accessory uses of the C-2 district, subject to the same applicable conditions. 
(Code 1999, § 14.020; Ord. No. 724, § XII(14.020), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-305. - Special limitations and conditions on uses. 
    All uses permitted in the C-2A district shall be subject to special limitations and conditions specified in section 38-274. 
(Code 1999, § 14.030; Ord. No. 724, § XIII(14.030), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-306. - Access. 
    Access shall be subject to the same requirements as the C-2 district, as in section 38-275. 
(Code 1999, § 14.040; Ord. No. 724, § XIV(14.040), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-307. - Lot coverage. 
    Lot coverage shall be subject to the same requirements as the C-2 district, as in section 38-276. 
(Code 1999, § 14.050; Ord. No. 724, § XVI(14.050), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-308. - Setback and height standards. 
    Setbacks and heights shall be subject to the same requirements as the C-2 district, as in section 38-277. 
(Code 1999, § 14.060; Ord. No. 724, § XVII(14.060), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-309. - Signs. 
    Signs shall be subject to the same requirements of the C-2 district, as in section 38-696. 
(Code 1999, § 14.010; Ord. No. 724, § XVIII(14.070), 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 732, att.(38-309), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-310. - Other references. 
    Other references to C-2 district standards throughout this chapter shall also pertain to the C-2A district, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 724, § XIX(14.080), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 38-311-38-338. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - COMMERCIAL THREE (C-3) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-339. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the C-3, auto-oriented business district is to provide for the establishment of businesses with need for great amounts of outdoor storage of vehicles as well as those which generate great amounts of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1999, § 15.010) 
Sec. 38-340. - Requirements for the establishment of a C-3 district. 
    No property shall be zoned C-3 district unless it is either more than five acres in area, or contiguous on a rear or side lot line or street frontage to an existing commercial district, office district, industrial district or planned unit district, or any combination thereof. All new zoning districts shall be approved by the city council, in compliance with section 38-37. 
(Code 1999, § 15.020; Ord. No. 724, § XX(15.020), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-341. - Uses in the C-3 district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  All permitted uses of the C-2 district, subject to the same applicable conditions, except daycare centers. 
(2)  Automobile agencies selling new vehicles. 
(3)  Boat and marine stores or agencies selling new boats. 
(4)  Convenience food restaurants. 
(5)  Garages for the storage, repair, and servicing of motor vehicles of not over two tons capacity. 
(6)  Health care facilities. 
(7)  Office buildings. 
(8)  Post-secondary educational facilities. 
(9)  Recreational vehicle and trailer sales. 
(10)  Rental agencies for the rental, but not sale, of automobiles. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses of the C-2 district, subject to the same applicable conditions, except offices. 
(2)  Automobile washing establishments: 
a.  Automobile car wash establishments shall be subject to the same limitations and conditions as are specified in section 38-273(b)(2)a and d for automobile service stations in the C-2 district. 
b.  Sufficient off-street area to provide space for not less than ten automobiles waiting to be serviced shall be provided, in compliance with the applicable park space dimension standards. 
c.  All wash water disposal facilities, including sludge, grit removal and disposal equipment, shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and shall conform to all city ordinances regarding sewerage and health, and shall be so designed so as not to affect detrimentally the city sewer system. 
(3)  Hotels and motels. 
(4)  Sale of rental automobiles in conjunction with rental of automobiles under subsection (a)(10) of this section, subject to: 
a.  Automobiles for rent shall always number 70 percent or more of the total automobiles for rent or sale on the site. Those automobiles for sale shall be clearly marked and not available for rent. 
b.  Only used automobiles originally and continuously owned by the rental agency shall be sold from the site. 
c.  A building or buildings shall constitute at least 15 percent of the site, and the total site shall be at least one acre. 
d.  A development agreement shall be executed which shall, among other things, require annual renewal of the conditional use permit and the applicant's understanding that there will be a denial of such renewal if any of the above conditions are violated. 
(5)  Temporary display of individually-owned and drivable used motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks and recreational vehicles, and including individually-owned and operable boats, subject to the following criteria and in addition to the criteria established in section 38-694. 
a.  The total site shall be at least one acre, be well landscaped, and shall have a building with restroom facilities. 
b.  The primary finish of the exterior building walls shall be one or a combination of the following: 
1.  Face-brick; 
2.  Glass; 
3.  Rock-face or split-face concrete block; 
4.  Architectural quality prefinished metal panels, when used in combination with one or more of the above materials; or 
5.  Other building facade treatment approved by the council. 
c.  All parking shall be improved according to city standards, including a bituminous surface, concrete curbing and storm sewer necessary for proper site drainage. 
d.  A site plan shall clearly show all parking and designate location and number of spaces for various types of motor vehicles and customer parking. One customer parking space shall be provided for every seven motor vehicle display spaces. Drive aisles must comply with section 38-610(b)(1) and all parking spaces must be appropriately striped. A site lighting plan shall also be required, denoting the type of fixture, the height of the light source, and the footcandle meter illumination patterns on the site. 
e.  A sign plan shall be submitted showing all sign details in accordance with section 38-694. 
(6)  Motor vehicle body shops. 
(7)  Kennels of more than five domestic animals. 
(8)  Movie theaters, with the following conditions: 
a.  The movie theater and associated parking must be at least 300 feet from the nearest residential use or residentially-zoned land; 
b.  A traffic study shall be performed by a qualified professional engineer and a traffic management plan formulated as part of the conditions of approval; 
c.  Reasonable hours of operation and staggered showtimes shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval; 
d.  A security plan, subject to annual review and modification, shall be adopted; and 
e.  Any video games or arcade-like games shall be located so as to be available only to paying theater patrons. 
(9)  Display of more than five, and not more than ten, used vehicles. Displays for sale of operable used motor vehicles and recreational vehicles numbering more than five, and not more than ten, vehicles, and as an accessory use to a related principal use, shall be subject to the following criteria: 
a.  Any used vehicle sales under this section must be associated with a principal building of at least 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
b.  The total site shall be at least one-half acre in size, well-landscaped, and shall have a building with restroom facilities. 
c.  Any used vehicles allowed to be displayed for sale under this section shall be licensed according to the state sales license held by the business owner on the site, shall be clearly marked with a required Federal Used Car Warranty Sticker, and no used vehicles shall be available for rent. 
d.  Any personal or customer vehicle parked or awaiting service on an approved site shall not be displayed or offered for sale under any circumstances, unless properly marked as noted in subsection (b)(9)c of this section and meeting all other conditions listed herein. 
e.  All parking display areas shall be on-site and improved according to city standards, including a bituminous or concrete surface, and storm sewer necessary for proper site drainage. Parking or display of used vehicles for sale on a public or private street, gravel, grass or any unimproved surface is strictly prohibited. 
f.  All parking requirements of section 38-610 are satisfied. A site plan shall clearly show all employee, customer and designated used vehicle display parking location, with all spaces appropriately sized and striped for the various types of motor vehicles to be displayed. 
g.  A site lighting plan shall be required, denoting the type of fixture, the height of the light source, and the footcandle meter illumination patterns on the site. 
h.  A screen, consisting of a fence up to six feet in height and including landscaping, shall be installed and maintained along all property lines separating institutional, residential, or professional office districts and/or uses. 
i.  A sign plan shall be submitted showing all sign details in accordance with section 38-694. Banners, pennants, balloons and similar inflatable type signs are prohibited. 
j.  A development agreement shall be executed which shall, among other things, require annual renewal of the conditional use permit and the applicant's understanding that there will be a denial of such renewal if any of the above conditions are violated. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Signs, in compliance with the applicable standards in article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Off-street parking facilities, in compliance with the applicable standards in section 38-610. 
(3)  Storage of merchandise, solely intended to be sold by a related and established principal use. 
(4)  Used automobiles, provided that such use is incidental to a related principal use (except service stations) and provided that the parking requirements of section 38-610 are satisfied. There shall be no more than five used automobiles on display for sale at any one time for each building site (except where the related principal use is an automobile agency selling new vehicles); provided that those related principal uses that wish to exceed the five used automobiles indicated herein shall be subject to the criteria established in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 15.030; Ord. No. 724, § XXI(15.030), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-342. - Access. 
(a)  Access to C-3 commercial activities shall be allowed only on arterial or collector streets or a street specifically designed for such development. 
(b)  Curb cuts within a single proposed site shall not be spaced closer than 100 feet, except in the case of service stations and automobile car wash establishments. Commercial and industrial developments of a small scale shall be encouraged to develop common access drives and parking facilities. Incentives to encourage shared access and parking, such as reduction in setback or parking requirements, may be provided at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  A turning lane and its appropriate right-of-way must be provided if the city council determines that one is needed. 
(Code 1999, § 15.040) 
Sec. 38-343. - Lot coverage. 
(a)  To calculate lot coverage, the following areas shall be added together: area of the building as determined by the foundation plan; parking areas and driveways; loading, storage, trash areas, and all other areas covered with impervious material not purposely used for landscaping. 
(b)  The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be 90 percent of the lot. 
(Code 1999, § 15.050) 
Sec. 38-344. - Setback and height standards. 
(a)  Setbacks. The minimum building setback shall be measured from the applicable lot line or public street right-of-way line. Street designations are based on the current comprehensive plan. 
Setback All Uses Except Health Care, Office or Education Health Care, Office or Education Uses Building Parking lot or circulation drive Building Parking lot or circulation drive Arterial street 50 feet 25 feet 40 feet 20 feet Collector street 50 feet 25 feet 30 feet 20 feet Local street 50 feet 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet Interior lot line 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 10 feet Residential zone boundary 50 feet 25 feet 50 feet 25 feet  
(b)  Building height. The maximum height of buildings shall be 35 feet, except for health care offices or offices of educational uses, which buildings may have a maximum height of 45 feet. 
(Code 1999, § 15.060; Ord. No. 724, § XXII(15.060), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 38-345-38-361. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - OFFICE (O) DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-362. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the office district is to provide for large-scale office and related service commercial development that may be incompatible with other land use categories. The office district may serve to complement commercial and industrial land uses or it can stand by itself in the form of an office park or large individual concern engaged in office-oriented activity. 
(Code 1999, § 16.010) 
Sec. 38-363. - Uses in the O district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Offices; business, professional, medical or institutional. 
(2)  Financial institutions. 
(3)  Post offices. 
(4)  Restaurants, including these serving on-sale liquor, and convenience type. 
(5)  Laboratories. 
(6)  Athletic clubs. 
(7)  Public utility uses, public parks, provisions of underground utilities and the use of solar energy systems, including solar collectors for the use of the particular site, storage facilities and distribution components of space heating and cooling and domestic water heating. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Signs, in compliance with the application standards of article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Off-street parking facilities incompliance with the applicable standards of section 38-610. 
(c)  Conditional use. Conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Hotels and motels; and 
(2)  Medical marijuana distribution facilities, in compliance with section 38-624. 
(Code 1999, § 16.020; Ord. No. 729 , § XI, 9-18-2018) 
Sec. 38-364. - Access. 
(a)  Access to commercial and office development shall be allowed only on arterial or collector streets, or a street specifically designed for such development. 
(b)  Curb cuts within a single proposed site shall not be spaced closer than 100 feet. Commercial and office developments of a small scale shall be encouraged to develop a common access drive and parking facilities. Incentives, such as reduction in setback or parking requirements, may be provided at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  A turning lane and its appropriate right-of-way shall be provided if the city council determines that one is needed. 
(Code 1999, § 16.030) 
Sec. 38-365. - Lot coverage. 
(a)  To calculate lot coverage, the following areas shall be added together: area of the building as determined by the foundation plan; parking areas and driveways; loading, storage, trash areas, and all other areas covered with impervious material not purposely used for landscaping. 
(b)  The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be 90 percent of the lot. 
(Code 1999, § 16.040) 
Sec. 38-366. - Requirements on setbacks and height. 
(a)  Setbacks. The minimum building setback from any lot line or public street right-of-way shall be as set forth below or the average height of the building, whichever is greater. Street designations are based on the current comprehensive plan. 
Feet Building Minor arterial street 40 Collector street 40  
Feet Local street 35 Interior lot line 20 Residential zoning boundary 50 Parking lot or circulation drive Arterial street 25 Collector street 20 Local street 20 Interior lot line 10 Residential zoning boundary 15  
(b)  Height. The maximum height of buildings shall be 45 feet. 
(Code 1999, § 16.050) 
Secs. 38-367-38-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - OFFICE-BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-391. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the office-business district is to provide for large-scale office buildings, related service businesses, and other businesses and light industries that complement the appearance of the office environment. 
(Code 1999, § 16A.010) 
Sec. 38-392. - Uses in the office-business district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Office buildings; business, professional, medical or institutional. 
(2)  Financial institutions. 
(3)  Laboratories. 
(4)  Athletic clubs. 
(5)  Post offices. 
(6)  Public utility uses, public parks provisions of underground utilities and the use of solar energy systems, including solar collectors for the use of the particular site, storage facilities and distribution components for space heating and cooling and domestic water heating. 
(7)  Daycare centers, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Where the facility is accessory to a principal use, service shall be made available to the employees of the principal use; 
b.  Each facility shall provide a separate off-street passenger loading and unloading area devoted solely to the facility; 
c.  Each facility shall provide a separate and protected outside recreation area; 
d.  Where the facility is accessory to a principal use, physical separation from the major operations of the principal use shall be required and direct access to the principal use shall be restricted or otherwise controlled; and 
e.  All requirements of the state department of health and human services are satisfactorily met and the structure and operation is licensed accordingly. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are allowed according to the requirements of section 38-363(b) and the following: 
(1)  A building for parking vehicles and storing equipment used by the business, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The building facade materials shall be visually compatible with the exterior of the principal building. 
b.  The site shall be landscaped to buffer the view from and promote visual compatibility with the nearby development. 
c.  The building must be located to the rear of the principal building. 
d.  The building may not exceed 3,000 square feet of floor area. 
e.  The building shall have four exterior walls and a security door. 
f.  No operations shall occur in the building. 
g.  The building site is under the same ownership as the principal building. 
h.  The building shall be reviewed under the provisions for a minor site plan review described in section 38-39(c). 
(2)  Signs, in compliance with article VI of this chapter. 
(3)  Off-street parking facilities, in compliance with the applicable standards of section 38-610. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Hotels and motels. 
(2)  Light industries, in compliance with the applicable definition in section 38-3, and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Very limited number of semi-trailer trucks and truck docking facilities. 
b.  Well-landscaped sites. 
c.  Architectural compatibility with an office park, namely: 
1.  Equal facade treatment on all sides. 
2.  No exterior storage. 
3.  No pole barns or all-steel buildings. 
(3)  Office-showroom buildings, in compliance with the applicable definition in section 38-3, and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Well-landscaped sites. 
b.  No restaurants allowed adjacent to any residential zoning district. 
c.  No convenience food-type restaurants. 
(4)  Kennels of more than five domestic animals. 
(5)  Microbreweries and microdistilleries, in compliance with section 38-623. 
(Code 1999, § 16A.020; Ord. No. 732, § VIII, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-393. - Access. 
    Access shall be subject to the same requirements as in the office (O) district as in section 38-364. 
(Code 1999, § 16A.030) 
Sec. 38-394. - Lot coverage. 
    Lot coverage shall be subject to the same requirements as the office (O) district as in section 38-365. 
Sec. 38-395. - Requirements on setbacks, yards, and height. 
(a)  The minimum building setback from any lot line or public street right-of-way shall be as set forth below or the average height of the building, whichever is greater. 
Feet Building Minor arterial street 40 Collector street 40 Local street 35 Interior lot line 20 Residential zoning boundary 50 Parking Lot or Circulation Drive Arterial street 20 Collector street 20 Local street 15 Interior lot line 10 Residential zoning boundary 15  
(b)  The maximum height of buildings shall be 45 feet. 
(Code 1999, § 16A.040; Ord. No. 729 , § XII, 9-18-2018) 
Secs. 38-396-38-418. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-419. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the industrial district is to provide for light manufacturing, warehousing, and supportive uses in a functional, attractive manner which does not unduly affect the development or use of nearby properties. 
(Code 1999, § 17.010) 
Sec. 38-420. - Uses in the industrial district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Athletic clubs. 
(2)  Electrical, plumbing, water, gas or steam fitting shops. 
(3)  Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment and assembly of products and materials. 
(4)  Offices; business professional, medical or institutional. 
(5)  Restaurants, including those offering on-sale liquor, including convenience food types. 
(6)  Scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation, including laboratories. 
(7)  Warehousing. 
(8)  Office showroom buildings, in compliance with the applicable definition in section 38-3. 
(9)  Public utility uses, public parks provisions of underground utilities and the use of solar energy systems, including solar collectors for the use of the particular site, storage facilities and distribution components of space heating and cooling and domestic water heating. 
(10)  Screened outside storage of materials, supplies, products or equipment. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Personnel service facilities providing personal services, education, recreation, entertainment, food and convenience goods primarily for those personnel employed for the principal use. These personnel facilities do not include daycare, educational or recreational services for minors. 
(2)  Signs, in compliance with applicable standards in article VI of this chapter. 
(3)  On-site retail sales, but only after review by the development review committee that such retail sales are compatible with surrounding land uses and compliant with applicable standards. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Motor vehicle body shops subject to the same conditions as in section 38-273(b)(7). 
(2)  Hotels and motels. 
(3)  Trucking businesses. 
(4)  Seasonal businesses. 
(5)  Kennels of more than five domestic animals. 
(6)  Bulk storage of liquid. 
(7)  Non-accessory signs as permitted by city sign regulations. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Adult uses as regulated by article V of this chapter. 
(10)  Self-storage unit facilities, with or without living quarters. 
a.  If the living quarters are in a separate structure from the self-storage unit facilities: 
1.  At least a portion of the principal business use (i.e., the office) shall be in the same structure with the living quarters. 
2.  The exterior materials of the living quarters structure shall be constructed of the same material as the self-storage unit facilities. 
b.  The living quarters shall be equipped with fire protection sprinklers. 
c.  Prohibit any and all commercial, industrial, or residential uses other than storage within the self-storage facilities. 
d.  Prohibit storage of any hazardous materials, chemicals, gasoline, or flammable liquids in any storage space, except for normal household quantities. Prohibit the storage of propane tanks or flammable gases. 
(11)  Microbreweries and microdistilleries, in compliance with section 38-623. 
(12)  Transportation/transit facility, in compliance with the following conditions: 
a.  The property shall be occupied by a principal building of no less than 50,000 square feet. 
b.  The use shall not be located within 500 feet from any residentially-zoned property, measured from the closest point of the lot lines. 
c.  All maintenance activities, including vehicle washing, shall be conducted within the principal building. 
d.  Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, or other materials shall be located in rear or side yards of the property on a paved surface and screened by a solid opaque wall or fence up to ten feet in height equipped with a security gates. The city council may require a taller fence by conditional use permit or additional landscaping, depending on the nature of the storage activities. 
e.  Vehicles stored outside shall be licensed and operational and parked within designated striped parking stalls in compliance with the applicable setbacks. The required drive aisles is unobstructed. 
f.  A traffic circulation plan that demonstrates that the use does not conflict with other operations on the property or on surrounding properties, shall be submitted for review and approval by the city engineer. 
g.  Bulk storage of liquids shall be in compliance with section 38-619. 
h.  Hours of operation may be limited by the city council upon findings that certain activities may negatively affect surrounding properties. 
i.  Additional conditions that mitigate potential negative impacts to surrounding properties, natural environment, traffic, and infrastructure may be included, as determined by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 17.020; Ord. No. 729 , §§ XIII, XIV, XVIII-XXI, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 732, §§ IX, X, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-421. - Access. 
(a)  Access to industrial development shall be allowed only on arterial or collector streets, or a street specifically designed for such development. 
(b)  Curb cuts within a single proposed site shall not be spaced closer than 150 feet. Industrial developments of a small scale shall be encouraged to develop a common access drive and parking facilities. Incentives, such as reduction in setback or parking requirements, may be provided at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  A turning lane and its appropriate right-of-way must be provided if the city council determines that one is needed. 
(Code 1999, § 17.030) 
Sec. 38-422. - Requirements on lot area, lot coverage, and building area. 
(a)  The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be 90 percent of the lot. 
(b)  To calculate lot coverage, the following areas shall be added together: area of the building as determined by the foundation plan; parking areas and driveways; loading, storage, trash areas, and all other areas covered with impervious material not purposely used for landscaping. 
(Code 1999, § 17.040) 
Sec. 38-423. - Requirements on setbacks, yards, and heights. 
(a)  The minimum building setback from any lot line or public right-of-way shall be as set forth below. 
Feet Building Setbacks Minor arterial street 50 Collector street 40 Local street 30 Interior lot line 20 Residential zoning boundary 75 Parking Lot or Circulation Drive Minor arterial street 25 Collector street 20 Local street 10 Interior lot line 10 Residential zoning boundary 30  
(b)  The maximum building height shall be 45 feet. 
(Code 1999, § 17.050) 
Sec. 38-424. - Storage. 
    All raw materials, supplies, finished or semi-finished products and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building unless otherwise allowed for as a permitted or conditional use. 
(Code 1999, § 17.060; Ord. No. 732, § XI, 2-5-2019) 
Secs. 38-425-38-446. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - CITY CENTER DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-447. - Intent and purpose. 
    The city center district is intended to help implement the goals and policies of the city comprehensive plan and the city center plan, including subsequent updates to both plans. District regulations are designed to provide flexibility for development that ensure the ability to require that development plans meet the spirit of the city center plan and city comprehensive plan. It is the intent of these regulations to provide a framework for creative development, uses and relationships and to encourage innovative and unique places. The zoning district regulations are used in combination with the goals and objectives of the city center plan. 
(Code 1999, § 18.010; Ord. No. 724, § XXIII(18.010), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-448. - Uses in the city center district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows: public utility uses, public parks, provision of underground utilities, and the use of solar energy systems, including solar collectors for the use of the particular site, storage facilities, and distribution components for space heating and cooling and domestic water heating. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed by conditional use permit subject to the site plan review process and conformance with the regulations in this chapter and the policies of the city center plan: 
(1)  Retail businesses having no outdoor storage of goods or materials and emphasizing a pedestrian scale environment. 
(2)  The following service businesses: 
a.  Animal hospitals/domestic animal boarding with applicable licenses and facilities without outside animal pens. 
b.  Athletic clubs and health clubs. 
c.  Banking, insurance, real estate and finance. 
d.  Banquet and meeting facilities. 
e.  Bowling, electronic simulators and other commercial recreation. 
f.  Catering. 
g.  Club and lodge halls. 
h.  Daycare facilities (as licensed by the state). 
i.  Dry cleaning and laundering services. 
j.  Electronic repairs. 
k.  Liquor establishments as an accessory use to a restaurant or entertainment center. 
l.  Medical, technical, and supporting laboratories. 
m.  Physicians, dentists, chiropractors, nursing homes and other health professionals. 
n.  Offices. 
o.  Restaurants, including convenience food and those having an on-sale liquor license. 
p.  Schools and educational facilities. 
q.  Tailors. 
r.  Theaters; movie, theatrical, musical, and dinner, with the following conditions: 
1.  Reasonable hours of operation and staggered show times to allow for good traffic management shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval; 
2.  A security plan, subject to annual review and modification, shall be adopted; 
3.  Any video games or arcade-like games shall be located so as to be available only to paying theater patrons. 
s.  Travel bureaus. 
t.  Weight loss centers, tanning studios, salons, spas, and therapeutic massage. 
(3)  Hotels or motels that, at a minimum, serve a continental breakfast, or have an attached or detached adjacent restaurant and conference room. 
(4)  Office-showrooms. 
(5)  Civic and cultural institutions, park and recreation facilities. 
(6)  Public buildings and facilities. 
(7)  Senior housing, subject to the applicable regulations as in the R-3 district. 
(8)  Mixed-use housing where retail/service or office is located on the first floor and housing on the second floor and above. 
(9)  Transit stations and transportation centers. 
(10)  Microbreweries and microdistilleries, in compliance with section 38-623. 
(11)  Multifamily residential structures, subject to the applicable regulations as in the R-3 district, including apartments and condominiums. 
(12)  Place of assembly, in compliance with the following conditions: 
a.  Assembly uses with capacity for greater than 250 persons in the assembly area, as calculated according to applicable building and fire codes, shall submit a traffic impact study to be reviewed by the city at the cost of the applicant. 
b.  A security and operations plan is approved by the city, which shall include the hours of operation and any traffic mitigation measures. 
c.  Any modification of an existing use that intensifies the use and/or surpasses the 250-person capacity threshold shall require an amendment to the conditional use permit and development agreement. 
(13)  Pet shops. 
(14)  Supermarkets and grocery stores. 
(15)  Convenience food stores with accessory gas pumps, in compliance with section 38-273(b)(1). 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses must be subordinate to and compatible with the principal use, comply with architectural and landscape standards, and be part of the approved conditional use permit. Allowable accessory uses include: 
(1)  Landscaped surface parking areas. 
(2)  Screened loading areas. 
(3)  Pedestrian pick-up shelters and benches without advertising. 
(4)  Pedestrian plazas. 
(5)  Outdoor dining. 
(6)  Structured parking as part of an approved principal use conditional use permit subject to the architectural guidelines in section 38-451. 
(7)  Limited outdoor products at gas stations as provided in section 38-605. 
(8)  Temporary banner signs limited to two events per year and no more than 15 days per event. 
(9)  Drive-through windows that are an integral part of a larger site development plan. 
(d)  Temporary uses. Temporary uses are as follows: seasonal garden centers and outdoor special event sales as a temporary use to an adjacent retail business, under the following conditions: 
(1)  All temporary uses shall obtain a permit approved administratively by the city administrator, upon recommendation of the city planner, city engineer, and fire marshal as a temporary use to an existing principal use. 
(2)  All temporary uses shall cover no more than 1,000 square feet except that a seasonal garden center may cover no more than 6,000 square feet of ground area, of which no more than 2,000 square feet may be covered. 
(3)  All temporary uses must be located in a portion of the site that will not disrupt typical parking needs, required service or vehicular movement, emergency access, or other site requirements, as determined by the city administrator in consultation with the city planner, fire marshal and city engineer. 
(4)  A temporary use may be permitted for no more than 21 days except that a seasonal garden center may be permitted for no more than 90 days in a calendar year, in the spring and summer months. The temporary use must be removed and the site cleaned and restored to its original condition within the permitted time period. 
(5)  Only merchandise sold regularly or seasonally by the principal use may be sold or displayed as a temporary use. 
(6)  Seasonal garden centers shall: 
a.  Only sell or display plants, flowers, and associated gardening. 
b.  Limit the covered portion of a seasonal garden center to a temporary structure no more than 15 feet in height, professionally designed and constructed, and maintained in a neat and attractive manner. Such a structure must be predominantly a single color that is compatible with surrounding development. Colors, stripes or patterns may be permitted on no more than eight percent of the surface area of the sides and roof of the temporary structure. 
c.  Maintain the outdoor portion of a seasonal garden center in a neat and attractive manner, surrounded by a fence no more than four feet in height, except at entrance openings. Plants and merchandise may not be displayed more than six feet above the ground. Boxes, cartons, bins or other similar storage devices are not permitted in the outdoor portion of the garden center. 
d.  Limit signage to no more than 32 square feet of attached signage on each of three sides of the temporary structure. 
(Code 1999, § 18.020; Ord. No. 724, § XXIV(18.020), 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 732, § XII, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-449. - Architectural guidelines and requirements. 
    The overall appearance and compatibility of individual buildings to other site elements or to surrounding development will be given primary consideration in the site plan approval process. 
(1)  All exterior wall finishes on any building shall be one or a combination of the following: 
a.  Face-brick and brick accents. 
b.  Glass, when used in combinations with one or more of the other materials listed herein. 
c.  Natural stone. 
d.  Stucco and similar types of exterior finish systems. 
e.  Architectural-quality, pre-finished metal panels when used as a secondary feature in combination with one or more of the other materials listed above. 
f.  Rock-face or split-face concrete blocks, only when used as a secondary, accent material in combination with one or more of the materials listed above. 
(2)  Buildings throughout the city center district shall reflect compatible and complementary colors and materials. This includes brick materials and earthtone colors for building treatments and earthtone or green roofs. 
(3)  Building rooflines should be articulated, through the use of arches or other appropriate detail. 
(4)  All ground-mounted or roof-mounted HVAC, utility meters and other such equipment shall be well-screened from eye-level view from adjacent streets, parking lots and entrances of adjacent buildings. 
(5)  All subsequent additions, exterior alterations, and accessory buildings constructed after the erection of an original building shall be constructed of the same materials as the original building and shall be designed in a manner conforming to the original architectural design and general appearance, to the extent that such design and construction is compatible with the city center standards. 
(6)  Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public street, public open space, or abutting property may not exceed 60 feet in length without significant visual relief consisting of one or more of the following: 
a.  The facade shall be divided architecturally by means of significantly different materials or textures; 
b.  Horizontal offsets of at least four feet in depth; 
c.  Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet; or 
d.  Windows at the first floor level which is either recessed or extending horizontally at least one foot from the facade. 
(7)  No outdoor storage of goods or merchandise shall be permitted, except as provided in section 38-448(c) and (d). 
(8)  Retail/service uses shall incorporate pedestrian amenities and design features to establish a village-type environment. 
(9)  No single-purpose retail facility shall be constructed after September 1, 2006 that is in excess of 50,000 ground floor area square feet unless it is a multi-story building. The term "single-purpose retail" means that retail sale of goods and incidental services is the principal function of the facility. The city council may increase these limits based on an overall comprehensive site development plan containing a special pedestrian scale building plan, architectural facade treatment and relief, connections to other retail and service uses and surrounding development, imaginative pedestrian outdoor space design and harmonizing, scale-reducing parking area appearance treatment. 
(Code 1999, § 18.030) 
Sec. 38-450. - Landscape guidelines and requirements. 
    In satisfying the landscaping requirement of this Code, landscape plans within the city center district will be required to adhere to the following, in addition to the requirements of article IV of this chapter: 
(1)  Landscaping shall be maintained by the property owners to retain the quality approved in the landscape plan as part of the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Planters or planter boxes shall be compatible with the architectural integrity, colors and material of the principal building and of the site. 
(3)  The major or overstory trees required on site by this chapter shall be one-third conifers, two-thirds deciduous and of the species indicated in the table below. 
a.  The specific species of major overstory trees shall be planted at major site entries, along street frontages, in interior open space areas, and around the site perimeter. It is the intent to create corridors of significant vegetation to reduce the scale of surface areas, provide shade, and to announce major connections. 
b.  The minimum size of the coniferous trees planted to satisfy the requirements of this chapter shall be six feet for one half of the required trees and ten feet for one half of the required trees. 
c.  The minimum size of replacement trees shall be six feet for coniferous trees and 21/2 caliper for deciduous trees. 
d.  All identical plants placed in a grouping shall be of similar size unless specifically approved otherwise by the city council. 
(4)  Supplemental plantings shall be grouped and massed rather small, scattered planting sites. 
Species Tolerance: Spray/Salt Evergreen Trees (Size: 6-12 feet in height) Fir, White (Abies concolor) ... Spruce, Norway (Picea abies) Sensitive spray/soil salt Spruce, Black Hills (Picea glauca 'densata') Tolerant spray/soil salt Pine, Eastern White (Pinus strobus) Sensitive spray/soil salt Pine, Ponderosa (Pinus ponderosa) Intermediate spray/soil salt tolerances Pine, Austrian (Pinus nigra) Tolerant spray/soil salt Canopy Trees (Size: minimum 21/2-inch caliper) Aspen, Big-toothed (Populus grandidentata) Tolerant spray/soil salt Aspen, Quaking (Populus tremuloides) Tolerant spray/soil salt Birch, Yellow (Betula alleghaniensis) Intermediate spray/soil salt tolerances Birch, Paper (Betula papyrifera) Intermediate spray/soil salt tolerances Maple, Red (Acer rubrum) Intermediate salt spray/sensitive soil salt Maple, Sugar (Acer saccharum) Intermediate salt spray/sensitive soil salt Basswood (Tilia americana) Intermediate salt spray/sensitive soil salt Oak, White (Quercus alba) Sensitive salt spray/tolerant soil salt Oak, Swamp White (Quercus bicolor) ... Oak, Bur (Quercus macrocarpa) Intermediate salt spray/tolerant soil salt Oak, Northern Pin (Quercus ellipsoidalis) Sensitive salt spray Oak, Northern Red (Quercus rubra) Sensitive salt spray/tolerant soil salt Subcanopy Trees (Size: minimum 11/2-inch caliper) Serviceberry (Amelanchier spp.) Tolerant salt spray/sensitive soil salt American Hornbeam (Carpinus caroliniana) ... Pagoda Dogwood (Cornus alternifolia) Sensitive salt spray Ironwood (Ostrya virginiana) ... Shrub Layer (Size: minimum 18-inch height) Juneberries (Amelanchier spp.) Black Chokeberry (Aronia melanocarpa) Dogwoods (Cornus sp.) American Hazelnut (Corylus americana) Common Winterberry (Ilex verticillata) Common Juniper (Juniperus communis) Common Ninebark (Physocarpus opulifolius) Chokecherry (Prunus virginiana) Prickly Gooseberry (Ribes cynosbati) Smooth Sumac (Rhus glabra) Staghorn Sumac (Rhus typhina) Nannybery (Viburnum lentago) American Cranberry Bush (Viburnum trilobum)  
(Code 1999, § 18.031; Ord. No. 724, § XXV(18.031), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-451. - Additional guidelines and requirements for conditional uses. 
    In addition to specific use, architectural requirements, landscape standards, and signage standards, the following policy criteria shall be considered in any conditional use permit application: 
(1)  Land use and site plans. 
a.  The proposed use shall be in conformance with the city comprehensive plan and the city center plan. 
b.  Designs are encouraged which create mixed-use developments in which retail, service and office activities or office and office-showroom activities are combined on one site. 
c.  Site plans and building architecture shall integrate the overall urban design so the city center district appears unified, internally compatible, and aesthetically pleasing, while maintaining the distinct function and design of the individual quadrants. 
d.  Site plans or subdivisions shall not be compromised by buildings which interfere with traffic access or break parcels into less than optimal sizes or shapes or interfere with implementation of the roadway and pathway plan. 
e.  Site plans shall be compatible with adjacent developments in terms of access, internal circulation, parking, landscaping, building orientation and massing, and signs. Shared access and parking are encouraged. 
f.  Housing site plans shall include building arrangement (entrances, orientation, parking, lighting and siting along with appropriate buffering. 
(2)  Design and architecture. 
a.  Developments shall be a high design quality, reflect a high level of investment, and provide a relatively high number of jobs so that the use of the land is maximized and the final result may be a source of pride and recognized as the economic, visual, and psychological center of the city's downtown. Retail buildings should project a timeless, smaller-scale village-like image, utilizing design treatments for facades to create a pedestrian atmosphere. Building, landscaping and interiors should use quality materials reflective of city center goals and objectives. 
b.  Developments adjacent to the interstate highway should use building height and massing to announce their presence to motorists on the freeway. 
c.  Housing will receive density bonuses for locating on upper levels of business and retail uses, including balconies and providing parking under the building or in adjacent structures. 
(3)  Transportation and parking. 
a.  New or enlarged public roadways shall be developed and dedicated according to the general alignments, roadway widths, number of lanes, and turning lanes shown by the city comprehensive plan and the city center plan. 
b.  Parking structures shall be complimentary to associated uses and design, provide exterior treatment that screens vehicles and creates visual interest, and provide pedestrian connections and spaces that are part of the overall site development plan. 
c.  Parking areas shall emphasize pedestrian amenities and provide for storage of bicycles and other personal travel vehicles. 
(4)  Storage. There shall be no outside storage or display of goods or materials, supplies, products or equipment, except as provided for temporary sales by permit. As provided in the architectural requirements, all loading areas shall be screened and all trash receptacles be located inside the principal building or within enclosures which are compatible with the building materials. 
(5)  Pedestrian, pathways, open space and landscaping (see also section 38-450). 
a.  Each development with the city center district will be required to provide sidewalks from major building entries and adjacent public street frontages, and interconnecting to other sidewalks, pathways or trails abutting the property and to existing or planned open space corridors. Such sidewalks shall be at least six feet in width within an open space corridor of at least ten feet in width. 
b.  In addition to roadway, building and safety lighting within the city lighting standards, pedestrian lighting shall be installed to reinforce and identify pedestrian connections. Large parking lots should also incorporate pedestrian-level lighting. 
c.  Landscaping shall be of the highest quality design and materials shall meet or exceed the landscaping standards in section 38-601(b). Landscaping and pedestrian design elements shall blend with and complement the objectives and components of the city center streetscape plan. 
d.  The wooded area in the southwest quadrant of the city center district shall be preserved to the extent practical. 
e.  The location of open space on a development parcel will be determined as part of the site plan review process for that development. 
f.  In addition to the sidewalk open space corridors provided above, each development within the city center district will be required to provide usable open spaces equal to at least ten percent of the overall site area, at least half of which shall be green area, the remainder may be paved. Such open space may not be roadways, driveways, parking or loading areas. 
g.  Plazas, courts, amphitheaters and other pedestrian features shall be provided and connected to other uses and the pathway system. Landscaped areas, when using planters, should be of the highest design materials, reinforce major roadways, pathways and plaza areas. These features should consider the ability to support and reinforce visual, performing and fine arts. Consideration should be given to hanging baskets and provisions for seasonal plantings and planters. Pedestrian areas should incorporate seating which encourages interaction. Paved open space areas may be of stone, brick, or articulated concrete paving. 
h.  Such open spaces shall be within or adjacent to the sidewalk corridors required above, shall each be at least 15 feet in width in either direction, and shall be easily accessible to the tenants or patrons of the building. 
i.  In fronting a public street or major driveway, the open spaces shall be screened by a hedge, fence or railing that provides a sense of enclosure. 
j.  For every 500 square feet of open space area, there shall also be provided one bench or seat for at least three persons and a trash receptacle of a material and color compatible with the development. 
(6)  Surface water management. Developments shall provide surface water ponding in conformance with the city's comprehensive ponding plan. Building placement shall take advantage of the aesthetic qualities of such ponds and wetlands. 
(Code 1999, § 18.032; Ord. No. 724, § XXVI(18.032), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-452. - Setback standards. 
    The minimum building setback shall be measured from the applicable lot line or public street right-of-way line. Where buildings have pedestrian access oriented to the streets, the city council may reduce the setback consistent with adjacent development and public safety. 
Setbacks Building Parking Lot or Circulation Drive Residential Structures All public streets 40 feet 25 feet N/A Public streets other than County Road E, Labore Road and Arcade Street 25 feet 15 feet 1 N/A Interior lot lines 20 feet 10 feet 20 feet or height of the building, whichever is greater  
1 Only if the same amount of green space that would have been provided by the 25-foot setback is provided elsewhere on the site. Further setback reductions may be permitted by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 18.040; Ord. No. 724, § XXVIII(18.040), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-453. - Signage requirements and standards. 
    In satisfying the signage requirement of this Code, signs within the city center district will be required to adhere to the following, in addition to the standards of article VI of this chapter: 
(1)  Freestanding signs will be limited to monument signs up to 12 feet in height except properties immediately abutting Interstate 35E where the C-2 signage standards shall apply; provided, however, that in any event, signage over 12 feet in height must be within 50 feet of Interstate 35E right-of-way. The use of freeway right-of-way signs will be encouraged to direct people into the city center business. 
(2)  One off-premises freestanding (pylon) sign may be allowed by conditional use permit on private property along Interstate 35E for a shopping center or single building, either of which exceeds 100,000 square feet of floor area, that is located on a parcel in the city center zoning district not abutting Interstate 35E and on a land parcel within 300 feet of such sign. The maximum height of such sign shall be 65 feet, and the maximum area per face shall be 200 square feet. No pylon sign shall be located within 300 feet of a property zoned for housing. 
(3)  Wall signage will be allowed only in a specified horizontal sign band no more than three feet in height and eight to 15 feet off the ground. 
a.  Such sign bands may project no more than one foot from the surface of the building to which it is attached. 
b.  Attached wall signage shall consist of individual letters or script logos mounted on the building. 
(4)  Projecting signs will be allowed in accordance with the following conditions: 
a.  Projecting signs may project no more than four feet from the front edge of the building and be no more than 12 square feet in area. 
b.  Projecting signs may not extend over a designated parking space or loading area. 
c.  Projecting signs may extend from a building over the public right-of-way or public open space, provided that the sign is approved by the city council on the recommendation of the city staff, and on finding that the sign placement will not compromise public health, safety, or welfare. 
(5)  Temporary grand opening or sales event banners. Temporary banners are allowed in the city center district for up to 30 days per year per business. Such signs are allowed by permit only and require a refundable deposit in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. Such banners must be firmly attached to the wall surface of the business and may cover no more than five percent of the wall surface area of any face of the building. Such banners must be of durable material that will not disintegrate with normal use and weather and must not interfere with the safe operation of windows, doors, sidewalks, parking areas, utilities or other necessary movements in and around the site. 
(6)  Illuminated message board signs are allowed subject to the conditions of section 38-690. 
(Code 1999, § 18.041; Ord. No. 724, § XXVIII(18.041), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-454. - Review and approval procedures. 
    The administrative procedures for the municipal review of a conditional use permit shall be as set forth in section 38-43, and consideration of the factors necessary for conditional use permit approval shall also include the standards, guidelines and requirements of this chapter and the city center plan. 
(Code 1999, § 18.050; Ord. No. 724, § XXIX(18.050), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-455. - Establishment of hours of operation; purpose. 
    The council finds: 
(1)  That the city center district is the retail hub of the city and its developed capacity will constitute in excess of 100 acres of various retail-community activity; 
(2)  That 24-hour operation of retail stores in the city center district would result in unacceptable nighttime traffic levels and visual glare which would have a deleterious effect on the surrounding residentially used property available for residential use, and would disturb residential tranquility during ordinary nighttime hours; 
(3)  That such 24-hour operation is not necessary to the citizenry and will adversely impact the health, welfare and safety of the citizenry of the city during the ordinary hours of repose. 
(Code 1999, § 18.060) 
Sec. 38-456. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Any retail store having a business license within the city center district and located within 750 feet of a residential structure, as measured in subsection (c) of this section, shall not be open to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of each day. 
(b)  The term "retail store" does not include grocery stores, gasoline filling stations, hotels and motels, and eating establishments. 
(c)  The distance of 750 feet shall be measured from the nearest property line point of the retail store to the nearest property line point of the residential property. 
(Code 1999, § 18.061) 
Sec. 38-457. - Extended hours permit. 
(a)  Any retail store prohibited from 24-hour operation through section 38-456 may apply for a permit to be partially or entirely excluded from such prohibition through application on a form provided by the clerk. 
(b)  In considering such extended hours permit, the council will consider: 
(1)  Location of driveways and traffic patterns effecting residential areas. 
(2)  Deliveries to the facility. 
(3)  Light and glare. 
(4)  Amount of noise from traffic using the facility or from the facility itself. 
(5)  The size of the facility. 
(6)  Whether essential services are being provided. 
(7)  Proximity to residential use. 
(8)  Competitive necessity. 
(c)  The application shall be heard by the city council after mailed notice to the residential property owners within 750 feet of the subject structure. 
(d)  If the extended hours permit is approved, the council may grant the application in full, or grant such application only for certain hours or times of the year or days of the week. 
(Code 1999, § 18.062) 
Secs. 38-458-38-482. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - PLANNED UNIT DISTRICT (PUD) 

Sec. 38-483. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  As an alternative to conventional zoning and development approaches and processes, the planned unit development zoning district (PUD) procedures are here set forth in order that the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare be furthered in an era of increasing urbanization; to encourage innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial development and renewal; so that greater opportunities for better housing and recreation, shops and industrial plants conveniently located to each other may extend to all citizens and residents of the city; to reflect changes in the technology of land development; to encourage a more creative approach in the utilization of land in order to accomplish a more efficient, aesthetic, and desirable development which may be characterized by special features of the geography, topography, size or shape of a particular property; and to provide a compatible and stable environment in harmony with that of the surrounding area. 
(b)  The planned unit development zoning district may include any developments having one or more principal uses or structures on a single parcel of ground or contiguous parcels, provided that the total area is five acres or larger. The PUD shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses and grouping of buildings, parking areas, circulation and open spaces, and shall be designed as an integrated unit, in such manner as to constitute a safe, efficient, and convenient urban area. Under the provisions of this district, the city council has the right to allow deviations from any standards in this chapter, including use. 
(Code 1999, § 18A.010) 
Sec. 38-484. - General requirements and standard for parcels of five acres or more. 
(a)  Ownership. The tract shall be a development of land under unified control at the time of application, planned and scheduled to be developed as a whole. However, no authorizations or permits shall be granted for such development unless the applicant has acquired actual ownership of or executed a binding sales contract for all of the property comprising such tract. For purposes of this chapter, ownership shall include a lease of not less than 50 years' duration. The term "single ownership" includes ownership of portions of such development by two or more wholly-owned subsidiaries of a single owner, or by such single owner and one or more of its wholly-owned subsidiaries. 
(b)  Conformance with comprehensive plan. The proposed planned unit development zoning district shall be consistent with the city comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Lot area regulations. 
(1)  The minimum total land area shall be no less than five acres, except as allowed by section 38-485 for a PUD overlay district. 
(2)  Unusual physical features of the property itself or of the surrounding neighborhood are such that development under the standard provisions of the residence districts would not be appropriate in order to conserve a physical or terrain feature of importance to the neighborhood or community. 
(d)  PUDs involving multiple housing types. A residential PUD may provide for a variety of housing types in any one of the basic residential zoning districts. The total number of dwelling units allowed in a development shall be determined by either: the area standards of the zoning district in which the proposed development is to be located, or the density specified by the planning commission and approved by the council, consistent with the intent of the city's land use plan. A plan may provide for a greater number of dwelling units per acre than would otherwise be permitted by the regulations applicable to the site, but if the density or intensity of land use exceeds by more than ten percent that permitted by the regulations otherwise applicable to the site, the applicant has the burden to show that such excess will not have an undue and adverse impact on existing public facilities and on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property. The planning commission and council, in determining the reasonableness of the increase in the density or intensity of land use, shall consider the following factors: the location, amount and proposed use of common open space, the location, design and type of dwelling units, and the physical characteristics of the site. 
(e)  Front, rear and side yard building setback regulations. Building setbacks from all property lines which form the perimeter of the total property in the PUD, or from all interior and exterior dedicated street right-of-way lines or from the paving of any private interior circulation streets shall be 20 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater, for residential structures, and 20 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater, for commercial structures. 
(f)  Multiple buildings on a single lot. More than one building may be placed on one platted or recorded lot in any PUD. Areas for single-family detached dwellings or other housing types providing privately-owned lots must comply with chapter 32, pertaining to subdivisions, in all respects not specifically noted in this chapter as appropriate variances or waivers. 
(g)  PUDs involving one housing type. A PUD which only involves one housing type, such as all detached or all attached units, shall not be considered as inconsistent with the stated purposes and objectives of this chapter and shall not be the sole basis for denial or approval. 
(h)  Appearance and compatibility. Architectural style of buildings shall not solely be a basis for denial or approval of a plan. However, the overall appearance and compatibility of individual buildings to other site elements or to surrounding development will be primary considerations in the review stages of the planning commission and council. 
(i)  Plans for PUDs in city review. No building permit shall be granted for any building on land for which a plan for a PUD is in the process of city review or which does not conform to the approved final plan. 
(j)  Staging of development. 
(1)  Any PUD plan proposed to be constructed in stages shall include full details relating thereto, and the city council may approve or modify, where necessary, any such proposals. 
(2)  The staging shall include the time for beginning and completion of each stage. Such timing may be modified by the city council on the showing of good cause by the developer. 
(3)  The landowner or developer shall make such easements, covenants, and other arrangements and shall furnish such performance bond as may be determined by the city council to be reasonably required to ensure performance in accordance with the plan and to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of the plan before completion. 
(k)  Streets, utilities, services and public facilities. The uniqueness of each proposal for a PUD requires that specifications and standards for streets, utilities and services shall be subject to minor modifications from the specifications and standards established in this and other city ordinances governing their construction. The city council may therefore waive or modify the specifications or standards where it is found that they are not required in the interests of the residents or of the entire city. The plans and profiles of all streets, utilities and services shall be reviewed, modified, if necessary, and approved by the city engineer, fire chief, and building inspector, prior to the final approval of the PUD plan by the city council. All PUD projects shall be served by public or community water and sewer systems. 
(l)  Open space provision. Land area will be set aside for public and private open space and recreational use according to the following provisions: 
(1)  Land area (or cash in lieu of land) shall be dedicated to the city for public park use according to the formula established in the current park land dedication ordinance of the city. The location of such dedicated land must be acceptable to the city council. In the industrial district, cash in lieu of land may be required. 
(2)  In addition to the dedication of land for public open space and recreational use, a minimum of ten percent of the total site area shall be set aside for the private recreational use of the site's residents. 
(m)  Operating and maintenance requirements for planned unit development common facilities. In the event that certain land areas or structures are provided within the planned unit development for private recreational use or as service facilities, the owner of such land and buildings shall enter into an agreement with the city to ensure the continued operation and maintenance to a predetermined reasonable standard. These common areas may be placed under the ownership of one of the following, depending upon which is more appropriate: 
(1)  Dedicated to public where a community-wide use would be anticipated. 
(2)  Landlord control. 
(3)  Landowners association, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The landowners association must be established. 
b.  Membership must be mandatory for each owner and any successive buyer. 
c.  The open space restrictions must be permanent, not for a given period of years. 
d.  The association must be responsible for liability insurance, for common areas and the reasonable maintenance of exterior residential and other facilities. 
e.  Landowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost and the assessment levied by the association that can become a lien on the property in accordance with state law. 
f.  The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. 
(n)  Density (residential). The number of dwelling units may be flexible relative to the existing zoning classification. Increased densities may be allowed for: 
(1)  Dedicating more than the minimum for public open space. 
(2)  Particular distinctiveness and excellence in siting, design, and landscaping as determined by the city council. 
(3)  In no event will population densities be greater than that which would be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(o)  Building height. A building's setback from property adjacent to the planned unit district site shall approximate its height, with a maximum of 45 feet. 
(p)  Landscaping. Landscaping or fencing shall be provided according to a plan that contains complete information as required by section 38-39 and is approved by the planning commission and city council. 
(q)  Utilities. All utilities, including electricity and telephone, shall be installed underground. 
(Code 1999, § 18A.020) 
Sec. 38-485. - Planned unit development overlay district. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. This section shall apply to a land area of less than five acres and must meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Oddly-shaped parcels which create development difficulties; 
(2)  Parcels that are underutilized, such as aged buildings or obsolete arrangement of buildings or lots create a need for redevelopment opportunity; 
(3)  The site has special physical features such as slopes, trees, and wetlands; 
(4)  The site possesses an opportunity to make improvements or reduce access points and improve community connections allowing for preservation of site features; or 
(5)  The proposed development must be consistent with the comprehensive plan. Mixed use proposals will be considered consistent, provided that the guided use is included in the development. 
(b)  General requirements and standards. Land areas of less than five acres may qualify for a conditional use permit for a PUD overlay district. The council will consider the following criteria and make a finding that the development will achieve a majority of the following: 
(1)  The property is adjacent to or across the street from property which has been developed under the provisions of this chapter and will contribute to the amenities of the neighborhood. 
(2)  The natural features of the site are preserved. 
(3)  Creative rearrangement of lots or buildings can be accomplished. 
(4)  The development relates to and is integrated with the immediate surrounding properties. 
(5)  Pedestrian connectors are maximized. 
(6)  Sustainable development is supported and enhanced. 
(7)  Surface water management and the provision of utilities is enhanced. 
(8)  At a minimum, the proposed lot area contains two parcels, under separate ownership with a joint application. 
(9)  Current screening and amenities are in place to protect neighboring properties, or the site is capable of supporting screening and amenities which protect adjacent properties. 
(10)  The development will provide for consolidation of properties to eliminate or reduce access drives onto public streets and highways. 
(11)  The development promotes shared party access drives and improved pedestrian access. 
(12)  The development provides shared and improved water quality improvements. 
(13)  Public water and sanitary sewer systems are made more efficient. 
(14)  The proposed development is environmentally friendly in that it includes green products and planning considerations. 
(15)  The planned development is compatible with the area in both architectural and landscape design. 
(Code 1999, § 18A.030) 
Sec. 38-486. - Procedure for planned unit development zoning district or planned unit development overlay district approval. 
(a)  Zoning district applications. Planned unit development zoning district applications shall be processed in accordance with section 38-37. 
(b)  Overlay district applications. Planned unit development overlay district applications shall be processed in accordance with section 38-43. 
(c)  Meeting with city staff. The developer shall meet with the development review committee/city planner to discuss the development concept, the review and approval process, and the submittal requirements. 
(d)  Application. The developer shall make application for approval on a form provided by the city and accompanied by the fee according to the license, permit, and application fee schedule set forth by the city council. Applications for both approval shall provide submission materials for site plan applications pursuant to sections 38-39 and 38-43. 
(e)  Concept plan review by planning commission (optional). 
(1)  Informal review. When the city staff agree that the concept plan has been suitably refined, an informal review by the planning commission may be scheduled at its next regularly-scheduled meeting. The concept plan should indicate proposed land uses, general circulation patterns, general building massing, and the general approach to special site conditions or problems. The commission shall comment as to whether it feels the concept plan is in conformance with the city comprehensive plan. It will also inform the developer of the positive features and preliminary concerns within the concept plan, what features or design elements should be considered in the detailed development plan, and what exceptions or zoning regulations it may be willing to allow in exchange for certain publicly beneficial design or planning features. 
(2)  Concept plan review by city council. It is not required that the city council review concept plans. However, when working on a site with a high degree of municipal sensitivity, or when it is anticipated that the reaction of the council may likely be substantially different from that of the commission, the developer or city staff may request a concept plan review by the city council. The scope of review and comment by the council shall be the same as that by the commission. 
(f)  Detailed development plan/preliminary plat. 
(1)  Submission of plan. Based upon comments received regarding the concept plan, and working with the city staff, the developer shall prepare a detailed development plan. This shall include a preliminary plat if land subdivision is proposed. The list of materials for submission shall be pursuant to the council-approved site plan application checklist pursuant to sections 38-39 and 38-43(b). 
(2)  Notice of review. Notice of detailed development plan review shall be given in the same manner as for rezoning applications, section 38-37, or conditional use permit approval applications, section 38-43. 
(3)  Review by planning commission of detailed development plan. The applicant shall submit the plan to city staff according to the schedule as approved by the city council. The planning commission shall review the detailed development plan in the same manner as it reviews a site plan approval application. 
(4)  Review by the city council of detailed development plan. The city council shall review at a public hearing the detailed development plan within 60 days after the planning commission has made its recommendation. In its review, the council shall consider the same impacts and features as did the commission. It may approve, disapprove, or table by motion the development proposal. Conditions may be applied to the approval of the plan, or a periodic review of the approval may be required. 
(g)  Developer's agreement. Prior to issuing a building permit, the city council shall require the applicant to sign a developer's agreement with the city which ensures that particular elements of the detailed development plan, either proposed by the applicant or imposed by the city, shall be carried out. 
(h)  Method of amending an approval. 
(1)  Minor changes in the location and placement of buildings or other elements of the plan may be authorized by the city council upon staff review. 
(2)  Changes in structural types, in the shape and arrangement of lots and blocks, in the allocation of open space, and all other changes which affect the overall design of the project shall be referred to the planning commission for report and recommendation, after which the city council shall hold a review and shall decide to either approve or deny the changes in the detailed development plan. If such changes are authorized, the applicant shall submit a revised plan showing the authorized changes. 
(i)  Denial of PUD approval. If an application for a planned unit development approval is denied, no new application for a PUD approval by the same applicant for the same site may be filed for 60 days from date of denial. 
(j)  Time limits. The zoning district and development plan may be approved for a certain period of time, or a phasing plan approved by the city council with conditions including periodic progress review. If construction has not commenced within 12 months or within the phasing schedule as approved by the city council, then the council may, on its own initiative, commence proceedings under section 38-37 to rezone the property back to its original classification or declare the conditional use permit null and void. 
(Code 1999, § 18A.040) 
Secs. 38-487-38-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - WATER MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-511. - Purpose and intent. 
    This division is intended to satisfy state department of natural resources (DNR) requirements for floodplain and shore land ordinances and state wetland conservation requirements (WCA), as well as to protect the city's wetlands and water resources. To maintain the city's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program, this division is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-78, as amended. 
(Code 1999, § 19.010) 
Sec. 38-512. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The city has many lakes and wetlands, providing aesthetic and environmental value. Two major lakes in the city, Sucker Lake and Vadnais Lake, are part of the St. Paul Water Utility water supply system. There are over 100 wetlands throughout the city. All of the lakes and wetlands within the city are subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Many of the same lakes and wetlands are also protected by the requirements of the DNR and the WCA. 
(b)  The lakes, wetlands and watercourses within the city provide flood protection for adjacent and downstream properties. Wetlands improve the quality of surface water by capturing pollutant loadings, enhancing groundwater recharge and providing diverse wildlife habitat. 
(Code 1999, § 19.020) 
Sec. 38-513. - Surface water management plan adopted. 
    The city's surface water management plan (SWMP) is a comprehensive planning tool that specifically identifies goals and policies for water management. Standards for flood control, erosion and sediment control, water quality enhancement, and the preservation of natural features have been identified. The plan also includes floodplain delineation, necessary freeboard requirements and recommended building elevations. The SWMP is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in its entirety, including all amendments, into this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 19.030) 
Sec. 38-514. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    This division does not imply that areas outside of the water management overlay district or land uses permitted within that district will be free from flooding or flood damages. This division does not create liability on the part of the city or its officers or employees for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision made under it. 
(Code 1999, § 19.040) 
Sec. 38-515. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this division shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city council and shall not be deemed a limitation or appeal of any other powers granted by state law. 
(1)  The approximate boundaries of the water management overlay district are indicated on the official zoning map of the city. However, the exact determination of the boundaries will be made by the water management administrator. 
(2)  Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the city council and to submit technical evidence. 
(3)  The official zoning map, together with all materials attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The attached material shall include the flood insurance study for Ramsey County, Minnesota (all jurisdictions) and flood insurance rate map panels therein numbered 27123C0030G, 27123C0035G, 27123C0036G, 27123C0037G, 27123C0041G and 27123C0042G, all dated June 4, 2010 and prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The official zoning map shall be on file in the office of the city administrator and zoning administrator. 
(4)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this division to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, or deeds restrictions. However, where this division imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this division shall prevail. All other sections of this division inconsistent with this chapter are subordinate to the extent of any inconsistency. 
(Code 1999, § 19.050) 
Sec. 38-516. - Establishment of zoning areas. 
(a)  Division of areas. The water management overlay district is divided into the following subdistricts: the wetland protection area, the floodplain area and the shore land area. The water management administrator shall maintain necessary records to display the water management overlay district. 
(b)  Annexation. The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference into section 38-515(3) may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter upon the date of annexation into the city. 
(Code 1999, § 19.060) 
Sec. 38-517. - Definitions. 
    Terms and phrases used in this division shall have the meanings defined in the city surface water management plan (SWMP). If not specifically defined within this division or the SWMP, words shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this division its most reasonable application. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
    Basement means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. 
    Equal degree of encroachment means a method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. 
    Floodplain means the channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. 
    Floodplain area means lands with a zone AE or zone A designation on the flood insurance rate map adopted in section 38-515(3). 
    Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
    Floodway means the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge. 
    Historic structure means a building or dwelling that has been designated by proper authorities as being important or potentially important in history. For the purpose of this division, the term "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 CFR 59. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle." 
    Obstruction means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, dredged spoil, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, stockpile of sand or gravel or other material, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, lake bed, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of flow, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by floodwater. 
    Principal use or structure means all uses or structures that are not accessory uses or structures. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle used for private enjoyment when one is not working that may or may not be self-propelled. 
    Regional flood means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. The term "regional flood" is synonymous with the term "base flood," used in the flood insurance rate map. 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation. The RFPE shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. The city shall establish minimum building elevations in the floodplain to the nearest one-tenth of a foot. In approximate zone A areas on the flood insurance rate map, the city shall use the SWMP. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, and travel trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in section 38-529 and other similar items. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. For the purpose of this division, the term "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 CFR 59. 
    The shore land area means all area within a 1,000-foot horizontal separation from the ordinary high water mark of a public water. The public waters of the city have been classified consistent with the criteria of state rules and the county's protected waters inventory map. The shore land area applies to the water bodies listed below, as shown on the official zoning map. 
Protected Waters Inventory I.D. Number Natural Environment Lakes Sucker Lake 28P Twin Lake 39P Recreational Development Lakes Vadnais Lake 38P Willow Lake 40P  
    Wetland protection area includes that property with the characteristics of a wetland as defined in M.S.A. § 103G.005. 
(Code 1999, § 19.070) 
Sec. 38-518. - Modification. 
    The water management overlay district may not be modified unless it can be shown that the original description is in error or that conditions have changed so that the area no longer fits the definitions applied in section 38-517. 
(Code 1999, § 19.080) 
Sec. 38-519. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Wetland protection area. The following are permitted uses in a wetland protection area to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other section, and that a certification is obtained from the city, acting as the local government unit (LGU) having regulatory control under the State Wetland Conservation Act, prior to the commencement of any work: 
(1)  Emergencies. Emergency work may be performed when necessary to preserve life or property. Prior to the commencement of emergency work, a person shall first report the pertinent facts relating to the need for such work to the water management administrator. The water management administrator shall review such pertinent facts and determine whether an emergency exists. Upon finding that an emergency exists, the water management administrator shall, by written memorandum, authorize the commencement of this emergency exception. A person performing emergency work shall, within ten days following the commencement of such work, apply for the issuance of a conditional use permit. Upon the issuance thereof, the permittee shall be required to perform such work as is determined to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment to the wetland occasioned by such emergency work. 
(2)  Activities necessary to repair and maintain existing public or private drainage systems as long as wetlands that have been in existence for more than 20 years are not drained. 
(3)  Activities in a wetland restored for conservation purposes under a contract or easement, providing the landowner with the right to drain the restored wetland. 
(4)  Activities in a wetland created solely as a result of beaver dam construction, blockage of culverts through roadways maintained by a public or private entity, actions by public entities that were taken for a purpose other than creating the wetland, or any combination thereof. 
(5)  Placement, maintenance, repair, enhancement, or replacement of utility or utility-type service, including the transmission, distribution, or furnishing, at wholesale or retail, of natural or manufactured gas, electricity, telephone, or radio service or communications if the impacts of the proposed project on the hydrologic and biological characteristics of the wetland have been avoided and minimized to the extent possible and the proposed project significantly modifies or alters less than one-half acre of wetlands. 
(6)  Activities associated with routine maintenance of utility and pipeline rights-of-way, provided the activities do not result in additional intrusion into the wetland. 
(7)  Alteration of a wetland associated with the operation, maintenance, or repair of an interstate pipeline. 
(8)  Activities associated with routine maintenance of existing public highways, roads, streets, and bridges, provided the activities do not result in the draining or filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland. 
(9)  Emergency repair and normal maintenance and repair of existing public works, provided the activity does not result in additional intrusion of the public works into the wetland and do not result in the draining or filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland. 
(10)  Normal maintenance and minor repair of structures causing no additional intrusion of an existing structure into the wetland, and maintenance and repair of private crossings that do not result in the draining or filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland. 
(11)  Normal agricultural practices to control pests or weeds, defined by rule as either noxious or secondary weeds, in accordance with applicable requirements under state and federal law, including established best management practices. 
(12)  Excavation and filling in accordance with section 38-523. 
(b)  Floodplain area. The floodplain area is divided into floodway and flood fringe districts in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section. The permitted uses in both the floodway and flood fringe districts are listed in subsection (b)(3) of this section. Additional permitted uses for only the flood fringe district are listed in subsection (b)(4) of this section. The permitted uses listed in subsections (b)(3) and (4) of this section are only allowable in the floodplain area, if they are not prohibited by any other divisions or state and federal laws, and the appropriate permits are issued. 
(1)  Floodway district. The floodway district shall include those areas designated as zone AE and zone A on the flood insurance rate map panels adopted in section 38-515(3) that are below the ordinary high water level as defined in M.S.A. § 103G.005, subd. 14. 
(2)  Flood fringe district. The flood fringe district shall include those areas designated as zone AE and zone A on the flood insurance rate map panels adopted in section 38-515(3) that are below the 100-year flood elevation but above the ordinary high water level as defined in M.S.A. § 103G.005, subd. 14. 
(3)  Uses permitted in both districts. The following uses shall be permitted uses in both the floodway and flood fringe districts: 
a.  Agriculture, general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, tree farms, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
b.  Boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, and fishing areas. 
c.  Residential lawns, gardens and play areas. 
(4)  Uses permitted in the flood fringe district. The following are permitted uses in the flood fringe district: 
a.  Private or public recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, picnic grounds, game farms, fish hatcheries, and single- or multiple-purpose recreational trails. 
b.  Related accessory structures to general farming and greenhouses. 
c.  Industrial-commercial loading areas and parking areas. 
d.  Paved areas that do not directly discharge stormwater runoff into a wetland protection area. 
e.  Levees, dikes or floodwalls. 
f.  Additions to, modification of or reconstruction of all legally established nonconformities pursuant to section 38-524. 
g.  Fill or storage of materials or equipment associated with the uses in subsections (b)(4)a through f of this section. 
h.  Redevelopment of a parcel to allow new principal structures. 
(c)  Shore land area. The permitted uses in the shore land management areas are those uses allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning district underlying the water management overlay district. 
(Code 1999, § 19.090) 
Sec. 38-520. - Standards in wetland protection areas. 
(a)  Approval for work within a wetland protection area shall not be issued unless the city finds and determines that the proposed development complies with the following standards: 
(1)  Sequencing procedure. All proposed activities must follow the sequencing procedure, as identified in the State Wetland Conservation Act (M.S.A. ch. 354 and Minn. R. ch. 8420, including subsequent amendments) and summarized in subsections (a)(1)a through c of this section, if alterations to a wetland protection area are proposed. 
a.  Avoidance. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed activity results from the least environmentally damaging practical alternative. 
1.  Evaluation of such alternatives must consider whether the proposed activity requires or is dependent upon water or wetland proximity. If the proposed activity does not require water or wetland proximity, it is presumed that other practical alternatives are available. 
2.  Any practical alternative which does not involve filling is presumed to have less adverse impact upon the aquatic system. 
3.  The avoidance determination process cannot consider compensatory wetland replacement. 
b.  Minimization. Appropriate and practical steps must be taken to decrease to the least possible amount the adverse wetland impacts through project modifications. 
c.  Wetland replacement. Appropriate and practical wetland replacement is required for unavoidable adverse impacts which remain after all avoidance and minimization actions have been implemented. Wetland replacement shall be provided in accordance with Minn. Admin. Rules 8429.530 to 8420.630 at a minimum ratio of two acres of replaced wetland area for each acre of wetland impacted. Replacement of impacted wetland area must be performed within the limits of the city or watershed management organization as defined by M.S.A. § 103B.205, subd. 13. Wetland replacement will include the following actions in descending order of acceptance. 
1.  Restoration of existing previously degraded (filled or drained) wetlands within the same watershed as the proposed project. 
2.  Creation of on-site, manmade wetlands within the proposed project site or contiguous to the proposed project site where practical. 
3.  Replacement banking in accordance with the requirements of the state wetland bank established by the WCA (M.S.A. ch. 354 and Minn. R. ch. 8420, including subsequent amendments). 
(b)  Anyone building in the wetland protection area shall provide plans certified by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor demonstrating that the finished fill and building elevations will be accomplished as required in section 38-521. Construction shall be certified by the professional that work was completed as required by this division. 
(c)  Development shall maximize the incorporation of natural features into the development's site design. 
(d)  Development shall not substantially reduce the natural water retention and discharge capacity of any watercourse or wetland, nor increase the rate or volume of water runoff discharging from such locations beyond the rates and volumes indicated in the SWMP. 
(e)  The location of natural features and the site's topography shall be considered in the designing and siting of all physical improvements. 
(f)  The soil and subsoil conditions shall be suitable for excavation and site preparation, and the drainage shall be designed to prevent erosion and environmentally deleterious surface runoff of water. 
(g)  Development shall minimize the disturbance of the natural vegetation from an area within a horizontal distance of 15 feet from a wetland protection area, and no structure, paved surface, or grading will be allowed within this area unless a variance has been granted pursuant to this Code. For any new development, plat, lot split, site plan approval, or building permit, a drainage easement shall be dedicated to the city over the entire wetland protection area on the lot. 
(Code 1999, § 19.100) 
Sec. 38-521. - Standards in floodplain areas. 
    Approval for work within a floodplain area shall not be issued unless the city finds and determines that the proposed development complies with the following standards: 
(1)  Standards in floodplain areas (both floodway and flood fringe) are as follows: 
a.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 16,000 square feet (7,000 square feet of ground surface above the 100-year elevation). 
b.  Use not to adversely affect capacity of channels. No use shall be permitted which will adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or other watercourse of the drainage system. 
c.  Use not to obstruct flood flows. The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations consistent with section 38-526. 
d.  Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities, such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain area shall be floodproofed in accordance with the state building code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
e.  Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain area shall comply with the applicable provisions of this division. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety. 
(2)  Standards for floodway uses are as follows: 
a.  The use shall have a low flood damage potential. 
b.  The use shall not involve a structure, an addition or modification to an existing structure, fill, obstruction, excavation or storage of materials or equipment. 
(3)  Standards for flood fringe uses are as follows: 
a.  Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the flood fringe shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements may incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. 
b.  Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross-section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of M.S.A. ch. 103G. 
c.  The lowest floor (including basement) of any accessory structure, or redevelopment of a parcel permitted or any modification, addition to or repair of a nonconforming structure subject to the elevation on fill provisions of section 38-524(a)(1) through (6) shall be constructed on fill no lower than regulatory flood protection elevation as established in section 38-517. The fill shall extend at this elevation 15 feet beyond the perimeter of the structure or addition to the structure in all directions. 
d.  Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation and shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters. 
e.  Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classifications in the state building code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification in the state building code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All floodproofed accessory structures must meet the following additional standards, as appropriate: 
1.  The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; 
2.  Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the RFPE or properly floodproofed; and 
3.  To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two automatic openings in the outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure, and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings. 
f.  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other materials and equipment may be allowed if elevated on fill to the RFPE. 
g.  Basement construction shall not be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
h.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
i.  Structural alterations to the inside dimensions of a nonconforming structure are subject to the provisions of section 38-524(a)(2) and (6). 
j.  Recreational vehicles are subject to sections 38-529 through 38-532. 
k.  Commercial uses. Accessory land uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four upon occurrence of the regional flood. 
l.  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations, especially along streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in subsection (3)(k) of this section. In considering permit applications, due consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be located in floodplain areas. 
m.  All building sites shall have road access no lower than one foot below the 100-year flood elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the city council shall specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist. 
n.  On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public utilities are not provided: 
1.  On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
2.  New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section. 
(Code 1999, § 19.110) 
Sec. 38-522. - Standards in shore land areas. 
    Approval for work within a shore land area shall not be issued unless the city finds and determines that the proposed development complies with the following standards: 
(1)  Lot area and width standards. 
Riparian Area Lot Width Non-Riparian Area Lot Width Single-Family Homes Unsewered Natural environment (Sucker and Willow Lakes) 80,000 sq. ft. 200 ft. 80,000 sq. ft. 200 ft. Recreational development (Vadnais and Twin Lakes) 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft. Single-Family Homes Sewered Areas Natural environment (Sucker and Willow Lakes) 40,000 sq. ft. 125 ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 125 ft. Recreational development (Vadnais and Twin Lakes) 20,000 sq. ft. 75 ft. 15,000 sq. ft. 75 ft.Other permitted uses are to be dictated by building area, parking requirements, lot dimensions, and setbacks.  
(2)  Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks (in feet) from ordinary high water level. 
Lake Classification Unsewered Sewered System Natural environment (Sucker and Willow Lakes) 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. Recreational development (Vadnais and Twin Lakes) 100 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft.Other permitted uses are to be dictated by building area, parking requirements, lot dimensions, and setbacks.  
(3)  Coverage. Not more than 15 percent or one acre, whichever is greater, of the lot, parcel, or tract of land shall be covered by structures or impervious surfaces, without providing on-site detention or water quality enhancement. 
a.  All roads and parking areas shall meet the setback requirements established for structures. 
b.  In no instance shall impervious surfaces be placed less than 50 feet from the ordinary highwater mark. 
c.  Native species of vegetation shall be used to screen parking areas when viewed from the water. 
d.  The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent erosion into protected waters, to assimilate nutrients in the soil, and to preserve shore land aesthetics. Removal of natural vegetation, grading and filling in the shore land area, except for uses permitted in the underlying zoning district and developed as approved by the city, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Clear cutting of natural vegetation is prohibited. 
2.  Selective removal of natural vegetation along waterfront properties may be allowed, provided that sufficient vegetation cover remains to screen cars, dwellings and other structures when viewed from the water. 
3.  Native species of vegetation shall be restored during and after all construction projects to retard surface runoff and soil erosion. 
4.  Any grading, filling or excavation in the shore land area which will change or diminish the course, current or cross-section of protected waters or wetlands shall be approved by the commissioner of the state department of natural resources. 
e.  All structures in residential districts, except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, shall not exceed 28 feet in height. 
(Code 1999, § 19.120) 
Sec. 38-523. - Excavation and filling. 
(a)  Excavation or filling, obstructions and any structures in the floodplain may be allowed only when appropriate state and federal permits have been obtained and when local review requirements have been fulfilled. 
(b)  The maximum extent of excavation or filling which may be permitted in the water management overlay district shall be determined by specific permitted uses and standards for each area, and flood storage needs and water quality improvement requirements of the city. 
(c)  Only fill substantially free of chemical pollutants and organic wastes, as determined by the water management administrator, may be used. 
(d)  Excavation may be allowed only when it will not result in the permanent draining of the wetland, and must be accomplished in the following manner: 
(1)  Excavation for pretreatment of stormwater runoff shall be limited to the minimum area necessary for removal of nutrients and associated sediment. 
(2)  Excavation activities or related stormwater discharges shall not significantly change or diminish the course, current, cross-section, water volume or habitat characteristics of protected waters or wetlands. 
(3)  The size of the excavated area shall be limited to the absolute minimum, unless the work is part of an approved mitigation plan. 
(4)  Excavated material shall be disposed of in areas lying outside of a wetland protection area and shall not result in a significant change in current flow, or in substantial destruction of vegetation, fish spawning areas, or water pollution. 
(5)  Work in the wetland will not be performed during the breeding season of waterfowl or fish spawning season. 
(Code 1999, § 19.130) 
Sec. 38-524. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Conditions of nonconforming uses. A structure, or the use of a structure, or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this division but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this division may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Any alteration to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential of that flood structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation (100-year elevation) in accordance with any of the floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the state building code, except as further restricted in subsections (a)(3) and (6) of this section. A structural addition to the outside dimensions of a nonconforming structure must be elevated on fill in accordance with section 38-521(3)(c). 
(3)  The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this division are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the elevation on fill requirements included in section 38-521(3)(c). 
(4)  If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to the elevation on fill requirements of section 38-521(3)(c). The assessor shall notify the water management administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period of 12 months. 
(5)  If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in section 38-517, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the elevation on fill requirements of section 38-521(3)(c). 
(6)  If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in section 38-517, from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building, then the building addition and the existing nonconforming building must meet the elevation on fill requirements of section 38-521(3)(c). 
(7)  Historical structures, as defined in section 38-517, shall be subject to the provisions of section 38-524(a)(1) through (6). 
(b)  Substandard lots. Lots of record in the office of the county recorder prior to the date of enactment of this division which do not meet the requirements of section 38-520, may be allowed as building sites provided: 
(1)  Such use is permitted in the zoning district; 
(2)  The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands; and 
(3)  All other dimensional requirements are complied with insofar as is practical. 
(c)  Exceptions to structure setback requirements. 
(1)  Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to boathouses, piers and docks. Boathouses may be allowed, provided they are not used for habitation and do not contain sanitary facilities. 
(2)  In those cases where there are existing adjacent structures which have a setback of less than 50 feet, the setback for new structures shall be equal to the average of the setbacks for the existing adjacent structures. In those cases where there is only one existing adjacent structure which has a setback of less than 50 feet, the setback for the new structure shall be equal to the average of the setback of the existing adjacent structure and the required 50-foot lakeside setback. 
(3)  Accessory structures may be located in the front yard of lakeshore properties upon approval of a riparian lot variance. 
(d)  Conditional use permit. A conditional use permit will be considered for specific property which has been platted or assessed for public improvements. Granting of the conditional use permit shall be subject to obtaining all applicable federal, state and local permits. 
(Code 1999, § 19.140) 
Sec. 38-525. - Administration. 
(a)  Water management administrator. The city engineer shall act as the water management administrator. The administrator shall review all development proposals to determine whether the proposed use lies within a floodplain area, shore land area or wetland protection area. No development shall be permitted unless it complies with all provisions of this division. 
(b)  Interpretation of area boundaries. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the floodplain area, shore land area or wetland protection area as shown on the official zoning map, the water management administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The interpretation shall be based on the 100-year flood profile information adopted in section 38-515(3), the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the council adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program Map showing the area in the floodplain if earlier, or as contained in the SWMP, as appropriate, field investigations to determine elevations, vegetation and soil types, contour maps and state and federal wetland maps. The water management administrator shall utilize persons with the appropriate expertise in making such field determinations. 
(c)  Records, maps, and data. The water management administrator shall assemble and maintain such necessary records, maps, and data deemed appropriate to determine floodplain, shore land and wetland protection areas. These maps shall include the SWMP maps, National Wetland Inventory maps, flood insurance rate maps and a soil survey manual. 
(d)  Permit required. A permit issued by the water management administrator, or other city designee, shall be secured prior to the construction, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building or structure; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to excavation or the placement of an obstruction within the floodplain. 
(e)  Notifications for watercourse alterations. The zoning administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the commissioner of the department of natural resources prior to the city authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to M.S.A. ch. 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the commissioner of natural resources. A copy of the notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago regional office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(f)  Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease the 100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the zoning administrator shall notify the Chicago regional office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the technical or scientific data. 
(Code 1999, § 19.150) 
Sec. 38-526. - Review. 
    Applications for work within the water management overlay district shall be reviewed and processed in the following manner: 
(1)  Once the application is approved by all governmental agencies having such authority, the water management administrator shall forward the copies of the application to appropriate staff for review and comment. 
(2)  The application, together with city staff and agency reviews, shall be forwarded to the planning commission for its review recommendations. 
(3)  An application fee in an amount established by the city shall be filed with the water management administrator. 
(4)  Upon receipt of an application for development within the water management overlay district, the applicant shall be required to furnish the following information: 
a.  Plan (surface view) showing two-foot contours of the ground; 
b.  Pertinent structures, fill or storage elevations; 
c.  Size, location, elevation, and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site; 
d.  Location and elevations of streets; 
e.  Photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream; 
f.  Soil type data; 
g.  Water table information; 
h.  Erosion control elements; 
i.  Delineation of floodplain, shore land or wetland protection areas; 
j.  In-place utilities; 
k.  Hydrologic analysis consistent with the SWMP; 
l.  Water quality enhancement feature design. 
(5)  If a proposed activity is either partially or wholly within a floodplain area, and based upon the review of a development plan, the following determinations shall be made: 
a.  Peak discharge of the regional flood (100-year frequency event). 
b.  Water surface elevation or profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis for the floodplain area if this information is not already available in the county flood insurance study adopted by reference in section 38-515(3). 
c.  Area of floodplain necessary to store or convey the regional flood without increasing flood stages. 
d.  Rate of stormwater runoff, before and after the development or construction of the proposed usage, to display that the rate of such runoff is not greater than the rates of the SWMP. 
e.  Design or plan of catch basins, pumps, settling ponds and similar water purification and filtering processes to ensure the maintenance or enhancement of runoff water quality standards for the area. 
f.  Based upon the technical evaluation by the water management administrator, the city shall amend the city's flood insurance rate map according to Federal Emergency Management Agency procedures. 
g.  The city shall notify and supply the department of natural resources (DNR) with plans and information on the following: 
1.  Copies of all variance requests or public hearings for a conditional use permit and ordinance amendments in a water management overlay district shall be submitted to the commissioner of the DNR at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
2.  A copy of the final decision granting variances or conditional use permits shall be submitted to the commissioner of the DNR within ten days after the meeting. 
3.  All preliminary plats within the water management overlay district area shall be submitted to the commissioner of the DNR within ten days after the meeting. 
4.  All approved final plats shall be submitted to the commissioner of the DNR ten days after the meeting. 
5.  All PUD detailed development plans shall be forwarded to and approved by the commissioner of the DNR prior to approval by the city council. PUD development plans must be in accordance with the requirements and standards of this division. 
6.  All amendments to this division must be approved by the commissioner of the DNR prior to approval by the city council. 
h.  Record of first floor elevation. The water management administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest slab floor (including basement) and lowest opening (door or window) of all new and reconstructed structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain area. The administrator shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are floodproofed. 
i.  Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or nonconforming use. It is unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the water management administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this division. 
j.  Variances. The city council may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such relief or variance from the terms of this division as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of such variance, the city council shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this division, any other zoning regulations in the city, and in the respective enabling legislation which justified the granting of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing uses prohibited in that area, permitting a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permitting standards lower than those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied: 
1.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
k.  Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The water management administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and 
2.  Such construction below the 100-year (regional flood) level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Code 1999, § 19.160) 
Sec. 38-527. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this division or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  In responding to a suspected violation, the water management administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it, including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(2)  When a violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the water management administrator, the water management administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate department of natural resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency regional office along with the city's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible. 
(3)  The water management administrator shall notify the suspected party of the requirements of this division and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure or use is under construction or development, the water management administrator may order the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the city. If the construction or development is already completed, then the water management administrator may either issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official controls, or notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
(4)  If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the water management administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this division and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The water management administrator shall also, upon the lapse of the specified response period, notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the violation of this division. 
(Code 1999, § 19.170) 
Sec. 38-528. - Amendments. 
(a)  The water management overlay designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from an area unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the commissioner of natural resources if they determine that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use. 
(b)  All amendments to this division, including amendments to the official flood insurance rate maps, must be submitted to and approved by the commissioner of natural resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official flood insurance rate maps also require prior approval by the Federal Insurance Arbitration. 
(c)  All amendments made to the SWMP shall be included in their entirety in this division, by reference. 
(Code 1999, § 19.180) 
Sec. 38-529. - Recreational vehicles. 
(a)  Exemption criteria not met. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in this division shall be subject to the provisions of this division and as specifically spelled out in the sections below. 
(b)  Exemption. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this division if they are placed in any of the areas listed in section 38-530 and, further, if they meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Have current licenses required for highway use. 
(2)  Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type-utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks, and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural-type additions attached to it. 
(3)  The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district. 
(Code 1999, § 19.190) 
Sec. 38-530. - Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles. 
    Areas exempt for placement of recreational vehicles are as follows: 
(1)  Individual lots or parcels of record. 
(2)  Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds. 
(3)  Existing condominium-type associations. 
(Code 1999, § 19.192) 
Sec. 38-531. - Loss of exemption. 
    Recreational vehicles exempted in section 38-529 lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500.00 for a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500.00 for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation on fill requirements of section 38-521(3)(c) and the use of land restrictions specified in this division. There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a flood-free location should flooding occur. 
(Code 1999, § 19.194) 
Sec. 38-532. - Restrictions. 
    New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential-type subdivisions and condominium associations and expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the flood fringe districts, provided the recreational vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation determined in accordance with the provisions of this division and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with this division. No fill placed in the flood fringe to meet the requirements of this division shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood. 
(2)  All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria of subsection (1) of this section may, as an alternative, be allowed if in accordance with the following provisions: the applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. The plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual and shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of sections 38-529(b)(2) and (3) and 38-531 will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1999, § 19.196) 
Sec. 38-533. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Review criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within floodplain areas shall be able to contain a building site outside of the floodplain area. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this division and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than one foot below the 100-year flood elevation. For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents. 
(b)  Procedures for determining the 100-year flood elevation and floodway and flood fringe boundaries. In the floodplain area, applicants shall provide the information required in section 38-526 to determine the water surface elevation or profile of the regional flood if such information is not available in the county flood insurance study as adopted by reference in this division. Floodway and flood fringe boundaries shall be determined in accordance with section 38-519(b)(1) and (2). 
(c)  Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. 
(Code 1999, § 19.200) 
Sec. 38-534. - Manufactured homes. 
    New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by section 38-533. The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks located in floodplain areas will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance with section 38-521(3)(c). If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with section 38-521(3)(m), then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owners develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 19.210) 
Sec. 38-535. - Compliance. 
    No new structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this division. Within floodplain areas, all uses not listed as permitted uses in section 38-519(b) shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1999, § 19.220) 
Secs. 38-536-38-563. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - WATERWORKS DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-564. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the preservation, protection, proper maintenance, and use of the property owned by the St. Paul Waterworks. 
(Code 1999, § 19A.010; Ord. No. 437, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 38-565. - Uses in the waterworks district. 
(a)  Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Accumulation and retention of lake/surface waters for municipal water purposes; 
(2)  Public open space, parks, playgrounds, trails and athletic fields; 
(3)  Nurseries and tree farms, but not including retail sales. 
(b)  Accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Off-street parking facilities; 
(2)  Underground utilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses are any and all buildings and structures necessary for the operation of the St. Paul Waterworks. 
(Code 1999, § 19A.020; Ord. No. 437, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 38-566. - Criteria for approval of conditional uses. 
    The city council shall review each proposed conditional use in the waterworks district according to the following criteria: the interrelationship with the proposed development to existing conditions both on and off the property. The impact of the plan on existing conditions shall include: 
(1)  Traffic movement and parking conditions; 
(2)  Pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress; 
(3)  Building location, setbacks and height; 
(4)  Building architecture; 
(5)  Landscaping; 
(6)  Lighting; 
(7)  Provisions for utilities; 
(8)  Site drainage; 
(9)  Location and screening of all exterior storage; 
(10)  Preservation of wooded areas; 
(11)  Consideration of water runoff and the preservation of ponds and wetlands. 
(Code 1999, § 19A.030; Ord. No. 437, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 38-567. - Requirements on setbacks, yard and heights. 
(a)  The minimum building setback from any lot line or public right-of-way shall be 50 feet. 
(b)  Development adjacent to residential zones shall have a parking lot area setback of 100 feet and building setback of 150 feet. 
(c)  The maximum building height shall be 28 feet, except as regulated in section 38-608(2). 
(Code 1999, § 19A.040; Ord. No. 437, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 38-568. - Review and approval procedures. 
    The administration procedures for the municipal review of a conditional use permit shall be as set forth in section 38-43. 
(Code 1999, § 19A.050; Ord. No. 437, 2-19-2002) 
Secs. 38-569-38-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION AND PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 38-600. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish general development performance standards. These standards are intended and designed to ensure compatibility of uses; to prevent urban blight, deterioration and decay; and to enhance the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 20.010) 
Sec. 38-601. - Multiple-family housing, commercial and industrial site reviews. 
(a)  Screening. 
(1)  All commercial and industrial principal and accessory uses which are situated within 75 feet of a residence one, residence two, or residence three district shall be screened from such district by a wooden wall or fence of not less than 100 percent opacity and not less than ten feet in height above the level of the residence one, residence two, or residence three property at the district boundary. Such wall or fence shall be setback from the property line at least five feet. In the setback area shall be planted a combination of coniferous and deciduous plants and possibly vines in order to soften the appearance of the fence or wall for the affected residential area. 
(2)  Walls or fences of lesser heights or planting screens may be permitted by the city council if there is a finding that the nature or extent of the use being screened is such that a lesser degree of screening will as adequately promote and protect the use and enjoyment of the properties within the adjacent residence one, residence two, or residence three, or there is a finding that a screening of the type required by this article would interfere with the provision of adequate amounts of light and air to the properties. 
(3)  All required screening devices shall be designed so that they are architecturally harmonious with the principal structures on the site and they shall be properly maintained so as not to become unsightly, hazardous or less opaque than when originally constructed. 
(4)  Exterior storage, where permitted, shall be subject to proper screening as approved by the city planner. 
(b)  Landscaping. All exposed ground areas surrounding or within a principal or accessory use, including street boulevards, which are not devoted to drives, sidewalks, patios and other such uses, shall be landscaped. All landscaped areas shall be kept neat, clean and uncluttered. No landscaped area shall be used for the parking of vehicles or the storage or display of materials, supplies or merchandise. Dead or dying vegetation within landscaped areas, including plantings and grass, shall be replaced by the property owner or manager. 
(1)  Elements of landscape design. Elements of landscape design may include: 
a.  Existing topographical and vegetative features; 
b.  Berming; 
c.  Plantings, including the required minimum number of overstory trees, understory trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover materials. 
(2)  Minimum number of major trees. The minimum number of major or overstory trees on any given site shall be as indicated below. These are the minimum substantial plantings, in addition to other understory trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover deemed appropriate for a complete quality landscape treatment of the site. Sites shall contain at a minimum the greater of: 
a.  One tree per 1,000 square feet of gross building floor area; 
b.  One tree per 800 square feet of landscaped area for commercial and industrial projects; 
c.  One tree per 1,600 square feet of landscaped area for residential projects; 
d.  One tree per 50 lineal feet of site perimeter; or 
e.  One tree per multi-residential dwelling unit. 
(3)  Expansion area exception. 
a.  When the site includes area designated for use in conjunction with future expansion of the development area, the site perimeter shall be defined as that area which extends 30 feet beyond the side and rear yard setback of the parking area or 30 feet beyond the side and rear yard setback of the primary or accessory structure. 
b.  The future designated area must be seeded, sodded or left with natural vegetation. 
(4)  Credit for existing trees. 
a.  The total number of required new overstory trees may be offset by the retention of existing overstory trees on the lot, provided that such trees satisfy the minimum requirements as to size and species. 
b.  The city planner shall recommend to the planning commission the amount of the credit for such existing trees based upon their location and distribution on the lot. 
(5)  Parking lots; planting islands. 
a.  Requirements. Planting islands within parking lots shall be required to visually break up expanses of hard surface parking areas to allow safe and efficient traffic movement, and to define rows of parking. 
b.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall occupy at least four percent of the parking area. 
(6)  Minimum size of plantings. Required trees shall be of the following minimum planting size: 
a.  Deciduous and overstory trees: 21/2 inches diameter, as measured six inches above the ground. 
b.  Coniferous trees: average six feet in height with a minimum height of four feet. 
c.  Deciduous/ornamental trees: 11/2 inches diameter, as measured six inches above the ground. 
(7)  Species. 
a.  All trees used in site developments shall be indigenous to the appropriate hardiness zone and physical characteristics of the site. 
b.  The compliment of trees fulfilling the requirements of this policy shall be not less than 25 percent hardwood deciduous overstory and no less than 25 percent coniferous. 
(8)  Minimum plant culture requirements. 
a.  All tree planting details shall meet or exceed current state department of transportation (MnDOT) planting detail requirements as to plant pit size and specifications. 
b.  All trees planted within parking lot islands or other hard surface areas or in areas with compacted soils shall have a minimum of 350 cubic feet of suitable, non-compacted soil for proper root development. This volume of soil shall be computed to a depth of three feet and a minimum lateral dimension of six feet. 
(9)  Sodding and seeding. 
a.  Seeding may be used when the city determines sod is not practical or desirable, such as, but not limited to, campus areas of schools, recreational playfields and open space, sites that are rough graded and areas that cannot be developed (such as those in a power line easement). 
b.  Seeding shall be confined to the rear yard area of a lot. 
c.  On any lot on which a building is located as the principal use of the property, seeding shall not be used within 50 feet of the building. 
d.  Seeding will be considered properly installed and vigorously growing when it is viable turf. 
e.  Seeding shall be allowed in undisturbed areas containing existing viable natural vegetation which can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant materials. 
f.  Seeding shall be allowed in areas designated as open space or future expansion areas or properly planted and maintained as prairie grass. 
(10)  Special approval for final slope grades. Final slope grades steeper than the ration of three to one will not be permitted without special approval or treatment, such as terracing or retaining walls. 
(11)  Protection of existing vegetation during construction. 
a.  All existing vegetation to be saved upon a lot under development shall be protected from damage or destruction occurring as a result of activity which takes place during the construction process. 
b.  No soil or other material shall be allowed to accumulate or be placed near any such vegetation in such a manner that the deterioration or death of the vegetation may result. 
c.  The vegetation shall be fenced off out to the drip line of trees or beyond to ensure against damage by vehicles, compaction of soils or the chemical alteration of soils, due to concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials. 
(12)  Woodland preservation policy and credit. 
a.  It is the policy of the city to preserve the natural forest and woodland areas throughout the city, and, with respect to specific site development, to retain, as far as practicable, substantial tree stands which should be incorporated into the site. 
b.  Credit for the retention of existing trees which are of acceptable species, size and location may be given to satisfy the minimum number requirements set forth in this policy and in the city ordinances. 
c.  Where commercial, industrial and institutional uses clearly demonstrate affirmative design efforts toward the preservation and enhancement of desirable natural site characteristics, ordinance required paved parking spaces may be reduced and installation deferred until such time as the need for the full complement of parking. When the need has been determined, paved parking shall be installed in conformance with a "proof of parking" plan so approved by the city. 
(c)  Building design. The design of exterior surfaces shall be consistent on all sides in terms of materials and architectural treatment. 
(Code 1999, § 20.020) 
Sec. 38-602. - Steep slopes. 
(a)  Slopes having an incline of at least 15 percent with a vertical elevation of at least 20 feet shall not be used as building placement sites. Such slopes shall not be altered to create suitable multiple-family (duplex or greater) building sites, unless no feasible alternative exists. 
(b)  The design and construction of any retaining walls for purposes of development in an area of steep slopes must receive approval from the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 20.022) 
Sec. 38-603. - Proposed increase in density or lot coverage. 
    The applicant for a density increase must show that the increase will not have an undue or adverse impact on existing public facilities and on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property. The city council, in determining reasonableness of the proposed increase, shall consider the following factors, among others: 
(1)  Location, amount and proposed use of open space; 
(2)  Location, design and type of dwelling provided; 
(3)  Physical characteristics of the site; 
(4)  Relationship of the proposed dwelling unit to nearby developments. When calculating the number of dwelling units per acre for residential developments or percentage of lot coverage for commercial or industrial developments, the following factors will be used: 
a.  Size of the site shall be determined by the total land area within the perimeter of the privately-owned property. This will include any area of newly-proposed public or private roads or road rights-of-way. 
b.  Wetlands protected by section 38-516(a) shall not be included in the calculation of the site. 
c.  Slopes having an incline of greater than 20 percent and a vertical elevation change of greater than 20 feet shall not be included in the calculation of the site. 
d.  If at least 30 percent of the site is affected by subsection (4)b or c of this section or dedicated as a public park, a density bonus of up to ten percent may be allowed by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 20.024) 
Sec. 38-604. - Dwelling unit restriction. 
    No garage, tent, recreational vehicle, temporary family health care dwelling or accessory building shall, at any time, be used as living quarters temporarily or permanently. Pursuant to the authority granted by M.S.A. § 462.3593, subd. 9, the city opts out of the requirements of M.S.A. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family health care dwellings. 
(Code 1999, § 20.030) 
Sec. 38-605. - Accessory buildings, uses and equipment. 
(a)  An accessory building shall be considered an integral part of the principal building if it is connected to the principal building by a covered passageway or is located less than six feet from the principal building. 
(b)  Except for farm buildings, no accessory buildings shall be erected or located within any required side yard setback or in front of the principal building on the subject property. 
(c)  Accessory buildings and garages in residential districts shall not exceed the height of the principal structure, shall comply with the setback and height standards in the applicable zoning district, and be at least five feet or more from all lot lines of adjoining lots and shall not be located within a drainage and utility easement. Farm buildings shall be exempt from the height requirements. 
(d)  Except for farm buildings, all accessory buildings and detached garages per single-family homes shall occupy no more than 25 percent of a rear yard, nor exceed 1,200 square feet of total floor area, for all accessory structures. Accessory buildings and garages that exceed the stated maximum may be allowed with a conditional use permit. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued for the construction of more than one accessory detached private garage structure for each dwelling or individual lot. 
(f)  No accessory building or use shall be constructed or developed on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory, except by conditional use permit. 
(g)  Accessory buildings in the commercial and industrial districts, if permitted in the applicable district, shall be located to the rear of the principal building. 
(h)  No accessory building in a commercial or industrial district shall exceed the height of the principal building, except by conditional use permit. 
(i)  No accessory building or structure shall be allowed over any public easement except by variance, in compliance with the procedures in section 38-38. 
(j)  Temporary outside display of merchandise at gas stations and convenience food stores is allowed as an accessory use in the commercial two and city center districts. Such display shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion appurtenant to a permanent structure and shall not exceed 150 square feet or five percent of the gross building floor area, whichever is less. Temporary outside display shall not be considered outside storage. 
(Code 1999, § 20.040; Ord. No. 732, § XIII, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-606. - Telecommunication antennas. 
(a)  Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community, while providing for well-designed and efficient telecommunications systems. To meet the objectives, the provisions of this section direct the location of antennas, dish antennas, towers, and wireless facilities. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means equipment used for transmitting or receiving telecommunication, television or radio signals, which is located on the exterior of, or attached to any building or structure, but not including satellite dish antennas or wireless facilities. 
    Antenna, commercial, means any pole, spire or structure, or any combination, to which an antenna is, or could be attached, or which is designed for an antenna to be attached, and all supporting lines, cables, wires and braces erected for the commercial use of information. 
    Antenna, private, means any antenna erected for the noncommercial use of information. 
    City-designated antenna site means a location in the city, designated by the city, on which is or may be located one or more telecommunication, radio or television antennas available for connection and use by any person upon execution of a lease with the city. 
    Micro wireless facility means has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 14, as may be hereafter modified. 
    Satellite dish antenna means a parabolic-shaped antenna (including all supporting apparatus) used in receiving television signals, which is located on the ground or exterior of, or outside of, any building or structure. 
    Small wireless facility : has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 11, as may be hereafter modified. 
    Wireless facility : has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 13, as may be hereafter modified. 
    Wireless support structure : has the meaning given by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 16, as may be hereafter modified. 
(c)  Restrictions on use of private telecommunication antennas. Private receiving or transmitting antennas and towers not more than 20 feet in height above a manmade structure or not more than 50 feet in height above the ground, if constructed on the ground, shall be a conditional use in all districts. 
(d)  Restrictions on use of commercial telecommunication antennas. 
(1)  Antennas to conform. Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas which are either new freestanding towers, new roof-mounted antennas, or new co-located antennas which will raise the height of an existing antenna tower shall conform to the following: 
a.  City water site preferred. Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas shall connect and use the city water tower sites under a negotiated lease whenever such placement is technically feasible. Such projects may proceed with city council approval and a building permit. Certification by an independent professional radio frequency engineer is required to demonstrate that the city tower site is not technically feasible. 
b.  City designated site; next preferred site. Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas, or towers containing such antennas, that cannot be located on the city water tower site shall be located on a city-designated site. Such projects shall be reviewed according to the city site plan approval process and require a building permit. Certification by an independent professional radio frequency engineer is required to demonstrate that the city-designated site is not technically feasible. 
c.  Existing tower site; city site not technically feasible. Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas, or towers containing such antennas, that cannot be located on a city-designated site shall be located on an existing tower site, including existing nonconforming tower sites. Such projects shall be reviewed according to the city site plan approval process, and require a building permit. 
d.  Commercial antennas on utility tower where existing tower site not technically feasible. Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas, or towers containing such antennas, that cannot be located on an existing tower site shall be located on the tower of a utility provider, such as NSP towers. Such projects shall be reviewed according to the city site plan approval process and require a building permit. Certification by an independent professional radio frequency engineer is required to demonstrate that an existing tower site is not technically feasible. 
e.  Commercial antennas; city site, existing tower site, or utility tower not technically feasible. If a professional radio frequency engineer certifies that it is not technically feasible to place the antenna on the city-designated site, existing tower site, or on the tower of a utility provider, the antenna may be located as follows: 
1.  First on existing structures in R-3 (within 100 feet of the interstate freeway), commercial, office-business, office or industrial districts as roof-mounted antenna, provided the antenna is no more than 25 percent of the structure height, by a conditional use permit; or 
2.  If a professional radio frequency engineer certifies that a roof-mounted antenna is not technically feasible, then in industrial zoning districts by a conditional use permit. 
f.  Setback requirements. All antennas and towers upon which antennas are placed shall be subject to the appropriate side and rear setback requirements established for structures in the applicable zoning district. 
g.  Setbacks from public streets and highways. Freestanding antenna towers shall be setback four times the tower height or 200 feet, whichever is greater, from existing public rights-of-way and residential zoning districts. 
(2)  Co-location on existing conforming sites. Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas which are co-located on existing conforming freestanding towers or roof-mounted antennas and which do not add to the height of the existing tower shall be reviewed according to the city site plan approval process and a building permit. Such co-locations do not require certification by a professional radio frequency engineer that placement on another site is not technically feasible. 
(3)  Co-location on existing nonconforming sites. Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas which are co-located on existing legal nonconforming freestanding towers or roof-mounted antennas and which do not add to the height of the existing tower shall be allowed by conditional use permit and a building permit. 
(4)  Standards for transmitting towers and antennas. The following standards shall apply to all commercial receiving or transmitting towers and antennas: 
a.  License required. The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any required license by state, federal or local agencies. 
b.  Nonconforming uses. Existing transmitting and receiving facilities, at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived may remain in service; however, at such times any material change is made in the facilities, full compliance with this section shall be required. 
c.  Building permit. In addition to other permits or approvals that may be required under this section, a building permit shall be required for the construction of new antennas and towers upon which antennas will be placed and shall include wind-loading and strength and footing calculations prepared by a state-registered engineer whenever deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
d.  Co-location requirement for new antennas. If a new antenna support structure is to be constructed, it shall be designed so as to accommodate a minimum of two other users, including, but not limited to, other cellular communication companies, local police, fire and ambulance companies. Any proposals for the construction of a new commercial tower shall include certification from a professional radio frequency engineer that existing tower sites within the city are not technically feasible for the application proposed. 
e.  Height requirement. The height of the antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily, as verified by an appropriate professional. 
f.  Sightlines. Antennas or towers shall be located outside the sightlines of offices, buildings or residences, to the extent possible. 
g.  Climbing discouraged. Antennas, dish antennas or towers shall be protected by a city-approved barrier to discourage climbing by unauthorized persons. 
h.  Illumination. Antennas or towers shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by law or governmental agency to protect the public's health and safety. 
i.  Color. All antennas and towers shall be of a city-approved color. 
j.  Advertising. All antennas and towers may not contain any signage or logos, except as may be required by any state or federal regulation. 
k.  Accessory uses. Freestanding towers are allowable only as an accessory use and are limited to one tower per parcel. 
l.  Bond requirement. If, for any reason, the antenna or tower is abandoned or the height of the antenna or tower can be reduced, the antenna, tower, or portions thereof must be removed or reduced in height within three months. To ensure compliance, the applicant must submit a performance bond or letter of credit in an amount sufficient to cover the removal or reduction costs. After removal or reduction, the site shall be restored to its original or an improved state. 
m.  Full disclosure of technical data. An application for a conditional use permit will not be considered complete until the applicant fully discloses all technical data requested by the city. Such data includes, but is not limited to, the locations, actual or planned, of other antenna towers in the applicant's system. 
(e)  Restrictions on the use of wireless facilities. Small wireless facilities in compliance with chapter 30, article III shall be a permitted use in the right-of-way in all zoning districts, except residential zoning districts as follows. Small wireless facilities in compliance with chapter 30, article III shall be a conditional use in the public street right-of-way in or adjacent to any residential zoning district, provided that such facilities meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Any new wireless support structure shall be no less than five feet from the street curb; 
(2)  Any new wireless support structure shall be no more than five feet from the side lot line extended to the street; 
(3)  To the extent possible, the antenna shall be shrouded or camouflaged; 
(4)  Ground-mounted equipment shall be constructed from earth-toned fiberglass; 
(5)  The small wireless facilities shall be served by underground power and communication lines. The wireless support structure shall not be served by any above ground power and communication lines; and 
(6)  The small wireless facilities shall comply with all requirements in chapter 30, article III. 
(Code 1999, § 20.045; Ord. No. 725, § IV(20.045), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 38-607. - Fences. 
(a)  Permit required. No persons, firm, or corporation, except on a farm and related to farming, shall hereafter construct, or cause to be constructed or erected, within the city, any fence without an appropriate permit. 
(b)  Construction and maintenance, generally. 
(1)  Every fence shall be constructed in a substantial, workmanlike manner and be of substantial material reasonably suited for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. 
(2)  Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence which is, or has become, dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare, is a public nuisance and the city building inspector shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof. 
(3)  Link fences, wherever permitted, shall be constructed in such a manner that no barbed ends shall be at the top except in industrial districts. 
(4)  That side of the fence considered to be the face (the side opposite the post) shall face abutting property, except for farm fences. 
(5)  No person shall construct or erect any electrical or barbed-wire fence, except to contain intensively used facilities for animal raising and then only if such electrical or barbed-wire fence shall be completely enclosed by a non-electrical or non-barbed-wire fence. 
(6)  No fence shall be installed in a location which would prevent a fire hydrant from being immediately discernible or in any manner deter or hinder the fire department from gaining immediate access thereto. 
(7)  In those instances where a fence exists as an enclosure that restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate, identifiable collapsible section, or other such means of recognizable ingress is required. Such means of ingress shall be unobstructed and a minimum of three feet in width. The location of such ingress points shall be positioned at any point paralleling the front lot lines, between the side lot property line and the principal structure. 
(8)  All fences shall be constructed inside the boundary of the subject property. 
(c)  Residential district fences. In all parts of the city zoned residential and not a farm, no boundary line fence shall be erected or maintained more than six feet in height except that: 
(1)  No fence shall be erected in any front yard to a height in excess of four feet. 
(2)  All fences shall be at least 25 percent open between the ground and the top, unless it is a privacy fence as referenced under subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(3)  Privacy fences or 100 percent opaque fences in R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts must conform to setbacks as required for accessory structures. 
(4)  On corner lots in all districts no fence or planting in excess of 30 inches above the street centerline grade shall be permitted within a triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the intersection of the projected curblines of two intersecting streets, thence 40 feet along one property line, thence diagonally to a point 40 feet from the point of beginning on the other property line, thence to the point of beginning. 
(5)  Should the rear lot line be common with the side lot line of an abutting lot, that portion of the rear lot line equal to the front setback of the house on the abutting lot shall not be fenced to a height of more than four feet. If the abutting lot is undeveloped, the height of the rear lot fence shall be reduced at the normal front setback line. 
(6)  Chain-link fences used for the enclosure of tennis courts shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(d)  Nonresidential district fences. Fences in all nonresidential districts shall not exceed ten feet in height, except that: 
(1)  Boundary line fences. Boundary line fences abutting residential districts shall conform to those conditions applying to the residential district. 
(2)  Special purpose fences. Fences for special purposes and fences differing in construction, height, or length may be permitted in any nonresidential district in the city by issuance of a conditional use permit approved by the planning commission and city council. Findings shall be made that the fence is necessary to protect, buffer, or improve the premises for which the fence is intended. 
(Code 1999, § 20.060) 
Sec. 38-608. - Permitted encroachments, limitations and exceptions. 
    The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on setback and height requirements, except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  In any yards. Posts, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, gutters, awnings, open terraces, flag poles, ornamental features, utilities, mechanical equipment and other examples as allowed by the city council. Also steps, yard lights and nameplate signs in residence districts, trees, shrubs, plants, floodlights or other sources of light illuminating authorized illuminated signs, or light standards for illuminating parking areas, loading areas or yards for safety and security reasons, provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential property. 
(2)  Height. Height limitations required elsewhere in this article shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes which do not contain usable space, monuments, water towers, farm silos, fire and hose towers, flag poles, electrical transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, parapet walls extending not more than three feet above the limiting height of the building, and cooling towers. 
(3)  Front setbacks. Unless subject to other applicable regulations for the applicable zoning district, when adjoining structures existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived have a different setback from that required, the front setback of a new structure shall conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity. The city council shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases. However, in no case shall a building be required to setback more than 60 feet. 
(4)  Side and rear setbacks. Subject to regulations contained in city building and construction regulations and other applicable regulations, buildings may be excluded from side and rear setback requirements, provided party walls are used and if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral unit. Such uses must have been allowed by this article as permitted or conditional uses. 
(Code 1999, § 20.070) 
Sec. 38-609. - Common wall dwellings. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, one developer may construct two separate single-family dwellings with a common wall and boundary lines, in which event the common boundary line shall have a zero lot line setback, provided: 
(1)  Each lot shall meet all other setback and minimum size requirements for a two-family dwelling; 
(2)  Separate services shall be furnished and provided to each dwelling for sanitary sewer and water; 
(3)  No fence or shrubbery divider shall be installed or maintained on the common boundary line. 
(Code 1999, § 20.072) 
Sec. 38-610. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Floor area. The floor area, for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required, shall be determined on the basis of the exterior floor area dimensions of the building, structure or use times the number of floors, minus ten percent, except as may hereinafter be provided or modified. 
(2)  Change of use or occupancy of buildings. Any change of use or occupancy of any building, including additions thereto, requiring more parking shall not be permitted until there is furnished such additional parking spaces as required by these zoning regulations. 
(3)  Parking accessory to a residential use. Exterior parking facilities accessory to a residential use, including on public rights-of-way, shall be utilized solely for the parking of currently licensed and operable vehicles of nine passengers or less or trucks not exceeding one-ton capacity, with a limit of two vehicles per dwelling unit, plus one additional vehicle per licensed driver residing in the dwelling unit, except where the city enforcement official has issued a permit to the dwelling unit, allowing for additional vehicles to be parked. Such permits shall be issued by the city enforcement official when, in the officer's discretion, the individuals residing in the dwelling unit have a justifiable need for parking of additional vehicles. Currently-licensed and operable boats, trailers, campers, and camping buses are also allowed to park from May 1 to December 1 of each year and at other times for not more than 72 hours, and currently-licensed snowmobiles may be parked from December 1 to the following March 15. 
(4)  Parking in rear or side yard. Currently-licensed boats, snowmobiles, campers, camping buses, and antique cars may be stored in rear or side yards if properly screened from view from a public street or neighboring property. The screening must be approved by the city enforcement official. 
(b)  Stall, aisle, and driveway design. 
(1)  Parking dimensions. The following shall be the minimum parking space dimensions: 
Angle Width Length Aisle Width 90 degrees 9 feet 19 feet 24 feet 60 degrees 9 feet 19 feet 20 feet 45 degrees 9 feet 19 feet 20 feet Parallel 8 feet 20 feet N/A  
(2)  Within structures. The off-street parking requirements may be furnished by providing spaces so designed within the principal building or structure attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no building permit shall be used to convert the parking structure into a dwelling unit or living area or other activity until other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this article. 
(3)  Circulation between bays. Except in the case of single-, two-family, townhouse, triplex and quadraminium dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley. Except in the case of single-family, two-family, townhouse, triplex and quadraminium dwellings, parking area design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited. 
(4)  Preserving off-site parking. When required accessory off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot in which the same ownership or control, either by deed or long-term lease, as the property occupied by such principal use, the owner of the principal use shall file a recordable document with the city requiring the owner and their heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of off-street spaces during the existence of the principal use. 
(5)  Driveways required. All off-street parking spaces shall have access from driveways and not directly from the public street. Parking areas or circulation drives shall be setback according to the standards in the applicable zoning district but at least five feet from any lot line. 
(6)  Distance from intersection. No curb cut access shall be located less than 40 feet from the intersection of 2 or more street rights-of-way. This distance shall be measured from the intersection of lot lines. 
(7)  Curb cut width. No curb cut access shall exceed 24 feet in width unless approved by the city engineer. 
(8)  Distance between curb cuts. Driveway access curb opening on a public street except for single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings shall not be located less than 40 feet from one another. 
(9)  Number of curb cuts. Each property shall be allowed one curb cut access for each 100 feet of street frontage. All property shall be entitled to at least one curb cut. Single-family uses shall be limited to one curb cut access per property. These conditions shall apply unless otherwise granted approval by the city council. 
(10)  Grade. The grade elevation of any parking area shall not exceed five percent. 
(11)  Surfacing. All areas intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete. Except in the case of farm dwellings and operations, driveways and stalls shall be surfaced. Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways and stalls for five or more vehicles shall be submitted to the city engineer for their review and the final drainage plan shall be subject to written approval by the city engineer. 
(12)  Striping. Except for single-family, two-family, triplex, and quadraminiums, all parking stalls shall be marked with painted lines not less than four inches wide. 
(13)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting residential uses and public rights-of-way and be in compliance with this article. 
(14)  Signs. No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sightlines and orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking lot. All signs shall conform to the city sign code. 
(15)  Curbing and landscaping. 
a.  Except for single-family, two-family, triplex, and quadraminimums, all open off-street parking shall have a perimeter concrete curb around the entire parking lot. Landscaping or surfacing material shall be provided in all areas bordering the parking area. 
b.  Landscaping shall comply with the standards in section 38-601. 
c.  Berming designed to comply with the standards in section 38-601 can also be used. 
d.  Side yard landscaping requirements for parking areas may be reduced if the developer proposes to locate their parking area next to an existing or proposed parking lot on an adjacent parcel owned by others and the owners have a written agreement to allow joint parking and a common driveway. However, only the common boundary to be used for parking will qualify. In such case, the sum of the parking areas of the two owners will determine the landscaping requirements within the total parking area. Parking areas and driveways shall have concrete curb and gutter according to standards provided by the city engineer. 
(c)  Maintenance. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the lessee and owner of the principal use, uses or building to maintain, in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, access ways, striping, landscaping, and required fences. Parking lots existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be exempt from the requirement. 
(d)  Use of required area. Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, or storage of inoperable vehicles without a conditional use permit. 
(e)  Number of spaces required. The following minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement or lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  Single-family or two-family dwellings: two off-street spaces per unit. 
(2)  Townhouse, four-family, and eight-family buildings: a minimum of two off-street spaces per dwelling unit for residents' use, plus a minimum of one-half off-street space per dwelling unit for visitors' use, in common, with the following consideration: if the housing is located on a public street, some credit may be given by the city council for visitors' parking due to available space on the adjacent street. 
(3)  Apartment buildings: at least two off-street spaces per unit plus visitor parking as required by the city council. 
(4)  Motels, motor hotels, and hotels: one space per each rental unit, plus one space for each ten units and one additional space for each employee on any shift, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses contained within the principal structure. 
(5)  Church, theater, auditorium: at least one parking space for each four seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall. Facilities as may be provided in conjunction with such buildings or uses shall be subject to additional requirements which are imposed by this article. 
(6)  Senior housing: 
a.  Independent living housing unit: one space per unit. 
b.  Assisted living or memory care housing unit: 0.4 space per unit. 
c.  At least 35 percent of the parking spaces must be provided in a surface lot so that they can be shared among visitors and staff. 
(7)  Convenience food restaurant: at least two parking spaces for each table. 
(8)  Bowling alley: at least five parking spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses contained within the principal structure. 
(9)  Motor fuel station: at least four off-street parking spaces, plus two off-street parking spaces for each service stall. Those facilities designed for sale of items other than strictly automotive products, parts or service shall be required to provide additional parking in compliance with other applicable articles of this chapter. 
(10)  Retail store and service establishment: at least one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
(11)  Manufacturing, fabricating or processing of a product or material: one space for each 350 square feet of floor area, plus one space for each company-owned truck (if not stored inside principal building), plus visitors' parking. 
(12)  Warehousing, storage or handling of bulk goods: one space for each employee on maximum shift and one space for each company-owned truck (if not stored inside principal building), plus visitors' parking. 
(13)  Research or testing facilities: one space per employee on the major shift, plus one space for each company-owned truck, plus visitors' parking. 
(14)  Car wash (in addition to required stacking space): 
a.  Automatic drive through, serviced: a maximum of ten spaces, or one space for each employee on the maximum shift, whichever is greater. 
b.  Self-service: a minimum of two spaces per stall. 
c.  Motor fuel station car wash: none in addition to that required for the station. 
(15)  Private racquetball, handball, and tennis courts: not less than three spaces per each court. 
(16)  Offices (in addition to visitors' parking): 
Gross Square Feet of Floor Area Spaces per 1,000 Square Feet of Floor Area To 20,000 6 20,000 to 100,000 5 Over 100,000 5  
(17)  Medical and dental offices: six spaces for each doctor or dentist, plus one per employee. 
(18)  Restaurants, taverns: one space for each three seats, plus one for each two employees. 
(19)  Nursing home: at least one space for each three beds, plus spaces for outpatient physical therapy (if any). 
(f)  Joint use of parking facilities. 
(1)  Up to 80 percent of the parking facilities required by this article for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities by the following daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses. 
(2)  The following conditions are required for joint use: 
a.  The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within 300 feet of such parking facilities. 
b.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
c.  A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and manner of execution by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk and recorded with the register of deeds of Ramsey County. 
(g)  Off-site parking. 
(1)  Any off-site parking which is used to meet the requirements of this article shall be a conditional use as regulated by this article and shall be subject to the conditions listed below. 
(2)  Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all requirements and standards of this article. 
(3)  Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use being served shall be provided. 
(4)  The site used for meeting the off-site parking requirements of this article is under the same ownership as the principal use being served or under public ownership. 
(5)  Off-site parking for multiple-family dwellings shall not be located more than 100 feet from any normally used entrance of the principal use served. 
(6)  Off-site parking for nonresidential uses shall not be located more than 300 feet from the main entrance of the principal use being served. No more than one main entrance shall be recognized for each principal building. 
(7)  Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this article shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the off-site location until such time as on-site parking is provided or a site in closer proximity to the principal use is acquired and developed for parking. 
(Code 1999, § 20.080) 
Sec. 38-611. - Off-street loading. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  All required loading berths shall be off-street and located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. 
(2)  Except for loading berths required for apartments, no loading berth shall be located closer than 50 feet from a residential district unless within a structure. 
(3)  Loading berths shall not occupy the front yard setbacks. 
(4)  Loading berths located at the front or at the side of buildings on a corner lot shall observe the following requirements: 
a.  Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement. 
b.  Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from off-street parking access. 
c.  Loading berths shall comply with all other requirements of this article. 
(5)  Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will cause the least interference with traffic. 
(b)  Screening. Except in the case of multiple dwellings, all loading areas shall be screened from abutting and surrounding residential uses in compliance with the standards in section 38-601. 
(Code 1999, § 20.090) 
Sec. 38-612. - Farming operations. 
    All farms in existence upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be a permitted use where the operator can conduct a farming operation. However, all regulations contained herein and other city regulations in effect shall apply to all changes of the farming operation which will cause all or part of the area to become more intensively used or more urban in character. Setback and other regulations shall apply to farming operations just as they do to urban developments. The city council may require any farm operation to secure a conditional use permit to continue the operations in the event the farming operations are so intensive as to constitute an industrial-type use consisting of the compounding, processing, and packaging of products for wholesale or retail trade and, further, that such operations may tend to become a permanent industrial-type operation that cannot be terminated as can a normal farming operation. 
(Code 1999, § 20.100) 
Sec. 38-613. - Land reclamation, mining and soil processing. 
    Land reclamation, mining, soil processing, filling, and excavation shall only be performed by permit in accordance with chapter 28, article III and chapter 30, article IV. 
(Code 1999, § 20.110) 
Sec. 38-614. - Glare. 
    Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign or other structure, shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high-temperature processes, such as combustion or welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. 
(Code 1999, § 20.120) 
Sec. 38-615. - Smoke. 
    The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Regulation APC 1-15, as amended. 
(Code 1999, § 20.130) 
Sec. 38-616. - Dust and other particulated matter. 
    The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulated matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Regulation MPCA 1-15, as amended. 
(Code 1999, § 20.140) 
Sec. 38-617. - Odors. 
    The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulation MPCA 1-15, as amended. 
(Code 1999, § 20.150) 
Sec. 38-618. - Noise. 
    Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with existing noise regulations and also standards as promulgated by the state pollution control agency. 
(Code 1999, § 20.152) 
Sec. 38-619. - Bulk storage (liquid). 
    All uses associated with the bulk storage of all gasoline, oil, liquid fertilizer, chemical, flammable and similar liquids shall comply with requirements of the state fire marshal and state department of agriculture offices and have documents from those offices stating the use is in compliance. 
(Code 1999, § 20.160) 
Sec. 38-620. - Radiation emission. 
    All activities that emit radioactivity shall comply with the minimum requirements of the state pollution control agency. 
(Code 1999, § 20.170) 
Sec. 38-621. - Electrical emission. 
    All activities which create electrical emissions shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Code 1999, § 20.180) 
Sec. 38-622. - Building heights. 
    Any building proposed to exceed the maximum height restrictions contained in the underlying zoning district may be allowed by a conditional use permit subject to section 38-43 and the following considerations: 
(1)  Compatibility with the height of the surrounding structures; 
(2)  The presence of trees or vegetation to soften the height; 
(3)  Interruption of view sheds; and 
(4)  The ability of fire and emergency personnel and equipment to access the site and structure. 
(Code 1999, § 20.190; Ord. No. 729 , § XVII, 9-18-2018) 
Sec. 38-623. - Microbreweries and micro-distilleries. 
    The uses shall be allowed based on the applicable zoning district, in compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The establishment shall contain a taproom or cocktail room, in compliance with the following conditions: 
a.  A minimum of 25 percent of the floor area is provided for sales, tasting, or restaurant purposes. 
b.  The use shall be open to the public at least two days or eight hours per week. 
c.  The hours of operation shall be limited to the hours specified in M.S.A. § 340A.504 or those contained in the applicable zoning district, whichever is more restrictive, or as further limited by the city council as part of the conditional use permit. 
d.  The product sold for consumption shall be produced on the licensed premises. 
(2)  The use shall obtain all applicable state and city licenses. 
(3)  Production reports shall be provided to the city with annual licensing requests. 
(4)  The use shall be compliant with all applicable regulations, performances standards, and procedures contained within this article. 
(5)  The city council may set forth additional conditions to mitigate any undue negative impacts to the public and surrounding properties. 
(Code 1999, § 20.220) 
Sec. 38-624. - Medical marijuana distribution facilities. 
    This use shall be allowed based on the applicable zoning district, in compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The sale of any products other than medical marijuana within the facility and the sale of non-medical marijuana is prohibited. 
(2)  All distribution facilities shall be at least 1,000 feet from any existing K-12 schools and existing commercial daycare facilities as measured between buildings. 
(3)  Only one distribution facility per 10,000, or fraction thereof, of city residents shall be allowed. 
(4)  The following security measures shall be required: 
a.  During all hours of operation, there shall be at least one licensed, uniformed security guard present and visible on all premises. 
b.  The facility shall operate and maintain in good working order a closed-circuit television (CCCT) surveillance system on its premises that operates 24 hours per day, seven days per week, and visually records all areas that might contain plant material or medical marijuana, including all safes and vaults and all points of entry and exit, including sales and clinic areas. 
c.  The facility shall install and maintain a professionally-monitored security alarm system that provides intrusion and fire detection of all entrances and exits. The alarm system must remain operational during a power outage. 
d.  The facility shall be equipped with an electronically-controlled access that limits access to the building to authorized individuals, tracks personnel entry and exit times, locks down the distribution facility in the event of a security threat, stores data for retrieval, remains operational during a power outage and is capable of remote administration. 
(5)  In addition to the submittal requirements stated in the conditional use permit application section, operating documents that describe operational and management practices shall be submitted, including: 
a.  Security measures to deter and prevent theft of medical marijuana. 
b.  Disposal methods for all waste material. 
c.  Response plans for measures to be taken in the event of a security breach at a distribution facility, or while medical marijuana is en route to a distribution facility. 
d.  Proposed product delivery plan. 
e.  Other information deemed necessary and requested by the city. 
Secs. 38-625-38-653. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT USES 

Sec. 38-654. - Adult uses; background, intent, and purpose. 
(a)  The state attorney general prepared a report entitled "Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses," dated June 6, 1989. The report considered evidence from studies conducted in Minneapolis and St. Paul and in other cities throughout the country relating to sexually-oriented businesses, also called adult establishments. 
(b)  The attorney general's report, based upon the above referenced studies and testimony presented to it concluded "that sexually-oriented businesses are associated with high crime rates and depression of property values." In addition, the attorney general's working group ". . .heard testimony that the character of a neighborhood can dramatically change when there is a concentration of sexually-oriented businesses adjacent to residential property." The report concluded that: 
(1)  Adult uses have an impact on the neighborhoods surrounding them, which is distinct from the impact caused by other commercial uses; 
(2)  Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity to adult theaters, bookstores and other adult uses experience increased crime rates (sex-related crimes in particular), lowered property values, increased transiency, and decreased stability of ownership; 
(3)  The adverse impacts which adult uses have on surrounding areas diminish as the distance from the adult use increases; 
(4)  Studies of other cities have shown that among the crimes which tend to increase either within or in the near vicinity of adult uses are rapes, prostitution, child molestation, indecent exposure and other lewd and lascivious behavior; 
(5)  The City of Phoenix, Arizona study confirmed that the sex crime rate was, on the average, 500 percent higher in areas with sexually-oriented businesses; 
(6)  Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult uses are located as less safe than other areas which do not have such uses; 
(7)  Studies of other cities have shown that the values of both commercial and residential properties either are diminished or fail to appreciate at the rate of other comparable properties when located in proximity to adult uses; 
(8)  The Indianapolis, Indiana study established that professional real estate appraisers believe that an adult bookstore would have a negative effect on the value of both residential and commercial properties within a one to three block area of the store; 
(9)  The adverse impacts of adult uses are exacerbated when the uses are located near each other; and 
(10)  The presence of liquor establishments in the immediate vicinity of adult uses also compounds the adverse impacts on the neighborhood. 
(c)  The city council finds that the characteristics of the city are similar to those of the cities cited by the report when considering the effects of adult uses. 
(d)  The city council finds, based upon the report and the studies cited therein, that adult uses would have secondary effects upon certain pre-existing land uses within the city. 
(e)  The city council directed that a study be undertaken of the existing zoning ordinance and other city regulations to address adult uses. The intent of the study was to determine how the city might reasonably amend the zoning ordinance to address the concerns raised by the studies cited and to offer reasonable alternative avenues of expression for the free speech activities guaranteed by recent Supreme Court rulings for adult uses. 
(f)  The city council finds, based on the above-cited zoning study, that adult uses could reasonably be allowed in the industrial district if separated from certain sensitive land uses, if those same sensitive land uses are not allowed in the industrial district, and if potential adult uses are separated from one another. The city council also finds that there are a reasonable number of distinct locations within the city's industrial districts where adult uses might locate and meet reasonable spacing standards from sensitive land uses and from one another. 
(Code 1999, § 21.010) 
Sec. 38-655. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult establishments means any establishment in which an adult use comprises more than ten percent of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located, or more than 20 percent of the gross receipts in any month for the entire business operation. 
    Adult use means any of the activities and businesses described below: 
    Body painting studio means an establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas. 
    Bookstore means a building, or portion of a building, used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, digital video discs (DVDs) or similar audio-video equipment, or motion picture film if such building, or portion of a building, excludes minors by reason of age, and if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Cabaret means a building, or portion of a building, for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building, or portion of a building, excludes minors by virtue of age and if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, or depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Car wash means a wash facility for any type of motor vehicle that allows employees, agents, independent contractors, or other persons to appear in a state of partial or total nudity in terms of specified anatomical areas. 
    Companionship establishment means a companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Conversation/rap parlor means a conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Health/sport club means a health or sport club which excludes minors by reason of age, if such club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Hotel or motel means a hotel or motel where minors are specifically excluded from patronage by reason of age and where material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Massage parlor, health club means a massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Mini-motion picture theater means a building, or portion of a building, with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The phrase "used for" in this definition means a regular and substantial course of conduct and not a one-time presentation of such material. 
    Miscellaneous means any establishment, business, or service whose products or services are substantially or significantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Modeling studio means an establishment whose major business is the provision to customers of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
    Motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically-, electrically- or mechanically-controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The phrase "used for" in this definition means a regular and substantial course of conduct and not a one-time presentation of such material. 
    Motion picture theater means a building, or portion of a building, with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material if such building, or portion of a building, as a prevailing practice excludes minors by reason of age and if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Novelty business means a business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation. 
    Sauna means a sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Steam room/bathhouse facility means a building, or portion of a building, used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building, or portion of a building, restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts of conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, or zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(5)  Situations involving a person, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually-revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Code 1999, § 21.020) 
Sec. 38-656. - Location of adult uses. 
    An adult establishment may be located only in the industrial district, but not less than 250 feet from the nearest property line of any land in a residential zone or in a planned unit development zone developed for residential use or an existing residential use, or of any daycare center, school, establishment with a liquor license, library, park, religious institution, playground or other public recreational facility in any zoning district, whether within the city limits or not. Further, no adult establishment may be located less than 500 feet from any other adult establishment district, whether within the city limits or not. Measurements shall be made in a direct line from the property line of the premises where each use is located. 
(Code 1999, § 21.030) 
Sec. 38-657. - Enforcement. 
    The city may enforce any provision of this article by mandamus, injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1999, § 21.040) 
Secs. 38-658-38-687. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 38-688. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect and promote the general welfare, health, safety and order within the city through the standards, regulations and procedures governing the erection, use or display of devices, signs or symbols serving as visual communicative media to persons situated within or upon public rights-of-way or properties. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are intended to encourage creativity, a reasonable degree of freedom of choice, an opportunity for effective communication and a sense of concern for the visual amenities on the part of those designing, displaying or otherwise utilizing needed communicative media of the types regulated by this article, while at the same time assuring that the public is not endangered or distracted by the unsafe, disorderly, indiscriminate or unnecessary use of such communicative facilities. 
(Code 1999, § 24.010) 
Sec. 38-689. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned sign means any sign, or its supporting sign structure, that remains without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period of 90 days or more; or any sign that pertains to a time, event or purpose that no longer applies. Any sign remaining after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed abandoned. 
    Address sign means postal identification numbers only, whether written or in numeric form, as required. 
    Advertising sign means an outdoor sign that portrays, through the use of words, letters or symbols, the type or name of any business conducted on the premises or the name of the individual firm, association, corporation or profession conducting business or selling of a product or service obtainable on the premises. 
    Animated sign means a sign that features moving parts or electronically controlled changeable messages, either illuminated or not illuminated. 
    Area identification sign means a sign that identifies a group of housing units or office, commercial or industrial buildings that are three or more in number. 
    Awning means a sheet of canvas, vinyl, metal, or other material on a frame and used to keep the sun or rain off a storefront, window, doorway, or deck. 
    Awning sign means a sign that is painted or attached to an awning. 
    Banners means attention-getting devices that resemble flags and are of a paper, cloth or plastic-like consistency. 
    Bench signs means a sign that is affixed to a bench or shelter at a bus stop. 
    Billboard means an off-premises advertising sign in excess of 340 square feet designed to display posters or other composite graphic advertisements for products or services sold elsewhere. 
    Boutique sale means the sale of handmade items created by the person residing on the premises. The term "boutique sale" may also include several persons, including the person residing on the premises, selling their handmade items. A boutique sale does not include the sale of commercially manufactured merchandise. 
    Building means a freestanding structure, or group of structures, joined by common walls. 
    Bulletin sign means a sign which announces available goods or services through the use of changeable letters. This sign may be freestanding, mounted on the same post as a business identification sign, wall-mounted, or portable. It may be illuminated or not. 
    Canopy and marquee means a roof-like structure projecting over the entrance to a theater, store, etc. 
    Clear view triangle means a triangle formed by connecting the three following points: the point of intersection of the extensions of the curblines or edge of the traveled portion of each street or drive aisle, and a point on each curbline 30 feet from the aforementioned point of intersection. 
    Channel letter means a three-dimensional letter with sides and a translucent front face that is capable of transmitting light form an internal source behind the letter. 
    Directional sign means a sign that designates the direction of any place or area and is located on the same lot as the place or area. Examples include entrance and exit signs. 
    Display means a three-dimensional object intended to attract attention, announce a location or otherwise convey a message. May be designed to be temporary or permanent. 
    District means a specific zoning district as defined in this article. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign with two faces, each oriented 180 degrees from the other. 
    Dynamic sign means a sign that appears to have movement or that appears to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components. This includes any display that incorporates a method or technology that allows the image on the sign face to change without physically or mechanically replacing the sign face or its components. This also includes signs containing parts that rotate, revolve, move, flash, blink, utilize light emitting diode (LED) or liquid crystal display (LCD) lights, or any other technology that allows the sign to display a series of images. 
    Flag means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols used as a symbol of a government or a political subdivision. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign whose baser is embedded into the ground and not attached to a building. 
    Incidental sign means a sign that has a purpose secondary to the use of the property on which it is located such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," and other similar information. 
    Institutional sign means any sign or bulletin board which identifies the name and other characteristics of a public or private institution on the site where the sign is located. 
    Mansard roof means a gambrel-style hip roof that is usually ornamental only, usually not functional as a roof, and, when used on a commercial buildings, acts as a false front. On a residence, a mansard roof is normally used on all four sides and functions as a two-slope hip roof. 
    Menu board means an outdoor sign that lists available offerings for drive-through customers at a retail business to enable customers to order from that menu. 
    Mobile sign. See Portable sign. 
    Monument sign means a freestanding sign that is roughly rectangular in shape and with a base that contacts the ground along its full width; may have one or two faces. 
    Motion sign means any sign which revolves or rotates, has moving parts, has changing messages, or displays a shimmering effect. Included in this category are searchlights used for advertisement. 
    Multiple-faced signs means a sign with more than two faces. 
    Mural means an artistic painting applied to the exterior wall of a building for the purpose of beautification; a mural does not include the name or logo of a company or product. 
    Nameplate or identification sign means a sign which bears the name or address of the occupants of the building. 
    Nonconforming sign means any lawfully established sign, which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or amendment thereof, does not comply with the sign regulations of the zoning district in which such sign is located. 
    Off-premises advertising sign means a sign advertising goods, services, or facilities available at a different location from where the sign is installed. 
    Panel sign means a sign composed of letters attached to or embossed on a plastic or glass panel, usually illuminated from the rear. 
    Pennants means attention-getting devices which resemble triangular or rectangular flags, and are of non-permanent paper, cloth or plastic-like consistency. 
    Permanent sign means any sign which is not a temporary sign. 
    Pole sign means a freestanding sign that is supported by one or two poles or columns. 
    Political campaign sign means a temporary sign that may be freestanding or mounted on a wall and is used to promote a political candidate or position during the campaign season prescribed by state law. 
    Portable sign means a sign so designed as to be movable from one location to another which is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure. 
    Private traffic directional sign means a sign which is erected on private property by the owner of such property for the purpose of guiding vehicular and pedestrian traffic within their property. Such sign bears no advertising information. 
    Projecting sign means any sign, all or part of which extends perpendicular by more than 24 inches from the wall to which it is affixed. 
    Public traffic directional sign means a sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purpose of directing or guiding traffic. 
    Pylon sign means a freestanding sign greater than 40 feet in height. 
    Roofline means the upper-most edge of the roof, or in the case of an extended facade or parapet, the upper-most heights of the facade. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected upon or projecting above the roofline of a structure to which it is affixed. 
    Sandwich board sign means a freestanding A-frame sign that does not require staking into the ground. 
    Seasonal sign means a sign that is intended to be used for a limited duration and that announces the availability of goods or services specific to that time of year. 
    Shopping center sign means a sign that identifies a group of shops or offices that number six or more. 
    Sign means any letter, word or symbol, device, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter or representation in the nature of an advertisement, announcement, message or visual communication whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed, or dynamic, changing messages or electronically illuminated moving or streaming text, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes. 
    Sign face area means that area within the marginal lines of the surface that bears the name, advertisement, messages, figures or symbols, and which is included in the smallest rectangle that can be made to circumscribe the message, figure or symbol. The stipulated maximum sign area for a freestanding sign refers to a single face. Also referred to as the term "sign area." 
    Spandrel means a roof-like structure that covers the gasoline pump dispenser below a service area canopy and which is a lighting source for the dispensing area; it serves to identify the gasoline pumps by number and may display signage. 
    Streaming text message signs means any sign subsidiary to a freestanding business identification sign that is illuminated by a single-color artificial light source and that has letters, words, numbers or symbols that may appear as streaming, moving or scrolling text. Not the same as a dynamic sign. 
    Street frontage means the proximity of a parcel of and to one or more streets. An interior lot has one street frontage and a corner lot has two such frontages. 
    Temporary banners means a banner which is displayed for a limited period of time. The term "temporary banners" does not include flags. 
    Temporary sign means a sign which is erected or displayed for a limited period of time. 
    Wall sign means any sign which is affixed to a wall of any building. 
    Way finding sign means a sign, usually off-premises, that provides directional or destination information. See also Directional sign. 
    Window sign means a temporary sign that is displayed in a window with the purpose of announcing the availability of goods or services, pricing or other business features. The term "window sign" does not include hours of operation, address, use of credit cards or association membership when displayed in an incidental manner. 
(Code 1999, § 24.020) 
Sec. 38-690. - General provisions applicable to signs in all districts where allowed. 
(a)  Construction, maintenance and removal. 
(1)  Construction specifications. 
a.  All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the state building code. 
b.  All illuminated signs shall be approved and labeled as conforming to the standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., the United States Bureau of Standards or other similar institutions of recognized standing. All illuminating elements shall be kept in satisfactory working condition or immediately repaired or replaced. Signs that are partly illuminated shall meet all electrical requirements for that portion which is illuminated. 
c.  All permanent freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on and permanently attached to concrete foundations. 
d.  For wall signs, the wall must be designed for and have sufficient strength to support the sign. 
(2)  Sign maintenance and repair. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all times, including the replacement of defective parts, cleaning and other items required for maintenance of the sign. Vegetation around, in front of, and behind the base of billboards and freestanding (ground) signs for a distance of ten feet shall, at all times, be neatly trimmed to a height of ten inches or less and free of weeds, and no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard or visual detriment shall be permitted under or near the sign. 
(3)  Abandoned signs and signs in disrepair. An abandoned sign or signs in disrepair are prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the premises within 30 days after notification. If compliance with the provisions of this section is not achieved within 30 days, the city may remove the sign as a public nuisance by following the procedure as specified in section 22-7. If an abandoned sign remains in good condition and without holes or other evidence of disrepair or damage, the sign shall not be considered abandoned until after a period of one year. 
(4)  Signs on public property or within public road rights-of-way. The city may, at any time and without notice, impound signs which have been installed on public property or closer to the public road than allowed by this article. The sign owner may retrieve the signs according to the following: 
a.  A fee must be paid to the city as provided in the city fee schedule. For each subsequent impoundment in a calendar year, the specified fee shall be doubled. 
b.  The sign shall be retrieved from a designated impound area during routine business hours and within 15 days from the date of impounding. After 15 days, the city will dispose of the sign. 
c.  The city shall not be held liable for any damage to impounded signs. 
(b)  Illumination. 
(1)  The building official, in granting permits for illuminated signs, shall specify the hours during which the same may be kept lighted when necessary to prevent the creation of a nuisance. All illuminated signs shall have a shielded light source. 
(2)  Any sign illuminated and located within 100 feet of a lot line of a residence shall be diffused or indirect so as not to reflect direct rays of light into adjacent residences or a street. All illuminated signs in commercial or industrial zoning districts in close proximity to residential zoning districts shall be designed so as to illuminate the sign and not residential property to the extent practicable. 
(c)  Interference with traffic safety. No sign other than traffic control, directional, or street name sign shall be erected or temporarily placed closer to a public street than allowed by this article, except for temporary street signs erected by a site developer. No sign may be erected in the clear view triangle as defined in this article. No person, other than an employee or duly authorized agent of the city, shall erect a sign purporting to be a street name sign within the corporate limits of the city. A permit for a sign to be located within 50 feet of any street or highway regulatory or warning sign, or of any traffic sign or signal, or of any crossroad or crosswalk, will be issued only if: 
(1)  The sign will not interfere with the ability of drivers and pedestrians to see any street or highway sign, or any traffic sign or signal, or any crossroad or crosswalk; and 
(2)  The sign will not distract drivers, nor offer any confusion to any street or highway sign, or any traffic sign or signal. 
(d)  Setback measurement. Sign setback is measured from the nearest edge of a sign to the vertical plane of the property line or other designated point of reference. 
(Code 1999, § 24.030) 
Sec. 38-691. - Signs prohibited in all districts. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Dynamic signs, except as allowed under sections 38-693(i) and 38-699. 
(2)  Temporary or permanent illuminated flashing signs, moving or swinging signs, illuminated revolving beacons, zip flashers, or similar devices. 
(3)  Inflatable signs. 
(4)  Off-premises permanent or temporary advertising signs other than the following: 
a.  Highway billboards as described and regulated by section 38-699; 
b.  Off-premises freestanding monument signs on city-owned property as regulated by section 38-693(v); and 
c.  Off-premises wall signs for sponsors of sports arenas and similar public or quasi-public facilities as regulated by section 38-393(f)(4). 
(5)  Rooftop signs, including signs on mansard roofs. 
(6)  Pennants, balloons and banners, except banners as regulated under commercial promotion temporary signs. 
(7)  Portable signs except as allowed in section 38-693. 
(8)  Projecting signs. 
(9)  Signs that include off-premises sponsor advertising (such as the name of a soft-drink or beer product on a restaurant sign). 
(10)  Signs attached to or painted on a fence, tree, or stone. 
(11)  Signs attached to a public sign. 
(12)  Signs closer to a public road than allowed by this article. 
(13)  Signs that contain vulgarity or an indecent picture or message. 
(14)  Signs held or worn by humans in the public street right-of-way. 
(Code 1999, § 24.040) 
Sec. 38-692. - Signs that do not require a permit. 
(a)  The city council finds that allocating public funds and staff resources to those signs that present the most public safety and aesthetic problems will better achieve the overall purpose of this section. Requiring a permit for every type of sign in the city would unduly tax staff resources, thus diluting the overall enforcement of this section. Therefore, the city council finds that the following signs shall be regulated pursuant to this section, but shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a sign permit and from the payment of a permit fee. 
(b)  No sign permit shall be required for the signs listed in this section, provided that the sign is permitted in the zoning district in which the sign is placed and the requirements for the particular type of sign are satisfied. If the requirements of this section are not met, a permit must be requested. 
(c)  Name change signs. No sign permit shall be required when a new sign merely involves changing the name of a business and the new sign is substantially the same area, height and style of the sign it is replacing and the new sign conforms to the regulations of this article. 
(d)  Other signs. In addition to the foregoing, no permit shall be required for the following signs: 
(1)  Address signs. 
(2)  Boutique sale signs. 
(3)  Building markers. 
(4)  Campaign signs. 
(5)  Construction or future development signs. 
(6)  Cornerstones and building date markers. 
(7)  Employment signs. 
(8)  Flags, noncommercial. 
(9)  Garage sale signs. 
(10)  Government, public school and public utility signs. 
(11)  Home improvement, construction or remodeling signs. 
(12)  Home security signs. 
(13)  Home occupation signs. 
(14)  Interior signs. 
(15)  Real estate signs for single- or two-family residential dwellings or lots. 
(16)  Real estate signs for uses other than single-family dwellings or lots. 
(17)  Residential name plates. 
(18)  Special event signs at public or semi-public places. 
(19)  Window signs. 
(Code 1999, § 24.050) 
Sec. 38-693. - General regulations by type of sign. 
(a)  Address signs. 
(1)  Each principal building on a parcel shall have a street number sign. 
(2)  Street number signs shall be displayed as regulated by section 8-63. 
(3)  If a building is part of a cluster of buildings that uses internal private streets such that a building does not face a public street, there must be a freestanding sign along the public street that lists the addresses in the cluster and internal signs that provide direction to the numbered buildings on the site. 
(b)  Apartment building identification signs. 
(1)  There may be one sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area permitted for each apartment building. Home occupation information may be placed on the residential name plate. 
(2)  The name plate shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Awning signs. 
(1)  Only business or organization names, logos, graphics, general products, or services shall be allowed on awnings. No brand names of products or services shall be allowed to be advertised. 
(2)  Awning signs shall be considered wall signs for the purpose of calculating the maximum allowable sign area and individual sign size limitations. General graphics shall not be considered towards the maximum allowable sign area or individual sign size limitations; however, any business or organization names, logos, or graphics that identify the specific business or organization or general products and services sold will be considered towards the maximum allowable sign area and individual sign size limitations. 
(d)  Boutique sale signs. 
(1)  The maximum size is six square feet in total surface area and three feet in height. 
(2)  There is a maximum of one sign per boutique sale. 
(3)  The sign must be installed on property having the sale. 
(4)  Signs must be placed at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. 
(5)  The boutique sale signs are allowed only twice each calendar year per site and the signs are permitted for a maximum of four days each occurrence. 
(e)  Bulletin signs. 
(1)  Non-portable bulletin signs. 
a.  Non-portable bulletin signs may have individual face areas of up to 25 square feet or 50 percent of the area of the face of the business' identification sign, whichever is less. 
b.  Freestanding non-portable bulletin signs are to be no closer than eight feet to the ground. 
(2)  Portable bulletin signs. 
a.  Portable bulletin signs are allowed for up to 30 days per year, per business. 
b.  Such signs are allowed by permit only and a refundable deposit of $50.00. 
c.  Such signs must be removed on the day indicated on the permit, or the deposit will not be refunded. 
d.  The maximum area per sign face is 40 square feet. 
e.  Such signs must be placed on private property and setback at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, or as determined by the city enforcement official or building inspector. 
f.  Such signs must be located on-site and at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. 
(f)  Commercial, charitable or civic promotion temporary signs. The city council finds that many businesses, charitable organizations and civic bodies have temporary promotions during the year that last for a limited duration and that these organizations typically feel the need to publicize the promotions with temporary signs. The following regulations address that need: 
(1)  Banners. Temporary banners for events such as grand openings or special sales are allowed for up to 30 days per year per business. Such signs are allowed by permit only and a refundable deposit in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. Such banners must be firmly attached to the wall surface of the business and may cover no more than five percent of the wall surface area of any face of the building. Such banners must be of durable material and must not interfere with the safe operation of the building or the site. 
(2)  Portable bulletin signs. Portable bulletin signs are allowed as described in this section. 
(3)  Other portable signs. Other temporary portable signs are fabricated in a variety of methods and may or may not include changeable letters. Such signs: 
a.  May not be placed within ten feet of the edge of the public road pavement or curb, on utility poles or attached to public traffic signs. Signs in illegal locations may be confiscated by the city and a penalty applied according to section 1-14. 
b.  May be allowed for up to a total of 30 days per year per business or organization. 
c.  Must be on private property or at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater, as determined by the city enforcement official. 
(4)  Signs for special events to be held at public or semi-public places. 
a.  Shall be subject to the regulations of this article addressing portable bulletin signs and other portable signs. However, a local service organization promoting a city-endorsed activity or event may place signs on city property, not including street rights-of-way, with prior city approval. 
b.  Such signs shall be temporary; they may be installed up to 30 days before the event and must be removed within three days after the event. 
c.  Special event signs shall be limited to three events per calendar year per organization. 
(5)  Public and charitable organizations. Public and charitable organizations are subject to these regulations as well as commercial organizations. 
(g)  Construction or future development signs. A temporary sign may be erected for the purpose of selling or promoting a residential, commercial or industrial project, provided: 
(1)  Such signs shall not exceed 60 square feet in area per side; 
(2)  Only one sign shall be permitted per street frontage upon which the property abuts; 
(3)  Such signs shall be removed when the project is 80 percent completed, sold or leased or within two years, whichever is shorter; and 
(4)  Such signs shall be located no closer than 30 feet to any pre-existing residence. 
(h)  Directional signs, on-site. Directional signs such as entrance, exit, or drive-through signs may be installed on private property, provided: 
(1)  Drivers' views are not obstructed at intersections. 
(2)  Individual tenants are not identified. 
(3)  The face area of such signs is limited to eight square feet. 
(4)  The height is limited to four feet. 
(5)  The sign is set or at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater, and five feet from any other property line. 
(6)  Walls signs shall be only high enough to be visible to on-site users. Wall signs may be larger than freestanding signs if only visible to on-site viewers. 
(i)  Dynamic signs. 
(1)  The signs are maintained as prescribed in this article. 
(2)  The sign does not have displays which move, rotate, stream, scroll, flash or contain movement, or the appearance of movement, unless specifically provided for under subsections (i)(7) and (8) of this section. 
(3)  The sign illumination levels are reasonable and compatible with the adjacent properties. 
(4)  The signs do not create distractions which are considered detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety. 
(5)  The signs comply with the height, size, arrangement, setback, location, and other applicable provisions of this article and the district in which the sign is located. 
(6)  The signs may be used as the principal business sign or for tenant signs within the districts, where permitted, provided that the sign display element changes in its entirety and does not change more frequently than once every 24 hours. 
(7)  A portion of the principal sign or a separate subsidiary sign to the principal business or tenant signs within the districts, where permitted, may be used as a temporary single or multiple message board only, provided that the temporary message sign display element does not change more frequently than once every 15 seconds. A change in dynamic sign means any alteration, addition, or deletion to any part of the text or graphics. 
(8)  A portion of a dynamic sign used as the principal sign or a separate subsidiary sign to the principal business or tenant signs within the districts, where permitted, may be allowed as a moving or streaming text message board sign as set forth under section 38-693(dd), and only if specifically allowed by the underlying zoning district. 
(j)  Employment signs. Temporary signs to announce employment opportunities at commercial or industrial sites: 
(1)  General provision. Temporary on-site signs to announce employment opportunities shall be allowed only in the office, office-business, industrial and highway business zoning districts. 
(2)  Maximum size and number. One such temporary sign shall be allowed. The maximum size for a temporary wall sign shall be 50 square feet. The maximum size for a freestanding sign shall be 24 square feet. 
(3)  Maximum height and minimum setbacks. Any temporary sign shall maintain a minimum setback of or at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. No temporary wall sign shall be placed above the highest outside wall. The maximum height for a temporary freestanding sign shall be six feet. 
(4)  Design. Banners may not be used. Such signs shall be made of standard sign materials. 
(5)  Time period for signage. Temporary signs to announce employment opportunities may be used at any time during the year. 
(k)  Flags, noncommercial. Noncommercial flags shall be placed on flagpoles. Such poles shall be no taller than 12 feet above the highest outside wall and the side yard setback of the pole shall be not less than the height of the pole. Flagpoles shall be placed at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. 
(l)  Freestanding signs. 
(1)  No freestanding sign may be closer than five feet to a property line. 
(2)  No freestanding sign shall be closer than 75 feet to another freestanding sign. 
(3)  There may be no more than one freestanding sign for each commercial development having a non-freeway frontage of 300 feet or less. One additional sign may be erected for each 300 feet of additional frontage. 
(4)  A second, subordinate sign shall not be allowed on any freestanding pole or pylon sign structure. 
(5)  If a freestanding shopping center sign lists the names of three or more individual tenants: 
a.  The total area of the shopping center name, plus tenants' names, cannot exceed the total allowable area of a freestanding sign. 
b.  Tenants' names must be displayed in the same typeface, method of illumination, and method of display (panel vs. individual letters) as one another. 
c.  The shopping center name and the tenants' names must be produced in the same materials, method of illumination, and method of display (panel vs. individual letters) as one another. 
d.  Tenants' names must be arranged in a rectangular grouping which does not extend horizontally beyond the edges of the shopping center name area. 
(6)  If a shopping center wishes to display the logotypes of its major tenants on its freestanding shopping center identification signs: 
a.  The total area of the various elements of the freestanding sign may not exceed the total allowable area of a freestanding sign. 
b.  No more than two tenants may be displayed in this manner on each freestanding shopping center identification sign. 
c.  The tenant logotypes and shopping center name (if included) shall be displayed on a single sign structure. 
d.  The tenant signs shall be designed and arranged to appear as an integrated whole; the proportions of the two signs shall be approximately equal; the materials, method of illumination, and method of display (individual letters vs. panel) should be the same; and both signs should be arranged in a rectangular area. 
(m)  Garage sale signs. 
(1)  Each sign is a maximum of six square feet in total surface area and three feet in height. 
(2)  There is a maximum of four signs per garage sale. 
(3)  If a sign is installed on property other than the property having the sale, the property owner having the garage sale must have the permission of the property owner where the sign is installed. 
(4)  Signs shall be placed at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. No signs may be attached to utility poles. 
(5)  The signs shall be removed within 24 hours of the end of the sale. 
(6)  The garage sale signs are allowed only three times each calendar year per site and the signs are permitted for a maximum of four days each occurrence. 
(n)  Gasoline service stations signs. The city council finds that gasoline service stations or convenience stores with gasoline sales have unique needs for signage, thus warranting the following special sign standards: 
(1)  Total site signage. 
a.  The maximum total site signage for a service station shall be 250 square feet. Except, if a service station has more than one frontage, the maximum total site signage shall be 350 square feet. 
b.  Total site signage includes all freestanding and wall identification signs. In no circumstance shall the total site signage amount be exceeded. 
(2)  Freestanding identification signs. 
a.  The types of freestanding signs permitted are pole, monument or pylon. 
b.  Maximum number of signs. 
1.  One freestanding pole or monument identification sign shall be permitted per street frontage. There shall be a maximum of two freestanding identification signs per lot, each oriented towards a different street frontage. 
2.  One pylon sign is allowed in addition to the freestanding signs for each gasoline service station or convenience store with gasoline sales that has an edge within 300 feet of the midpoint of interstate highway interchange. 
(3)  Maximum sign area and height. 
a.  Pole signs may be up to 50 square feet in area and 18 feet in height. 
b.  Monument signs may be up to 50 square feet in area and 12 feet in height. 
c.  Pylon signs may be up to 100 square feet and 65 feet in area in height. 
d.  Minimum setbacks, front. The minimum setback of the sign base shall be at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. 
e.  Minimum setbacks, side and rear. The minimum setback of the sign base shall be five feet from a side or rear property line. 
(4)  Canopy signs. 
a.  Maximum size and number of signs. Service area canopy signs are considered wall signs. Sign size shall be computed as under subsection (n) of this section. 
b.  Distance from side or rear lot line when abutting dwelling district. There shall be no required side or rear setbacks. 
(5)  Wall signs. 
a.  The allowable sign surface area for wall signs shall be ten feet of the total of the wall areas that face any lot line but with a maximum sign surface area of 100 square feet for all wall areas seen in one elevation. 
b.  Signs may be placed on a maximum of three sides, and each permitted sign shall be oriented toward its respective lot line. 
c.  The linear measurement of the sign shall not exceed 80 percent of the linear frontage of the facade of the structure. 
(6)  Window signs. Signs within a retail display window, or attached thereto, shall occupy no more than 30 percent of each retail display window. 
(7)  Spandrel or pump island signs. 
a.  Maximum size and number of signs. The maximum sign surface area shall not exceed two square feet per dispensing station, regardless of the number of hoses. The signage allowed per dispensing station may be combined into one sign on the spandrel. Signage is permitted on only two sides of the spandrel. 
b.  Pump island signs. In lieu of the spandrel sign, the gasoline service station may elect pump island signs or pump toppers. Pump island signs of two square feet or less are allowed without permits. Pump island signs greater than two square feet are not allowed. Signage is permitted on only two sides of the pump island sign. 
(8)  Other signs. All other signs shall be located on the site of the use. 
a.  Incidental signs. Each incidental sign shall be located at the point to which the sign is directed, i.e., service, body shop, etc. Only one sign for each subject shall be permitted. 
b.  Directional signs. See subsection (h) of this section. 
c.  No pennants or other similar attracting or advertising devices are permitted. 
d.  Signs on perimeter poles. Signs are not allowed on perimeter poles or other structures that are not expressly permitted in this section. 
e.  Commercial promotion temporary signs. 
f.  Signs prohibited at gasoline service stations are roof signs, roof-integral signs, projecting signs, awning signs, marquee signs, and suspended signs. 
(o)  Home improvement, construction or remodeling signs. 
(1)  There shall be only one such sign not exceeding six square feet in total surface area and four feet in height for each lot. 
(2)  Such sign shall be located on the lot the described activity is occurring and shall be a minimum of five feet from the property line. 
(3)  The sign shall be displayed only until approval of the final inspection or the project is substantially completed. 
(p)  Home occupation signs. Signs are limited to one name identification sign, mounted on the house wall and not larger in face area than two square feet. 
(q)  Home security signs. Home security signs shall not exceed one square foot in total sign surface area. 
(r)  Identification signs in shopping centers. 
(1)  If a canopy or other building overhang is used, each store may have an under-canopy identification sign, not exceeding eight square feet. 
(2)  Each store may have an identification sign on its door not exceeding four square feet. 
(s)  Interior signs. Interior signs shall be completely within a building and shall not be visible from the outside. 
(t)  Murals. 
(1)  Murals shall be used for artistic expression and not to directly identify or promote a business, product or service. 
(2)  The mural image shall not be offensive or indecent. 
(3)  The mural design shall be approved by the city council. 
(4)  Murals are allowed only in nonresidential zoning districts. 
(u)  Off-premises freestanding signs on city-owned property. 
(1)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, off-premises freestanding monument freeway signage shall be allowed on city-owned property in the city's office, office-business, and industrial districts for city-sponsored messages, or for businesses or other enterprises found to have a unique need for freeway signage or visibility, with a finding by the city council that such signs will promote the best interests of the city. 
(2)  Off-premises freestanding monument freeway signage on city-owned property shall be limited to one sign per 300 feet of roadway frontage. Each sign shall be no more than 40 feet in height above the freeway elevation and no more than 255 square feet in area per sign face, with no more than 100 square feet of sign area devoted to one business or enterprise. 
(3)  All off-premises freestanding monument freeway signage on city-owned property shall be owned and maintained by the city, for city purposes with space leased to businesses in the city center district. 
(4)  The use of any city-owned property for off-premises freestanding monument freeway signage shall be solely at the discretion of city council and no assumption is made or implied that any city-owned properties are available for such use, that a parcel once available shall be available for all time, nor that any business or enterprise desiring signage will be guaranteed a place on the city's signs. 
(5)  The city council will adopt appropriate guidelines for the appearance and content of the off-premises freestanding monument freeway signage, the method in which such signage will be made available to city center businesses, and all matters related to the maintenance of the signage. The city council shall adopt the guidelines by a four-fifths vote and any amendments to those guidelines shall also be made by four-fifths vote of the city council. 
(v)  Off-premises wall signs for sponsors of sports arenas and similar public or quasi-public facilities. 
(1)  Signs shall have a flat face and be affixed parallel to the exterior wall of the building. 
(2)  Signs shall not be back-lit, nor shall they include moving parts, lights, light-emitting diodes or changing images. 
(3)  Signs shall be set in a consistent horizontal or vertical band on the face of the building, harmonizing when possible with the wall surface pattern or texture. 
(4)  Signs may contain either company logotypes or generic lettering. 
(w)  Political campaign signs. Political campaign signs of any size may be posted in any number from 46 days before the state primary in a state general election year until ten days following the state general election, according to M.S.A. § 211B.045. Such signs shall not be attached to or painted on a fence, tree, stone or a public sign. 
(x)  Projecting signs. 
(1)  Projecting signs may extend no more than four feet from the front edge of the building and be no more than 12 square feet in area. 
(2)  Projecting signs may not extend over a designated parking space or loading area. 
(3)  Projecting signs may not extend from a building over the public right-of-way or public open space. 
(y)  Public park name identification signs. Public park signs shall be limited to a height of six feet and a face area of 24 square feet. 
(z)  Real estate sale or leasing signs for single- or two-family residential dwellings or lots. 
(1)  There shall be one sign per street frontage up to a maximum of two signs per lot. 
(2)  Such sign shall be located on the lot for sale or lease must be set on private property and at least 20 feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway. 
(3)  Such sign shall not exceed ten square feet in total surface area and six feet in height. 
(4)  Real estate signs shall not be illuminated and shall be removed within three days after closing or lease has occurred. 
(5)  Open house directional signs are allowed daily up to one hour before and one hour after the open house event. Such signs must be setback at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway. 
(6)  Residential development directional signs are commercial promotion temporary signs and must be setback at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway. Such signs must be removed when the development is 80 percent sold or rented. 
(aa)  Real estate sale or leasing signs for uses other than single-family dwellings or lots. 
(1)  General provision. The real estate sign shall be located on the site for sale or for lease and shall not be directly illuminated unless incorporated into the site's identification sign. 
(2)  For real estate signs adjacent to I-35E. The site may elect one of the following options, subject to the provisions of the clear view triangle area: 
a.  Incorporate the real estate sign into the permanent identification sign and increase the total allowed sign surface area by a maximum of 24 square feet. The 24 square feet addition to the identification sign can be used at the discretion of the property owner as long as the identification sign is used for any real estate information. No other real estate sign shall be allowed; or 
b.  One real estate sign not exceeding 32 square feet shall be permitted per street frontage up to a maximum of two signs per site. The maximum height shall be eight feet, and the sign setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. 
(3)  For signs on other street frontages. 
a.  The site may elect one of the following options, subject to provisions of the clear view triangle area: 
1.  Incorporate the real estate sign into the permanent identification sign and increase the total allowed sign surface area by a maximum of 16 square feet. The 16 square foot addition to the identification sign can be used at the discretion of the property owner, so long as the identification sign is utilized for any real estate information. No other real estate sign shall be allowed; or 
2.  One real estate sign not exceeding 16 square feet shall be permitted per street frontage up to a maximum of two signs per site. The maximum height shall be six feet and the sign setback shall be at least 20 feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway, whichever is greater. 
b.  If a site is allowed two real estate signs because it has two street frontages, both frontages shall use the same style option, either incorporating the real estate sign into the permanent identification signs or using a separate real estate sign. 
(4)  Residential development directional signs. Residential development directional signs are commercial promotion temporary signs and must be setback at least ten feet from the curbline or edge of the paved roadway. Such signs must be removed when the development is 80 percent sold or rented. 
(bb)  Residential neighborhood identification signs. 
(1)  Signs shall be limited to a face area of 32 square feet and a height of six feet. 
(2)  Signs shall not be illuminated. 
(cc)  Text message board signs, moving or streaming. 
(1)  Signs shall not have different colored lights (except as specifically permitted under this section) or flashing or intermittent lighting. 
(2)  All lighting sources, including light bulbs, LED or other similar devices, must be regularly maintained and serviced to provide full illumination and display of messages or text. 
(3)  Signs may display current time and temperature, and provide an equal amount of time for personal business messages or promotions and also community or nonprofit group messages, which announce a community-sponsored or special event. 
(4)  Any changing message or scrolling text must be gradual and slow enough to read in order to reduce any disturbance or interference with the safe movement of traffic. The city planning director shall approve all changing text or scrolling text movements and speeds. 
(5)  No moving or streaming text message board sign shall be closer than 1,000 feet to another similar style sign, except by variance granted under the provisions of this article. The property owner/tenant may request a variance for a lesser distance. 
(6)  The area and height of any sign shall comply with the provisions of each respective zoning district. Message board cabinets shall only be placed on monument or freestanding signs as allowed by this Code. 
(7)  Signs shall provide for aesthetic compatibility with surrounding properties. 
(8)  Signs shall be limited to letters, words, symbols and numbers only. Pictures and other displays are prohibited. 
(9)  Signs shall be limited to freestanding signs only. 
(10)  Signs shall not cause any disturbance or interference with the safe movement of traffic or otherwise adversely impact public safety. 
(dd)  Wall signs. 
(1)  Wall signs shall not exceed the height of a flat roof, mansard roof, or parapet wall, nor the wall height of a pitched-roof building. Wall signs are not allowed on mansard roofs. 
(2)  The total, cumulative area of signs on a wall may not exceed ten percent of the wall area in the C-1, neighborhood commercial zoning district, 15 percent in the C-2, community commercial district, 15 percent in the CC, city center district, and 25 percent in the C-3, highway business district. 
(3)  Wall signs must be limited to areas on the building facade that will allow the signs to harmonize with the overall building design and with the signs of other tenants sharing the same facade. That is, wall signs must be mounted in one of the following: either a horizontal band which stretches across the building facade above the window line, or in rectangular blocks of approximately equal area and consistent placement along the facade at window height, but not both. 
(4)  In a shopping center, only one type of design format may be used for wall signs which are on the same building facade. That is, all shops sharing the same facade must have either signs with individual letters or signs with a box or panel format. The type style of such signs does not have to be the same, only the method of display. 
(5)  When a number of small wall signs are grouped together, such as at the entrance of an interior mini-mall, those signs must be arranged in a framework or common display system which gives the impression of a single, larger sign. Type styles may differ but the method of construction and illumination and the display format (individual letters vs. panel) must be the same. 
(6)  Temporary window signs are allowed but may not cover more than 30 percent of the total window space. (See also subsection (ff) of this section) 
(ee)  Way finding signs. Way finding signs may be installed by the city, county or state to assist motorists and others in certain situations where it is determined necessary for economic development, traffic flow or traveler convenience. Such signs may be installed in the public road right-of-way by the public agency upon approval of the city council. Off-site, private way finding signs are not allowed. 
(ff)  Window signs. 
(1)  Window signs are considered to be temporary signs. 
(2)  Window signs shall be placed inside the building. 
(3)  Window signs shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the area of the window space on a wall. 
(4)  Graphics that show a product or company logotype shall be considered window signs. 
(Code 1999, § 24.060; Ord. No. 732, att.(38-693), 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 38-694. - Residential districts. 
(a)  Permitted signs. Refer to section 38-693 for specific regulations. The following are permitted in residential districts: 
(1)  Area identification signs. 
(2)  Awning signs. 
(3)  Boutique sale signs. 
(4)  Building identification signs. 
(5)  Cornerstone and building markers. 
(6)  Directional signs, on-site. 
(7)  Flags, noncommercial. 
(8)  Garage sale signs. 
(9)  Government signs, public schools signs and public utility signs. 
(10)  Home occupation signs. 
(11)  Home security signs. 
(12)  Political campaign signs. 
(13)  Public park name identification. 
(14)  Real estate sale signs for single- or two-family residential dwellings or lots. 
(15)  Real estate sale signs for uses other than single-family dwellings or lots. 
(16)  Residential name plates. 
(17)  Residential neighborhood identification signs. 
(18)  Special event signs at public or semi-public places. 
(19)  Residential name plate signs. 
(20)  Residential neighborhood identification signs. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. Refer to section 38-691 for prohibited signs. 
(Code 1999, § 24.070) 
Sec. 38-695. - Neighborhood commercial district (C-1 and C-1A). 
(a)  Permitted signs. Refer to section 38-693 for specific regulations, in addition to the following permitted signs: 
(1)  Awning signs. 
(2)  Bulletin signs. 
(3)  Commercial promotion temporary signs. 
(4)  Construction or future development signs. 
(5)  Cornerstone and building markers. 
(6)  Directional signs, on-site. 
(7)  Dynamic signs. 
(8)  Employment signs. 
(9)  Flags, noncommercial. 
(10)  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign per isolated commercial establishment is permitted. The total area of this sign shall not exceed 50 square feet per side and its maximum height shall not exceed 16 feet. 
(11)  Gasoline service station signs. 
(12)  Government, public school and public utility signs. 
(13)  Interior signs. 
(14)  Murals. 
(15)  Off-premises wall signs for sponsors of sports arenas. 
(16)  Political campaign signs. 
(17)  Real estate sale signs for uses other than single-family dwellings or lots. 
(18)  Special event signs at public or semi-public places. 
(19)  Text message board signs, moving or streaming. 
(20)  Wall signs. The total area of all wall signs affixed to a building wall shall not exceed ten percent of the total area of that wall. No individual wall sign shall exceed 40 square feet. 
(21)  Way finding signs. 
(22)  Window signs. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. Refer to section 38-691 for prohibited signs. 
(Code 1999, § 24.080) 
Sec. 38-696. - Community commercial district (C-2 and C-2A). 
(a)  Permitted signs. Refer to section 38-693 for specific regulations, in addition to the following permitted signs: 
(1)  Awning signs. 
(2)  Bulletin signs. 
(3)  Commercial promotion temporary signs. 
(4)  Construction or future development signs. 
(5)  Cornerstone and building markers. 
(6)  Directional signs, on-site. 
(7)  Dynamic signs. 
(8)  Employment signs. 
(9)  Flags, noncommercial. 
(10)  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign per isolated commercial establishment is permitted. The total area of each sign face shall not exceed 75 square feet and its maximum height shall not exceed 18 feet. However, commercial parcels located within 600 feet of the top of the freeway exit ramps at I-694 and Rice Street may have a sign up to 65 feet in height and 75 feet in face area per side. 
(11)  Gasoline service station signs. 
(12)  Government, public school and public utility signs. 
(13)  Interior signs. 
(14)  Murals. 
(15)  Political campaign signs. 
(16)  Real estate sale signs. 
(17)  Special event signs at public or semi-public places. 
(18)  Text message board signs, moving or streaming. 
(19)  Wall signs. The total area of all wall signs affixed to a building wall shall not exceed 15 percent of the total area of that wall. No individual wall sign shall exceed 50 square feet. 
(20)  Way finding signs. 
(21)  Window signs. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. Refer to section 38-691 for prohibited signs. 
(Code 1999, § 24.090) 
Sec. 38-697. - City center district (CC). 
(a)  Permitted signs. Refer to section 38-693 for specific regulations, in addition to the following permitted signs: 
(1)  Awning signs. 
(2)  Bulletin signs. 
(3)  Commercial promotion temporary signs. 
(4)  Construction or future development signs. 
(5)  Cornerstone and building markers. 
(6)  Directional signs, on-site. One traffic directional sign shall be permitted at each shopping center entrance. This sign shall not exceed four feet in height and 12 feet in area. 
(7)  Government, public school and public utility signs. 
(8)  Interior signs. 
(9)  Political campaign signs. 
(10)  Real estate sale signs. 
(11)  Way finding signs. 
(12)  Window signs. 
(b)  Signs by conditional use permit. Signs permitted by a conditional use permit are as follows: 
(1)  Dynamic signs. 
(2)  Employment signs. 
(3)  Flags, noncommercial. 
(4)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  One freestanding sign shall be allowed for each 600 feet of frontage along the perimeter of public streets of each development. 
b.  Properties not abutting I-35E. Monument signs shall be allowed in locations not abutting I-35E shall not exceed 12 feet in height. Pole signs are not allowed in these locations. 
c.  Properties abutting Interstate 35E. Properties that abut I-35E and have an edge within 600 feet of the top of a freeway exit ramp may have, in addition to one or more signs along an access road, a freestanding pole or pylon sign up to 65 feet in height and 180 square feet in area for each face. No pylon sign shall be located within 300 feet of a property zoned for housing. 
d.  One off-premises freestanding (pylon) sign may be allowed by conditional use permit on private property along Interstate 35E for a shopping center or single building, either of which exceeds 100,000 square feet of floor area, that is located on a parcel in the city center zoning district not abutting I-35E and on a land parcel within 300 feet of such sign. The maximum height of such sign shall be 65 feet and the maximum area per face shall be 200 square feet. No pylon sign shall be located within 300 feet of a property zoned for housing. 
(5)  Gasoline service station signs. 
(6)  Murals. 
(7)  Projecting signs. 
(8)  Special event signs at public or semi-public places. 
(9)  Text message board signs, moving or streaming. 
(10)  Wall signs. 
a.  Each building or each individual tenant in a multiple-tenant building may have a wall sign which does not exceed 15 percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached. (A tenant's wall includes only their portion of the building facade.) 
b.  Wall signs will be allowed only in a specified horizontal sign band no more than three feet in height and eight to 15 feet off the ground. Such sign bands may project no more than one foot from the surface of the building to which it is attached. 
c.  Attached wall signs shall consist of individual letters or script logos mounted on the building. 
(c)  Prohibited signs. Refer to section 38-691 for prohibited signs. 
(Code 1999, § 24.100) 
Sec. 38-698. - Highway business district (C-3). 
(a)  Permitted signs. Refer to section 38-693 for specific regulations, in addition to the following permitted signs: 
(1)  Awning signs. 
(2)  Bulletin signs. 
(3)  Commercial promotion temporary signs. 
(4)  Construction or future development signs. 
(5)  Cornerstone and building markers. 
(6)  Directional signs, on-site. 
(7)  Dynamic signs. 
(8)  Employment signs. 
(9)  Flags, noncommercial. 
(10)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  There may be no more than one freestanding sign for each commercial development having a frontage of 500 feet or less. One additional sign may be erected for each 300 feet of additional frontage. 
b.  The area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed 200 square feet. 
c.  The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed 40 feet. 
d.  One additional freestanding (pylon) sign of up to 65 feet in height shall be allowed for each shopping center or isolated business which has an edge within 600 feet of the midpoint of an interstate highway interchange. 
e.  One traffic directional sign shall be permitted at each auto dealer entrance. This sign shall not exceed four feet in height and 12 feet in area. 
(11)  Gasoline service station signs. 
(12)  Government, public school and public utility signs. 
(13)  Interior signs. 
(14)  Murals. 
(15)  Off-premises wall signs for sponsors of sports arenas. 
(16)  Political campaign signs. 
(17)  Real estate sale signs for uses other than single-family dwellings or lots. 
(18)  Special event signs at public or semi-public places. 
(19)  Text message board signs, moving or streaming. 
(20)  Wall signs. 
a.  Businesses selling new automobiles or boats may have a wall sign which does not exceed 20 percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached. One such wall sign is allowed for each wall that faces a property line that abuts a public street. Small window signs bearing messages such as "Body Shop" are also allowed. 
b.  Other businesses in the C-3 zoning district may have a wall sign not exceeding ten percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached or 80 square feet, whichever is less. 
(21)  Way finding signs. 
(22)  Window signs. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. Refer to section 38-691 for prohibited signs. 
(Code 1999, § 24.110) 
Sec. 38-699. - Office, office-business, and industrial districts. 
(a)  Permitted signs. Refer to section 38-693 for specific regulations in addition to the following permitted signs: 
(1)  Awning signs. 
(2)  Bulletin signs. 
(3)  Commercial promotion temporary signs. 
(4)  Construction or future development signs. 
(5)  Cornerstone and building markers. 
(6)  Directional signs, on-site. 
(7)  Dynamic signs. 
(8)  Employment signs. 
(9)  Flags, noncommercial. 
(10)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  One sign per principal building not to exceed 80 square feet in area and 20 feet in height. 
b.  One area identification sign not exceeding 100 square feet and 24 feet in height for each public road serving an office or industrial park. If three or more tenants are listed on this sign, the sign design must conform to the regulations of section 38-453(1). 
c.  A second freestanding sign shall be allowed for an office or industrial building which has an edge which abuts I-35E or I-694. This sign may be 50 percent greater in area than normally allowed by Table 1. Refer to section 38-697(b)(4)c. 
(11)  Gasoline service station signs. 
(12)  Government, public school, and public utility signs. 
(13)  Interior signs. 
(14)  Murals. 
(15)  Off-premises freestanding monument signs on city-owned property. Refer to section 38-693(v). 
(16)  Off-premises wall signs for sponsors of sports arenas. 
(17)  Political campaign signs. 
(18)  Real estate sale signs for uses other than single-family dwellings or lots. 
(19)  Special event signs at public or semi-public places. 
(20)  Text message board signs, moving or streaming. 
(21)  Wall signs. 
a.  One wall sign per building, not to exceed ten percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached or 80 square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  One additional wall-mounted identification sign is allowed for each tenant having a private exterior entrance to the building. Such sign shall be displayed at or near the tenant's entrance and shall not exceed ten percent of the wall area pertaining to the tenant. Such identification signs must have a consistent display format (panel vs. individual letters) across the building. 
c.  One wall sign listing the building tenants may be used in place of individual tenant identification signs. Such sign shall not exceed ten percent of the wall to which it is attached or 60 square feet, whichever is less. Tenants' names shall be displayed in the same materials, method of illumination, and method of display (panel vs. individual letters) as one another. 
d.  Way finding signs. 
e.  Window signs. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. Refer to section 38-691 for prohibited signs. 
(Code 1999, § 24.120) 
Sec. 38-700. - Billboards. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Billboards may be erected along and intended to be viewed from only Interstate Highways 35E and 694. Billboards are allowed only in the following zoning districts: C-2, C-3, office and industrial districts. 
(2)  The maximum allowable size of any billboard is 700 square feet. The maximum allowable extensions shall not exceed 15 percent of the total sign area. 
(3)  The maximum allowable height of any billboard is 35 feet. 
(4)  The minimum allowable distance between billboards as measured along the centerline of I-35E and I-694 is 1,500 feet. 
(5)  The minimum allowable proximity of any billboard to any residential zoning district or a nonconforming residential structure is 500 feet. 
(6)  The minimum allowable proximity of any billboard to any interstate or state trunk highway right-of-way is ten feet, and the maximum distance from the same is 150 feet. 
(7)  The minimum allowable proximity of a billboard to any building (except as set forth in subsection (5) of this section) shall be 100 feet for billboards of 700 square feet or more. This setback may be reduced by ten feet for every 100 square feet of sign area less than 700 square feet to a minimum of 60 feet. 
(8)  No portion of any billboard shall occupy air space above any driveway or parking area. 
(9)  No billboard may display any moving parts, nor shall it be illuminated with any flashing or intermittent lights. 
(10)  The minimum allowable proximity of any billboard to any designated wetland is 500 feet. 
(b)  Lighting. Lighting shall be limited to a level necessary for viewing. 
(c)  Additional requirements for dynamic signs. 
(1)  Billboards may contain a single dynamic sign that has no animation or moving parts. 
(2)  The minimum duration of the image can be no less than eight seconds. 
(3)  The image must have a change sequence accomplished by means of instantaneous re-pixelization (eliminating fading between images). 
(4)  The sign image must contain a complete message and not be continued to a subsequent image. 
(5)  Dynamic signs must provide to the city a minimum of five hours (2,250 eight-second spots) per month per enhanced dynamic display sign in the city for community and public service messages at such times as shall be determined by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 24.130) 
Sec. 38-701. - Administration and enforcement. 
    Except as exempted in section 38-693, the owner or occupant of the premises on which a sign is to be displayed, or the owner or installer of such signs, shall file an application provided by the city clerk for permission to display such sign. Permits must be acquired for all existing, new, relocated, modified or redesigned signs, except those specifically exempted below. The owner shall submit with the application a complete description of the sign and a sketch showing its size, location, manner of construction, and such other information as shall be necessary to inform the city building inspector of the kind, size, material, construction and location of the sign. The city building inspector or city code enforcement officer may approve sign permits. The applicant shall also submit at the time of application the application fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 24.140) 
Sec. 38-702. - Violations and fines. 
    If the city building inspector or his deputies or the city enforcement official shall find that any sign regulated by this chapter is prohibited as to size, location, content, type, number, height or method of construction, or are unsafe, insecure or a menace to the public, or if any sign has been constructed or erected without a permit first being granted to the installer of the sign or to the owner of the property upon which the sign has been erected, or is improperly maintained, or is in violation of any other provisions of this chapter, the city building inspector shall give written notice of such violation to the owner or permittee thereof. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the provision set forth in this chapter within ten calendar days following receipt of the notice, such sign shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be abated by the city by proceedings taken under M.S.A. ch. 429, and the cost of abatement, including administration expenses, may be levied as a special assessment against the property upon which the sign is located. 
(Code 1999, § 24.150) 
Sec. 38-703. - Appeals. 
    A permit applicant or permit holder may appeal any order or determination made by the city building inspector or his deputy or the city enforcement official, pursuant to this chapter, by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk requesting a hearing before the city council. The city council will hear: 
(1)  Appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the administrative officer in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 24.160) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1999 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1999 Code, as supplemented through May 17, 2017, that are included herein. Sections of the 1999 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1999 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 2.010 1-2 2.020 1-3 2.030 1-11 4.020 38-2 4.030 38-4 4.040 38-5 4.050 38-6 4.060 38-1 4.070 38-7 5.010 38-3 5.020 38-3 5.030 38-3 5.040 38-3 5.050 38-3 5.060 38-3 5.070 38-3 5.080 38-3 5.090 38-3 5.100 38-3 5.110 38-3 5.120 38-3 5.130 38-3 5.140 38-3 5.150 38-3 5.160 38-3 5.170 38-3 5.180 38-3 5.190 38-3 5.200 38-3 5.210 38-3 5.220 38-3 5.230 38-3 5.240 38-3 5.250 38-3 5.260 38-3 5.270 38-3 5.280 38-3 5.290 38-3 5.300 38-3 5.310 38-3 5.320 38-3 5.330 38-3 5.340 38-3 5.350 38-3 5.360 38-3 5.370 38-3 5.380 38-3 5.390 38-3 5.400 38-3 5.410 38-3 5.420 38-3 5.430 38-3 5.440 38-3 5.450 38-3 5.460 38-3 5.470 38-3 5.480 38-3 5.490 38-3 5.500 38-3 5.510 38-3 5.520 38-3 5.530 38-3 5.540 38-3 5.550 38-3 5.560 38-3 5.570 38-3 5.580 38-3 5.590 38-3 5.600 38-3 5.610 38-3 5.620 38-3 5.630 38-3 5.640 38-3 5.650 38-3 5.660 38-3 5.670 38-3 5.680 38-3 5.690 38-3 5.700 38-3 5.710 38-3 5.720 38-3 5.730 38-3 5.740 38-3 5.750 38-3 5.760 38-3 5.770 38-3 5.780 38-3 5.790 38-3 5.800 38-3 5.810 38-3 5.820 38-3 5.830 38-3 5.840 38-3 5.850 38-3 5.860 38-3 5.870 38-3 5.880 38-3 5.890 38-3 6.010 38-33 6.025 38-34 6.030 38-35 6.035 38-36 6.040 38-37 6.050 38-38 6.060 38-39 6.064 38-40 6.066 38-41 6.068 38-42 6.070 38-43 6.080 38-44 6.110 38-45 6.130 38-47 7.010 38-68 7.020 38-69 9.010 38-97 9.020 38-98 9.030 38-99 9.040 38-100 9.045 38-102 9.047 38-103 9.060 38-105 9.070 38-104 - 38-106 9.080 38-107 10.010 38-128 10.020 38-129 10.030 38-130 10.040 38-131 10.045 38-132 10.047 38-133 10.050 38-134 10.060 38-135 11.010 38-154 11.020 38-155 11.030 38-156 11.040 38-157 11.050 38-158 11.052 38-159 11.055 38-160 11.057 38-161 11.060 38-162 11.070 38-163 11.080 38-164 12.010 38-182 12.020 38-183 12.030 38-184 12.040 38-185 12.042 38-187 12.043 38-188 12.050 38-189 12.060 38-190 12.070 38-191 12.080 38-192 12.090 38-193 12.100 38-194 12.110 38-195 13.010 38-214 13.020 38-215 13.030 38-216 13.040 38-217 13.050 38-218 13.060 38-219 13A.010 38-247 13A.020 38-248 13A.030 38-249 13A.040 38-250 13A.050 38-251 13A.060 38-252 13A.070 38-253 14.010 38-272 - 38-303 - 38-309 14.020 38-273 - 38-304 14.030 38-274 - 38-305 14.040 38-275 - 38-306 14.050 38-276 - 38-307 14.060 38-277 - 38-308 15.010 38-339 15.020 38-340 15.030 38-341 15.040 38-342 15.050 38-343 15.060 38-344 16.010 38-362 16.020 38-363 16.030 38-364 16.040 38-365 16.050 38-366 16A.010 38-391 16A.020 38-392 16A.030 38-393 16A.040 38-395 17.010 38-419 17.020 38-420 17.030 38-421 17.040 38-422 17.050 38-423 17.060 38-424 18.010 38-447 18.020 38-448 18.030 38-449 18.031 38-450 18.032 38-451 18.040 38-452 18.041 38-453 18.050 38-454 18.060 38-455 18.061 38-456 18.062 38-457 18A.010 38-483 18A.020 38-484 18A.030 38-485 18A.040 38-486 19.010 38-511 19.020 38-512 19.030 38-513 19.040 38-514 19.050 38-515 19.060 38-516 19.070 38-517 19.080 38-518 19.090 38-519 19.100 38-520 19.110 38-521 19.120 38-522 19.130 38-523 19.140 38-524 19.150 38-525 19.160 38-526 19.170 38-527 19.180 38-528 19.190 38-529 19.192 38-530 19.194 38-531 19.196 38-532 19.200 38-533 19.210 38-534 19.220 38-535 19A.010 38-564 19A.020 38-565 19A.030 38-566 19A.040 38-567 19A.050 38-568 20.010 38-600 20.020 38-601 20.022 38-602 20.024 38-603 20.030 38-604 20.040 38-605 20.045 38-606 20.060 38-607 20.070 38-608 20.072 38-609 20.080 38-610 20.090 38-611 20.100 38-612 20.110 38-613 20.120 38-614 20.130 38-615 20.140 38-616 20.150 38-617 20.152 38-618 20.160 38-619 20.170 38-620 20.180 38-621 20.190 38-622 20.210 6-212 20.220 38-623 21.010 38-654 21.020 38-655 21.030 38-656 21.040 38-657 24.010 38-688 24.020 38-689 24.030 38-690 24.040 38-691 24.050 38-692 24.060 38-693 24.070 38-694 24.080 38-695 24.090 38-696 24.100 38-697 24.110 38-698 24.120 38-699 24.130 38-700 24.140 38-701 24.150 38-702 24.160 38-703 25.010 32-1 25.020 32-4 25.030 32-5 25.040 32-6 25.050 32-7 25.060 32-8 25.070 32-9 26.010 32-10 27.020 32-2 27.030 32-2 27.040 32-2 27.050 32-2 27.060 32-2 27.070 32-2 27.080 32-2 27.090 32-2 27.100 32-2 27.110 32-2 27.120 32-2 27.130 32-2 27.140 32-2 27.150 32-2 27.160 32-2 27.170 32-2 27.180 32-2 27.190 32-2 27.200 32-2 27.210 32-2 27.220 32-2 27.230 32-2 27.240 32-2 27.250 32-2 27.260 32-2 27.270 32-2 27.280 32-2 27.290 32-2 27.300 32-2 27.310 32-2 28.010 32-43 28.020 32-44 28.030 32-45 28.040 32-46 28.050 32-47 28.060 32-48 28.070 32-49 28.080 32-50 28.090 32-51 28.100 32-52 28.110 32-53 28.120 32-54 28.130 32-55 28.140 32-56 28.150 32-57 28.152 32-58 28.160 32-59 28.170 32-60 28.180 32-61 28.190 32-62 28.192 32-63 28.200 32-64 28.210 32-65 28.220 32-66 28.230 32-67 29.010 32-93 29.012 32-94 29.020 32-95 29.030 32-96 29.040 32-97 29.050 32-98 30.010 32-125 - 32-159 30.020 32-126 30.030 32-127 30.040 32-128 30.060 32-129 30.070 32-130 32.010 32-187 32.020 32-188 33.010 32-215 33.015 32-216 33.020 32-217 33.030 32-11 33.040 32-12 35.010 32-3 40.010 8-24 40.040 8-25 43.010 8-278 43.020 8-278 43.040 8-283 43.040(1) 8-278 43.050 8-283 43.100 8-285 - 8-287 43.110 8-279 43.120 8-280 43.130 8-288 43.140 8-281 43.150 8-282 43.30 8-277 43.60(1) 8-310 43.60(1)(a) 8-311 43.60(1)(b) 8-312 43.60(2) 8-313 43.60(3) 8-314 43.60(4) 8-315 43.60(5) 8-315 43.60(6) 8-315 43.70 8-286 43.80 8-284 44.010 24-57 - 24-59 - 24-64 44.020 24-58 44.030 24-60 44.040 24-61 44.050 24-62 44.060 24-63 44.070 24-64 44.080 24-65 44.090 24-66 44.100 24-67 45.010 8-22 45.020 8-22 45.030 8-22 46.010 8-21 46.020 8-21 46.030 8-26 46.040 8-21 46.050 8-21 46A.010 8-23 46A.020 8-23 46A.030 8-23 46A.040 8-23 46A.050 8-23 46A.060 8-23 46A.070 8-23 47.010 8-57 47.020 8-58 47.030 8-59 47.040 8-60 47.050 8-61 47.060 8-62 47.120 8-63 47.140 8-64 47.150 8-65 47.152 8-66 47.160 8-67 47.170 8-68 47.180 8-69 47.190 8-70 47.192 8-71 47.194 8-72 47.196 8-73 48.010 8-105 48.020 8-106 48.030 8-107 48.040 8-108 48.050 8-109 48.060 8-110 50.010 8-134 50.020 8-135 50.030 8-136 50.040 8-137 51.010 14-87 51.020 14-87 51.080 14-88 51.090 14-89 - 14-90 51.100 14-90 52.010 8-158 52.020 8-159 52.030 8-160 53.010 8-189 53.012 8-190 53.020 8-191 53.030 8-192 53.040 8-193 53.050 8-194 53.060 8-195 53.070 8-196 53.080 8-197 54.010 8-218 54.020 8-219 54.030 8-247 54.040 8-248 54.050 8-249 55.010 36-21 55.015 36-60 55.020 36-22 55.030 36-23 55.040 36-76 55.050 36-28 55.060 36-61 55.070 36-62 55.080 36-71 55.090 36-74 55.100 36-65 55.110 36-66 55.120 36-24 55.130 36-25 55.140 36-75 55.150 36-26 55.152 36-26 55.160 36-72 55.170 36-72 55.180 36-27 55.200 36-69 55.210 36-96 55.215 36-99 55.220 36-67 55.230 36-70 55.240 36-97 55.242 36-98 55.250 36-68 55.260 36-63 55.270 36-73 55.280 36-157 55.290 36-158 55.310 36-159 55.312 36-160 55.320 36-189 - 36-191 55.330 36-190 55.340 36-192 55.400 36-127 55.410 36-128 55.420 36-223 55.430 36-224 55.450 36-225 55.460 36-26 - 36-129 55.500 36-64 56.010 8-334 56.020 8-335 56.025 8-336 56.030 8-337 56.040 8-338 59.010 36-245 59.014 36-405 59.020 36-272 59.021 36-273 59.025 36-274 59.030 36-246 59.040 36-371 59.050 36-372 59.060 36-373 59.062 36-247 59.064 36-248 59.066 36-249 59.070 36-251 59.080 36-276 59.090 36-250 59.100 36-406 59.110 36-407 59.120 36-409 59.122 36-410 59.130 36-411 60.010 10-206 60.020 10-207 60.030 10-208 60.040 10-209 60.050 10-210 60.060 10-211 60.070 10-212 60.080 10-213 60.090 10-214 60.100 10-215 61.010 36-277 61.020 36-305 61.025 36-412 61.030 36-413 61.040 36-306 61.050 36-307 61.060 36-333 61.070 36-334 61.080 36-335 61.090 36-336 61.100 36-337 61.110 36-338 61.120 36-252 61.130 36-253 61.140 36-339 61.150 36-340 61.160 36-254 61.170 36-254 61.180 36-341 61.190 36-278 63.010 36-1 64.010 36-440 64.020 36-441 64.030 36-442 64.040 36-443 64.050 36-444 64.060 36-445 64.070 36-447 64.090 36-448 64.100 36-449 64.110 36-450 65.010 36-500 65.020 36-502 65.030 36-503 65.040 36-505 65.050 36-506 65.060 36-507 65.070 36-508 65.080 36-509 65.090 36-501 66.010 36-469 66.020 36-470 66.030 36-471 66.040 36-472 66.050 36-473 71.010 30-1 71.020 30-2 72.010 30-23 72.020 30-24 72.030 30-25 72.040 30-26 72.050 30-27 72.060 30-28 72.070 30-29 72.080 30-30 73.010 30-50 73.020 30-51 73.030 30-52 73.040 30-53 73.050 30-54 73.055 30-55 73.060 30-56 73.062 30-57 73.070 30-58 73.080 30-59 73.090 30-60 74.010 30-79 74.012 30-80 74.020 30-104 74.032 30-105 74.040 30-103 75.010 30-130 75.020 30-131 75.030 30-132 75.040 30-133 75.050 30-134 75.060 30-135 75.070 30-136 75.080 30-137 75.090 30-138 75.100 30-139 75.110 30-140 75.120 30-141 75.130 30-142 75.140 30-143 75.150 30-144 75.160 30-145 75.170 30-146 75.180 30-147 75.190 30-148 75.200 30-149 - 30-155 75.210 30-150 75.220 30-151 75.230 30-152 75.260 30-153 75.270 30-154 76.010 34-1 76.030 34-2 76.110 34-23 - 34-27 76.120 34-24 76.130 34-25 76.140 34-26 77.010 34-58 77.020 34-58 77.030 34-58 77.040 34-58 77.050 34-59 77.060 34-60 77.061 34-60 78.010 34-79 78.020 34-80 78.030 34-81 78.040 34-82 78.050 34-83 78.060 34-84 78.070 34-85 78.080 34-86 79.010 34-116 79.020 34-117 79.030 34-118 79.040 34-119 79.050 34-120 79.060 34-121 79.070 34-122 79.080 34-123 79.090 34-124 79.100 34-125 79.110 34-126 79.120 34-127 80.010 34-153 80.020 34-154 80.110 34-155 80.120 34-156 80.130 34-157 80.140 34-158 80.150 34-159 80.160 34-160 80.170 34-161 80.240 34-162 80.250 34-163 80.260 34-164 80.270 34-165 80.280 34-166 90.010 10-1 90.020 10-2 90.030 10-3 90.040 10-4 90.050 10-6 90.060 10-7 90.090 10-8 91.010 8-391 91.020 8-56 - 8-391 92.010 10-239 92.020 10-240 92.030 10-241 92.040 10-242 92.050 10-243 92.060 10-244 92.070 10-245 92.080 10-246 92.090 10-247 92.100 10-248 92.110 10-249 92.130 10-250 92.140 10-251 92.150 10-252 92.160 10-253 93.10 10-95 93.20 10-96 93.30 10-97 93.40 10-98 93.50 10-99 93.60 10-100 93.70 10-101 93.80 10-102 104.010 8-392 104.020 8-392 104.030 8-392 107.010 8-366 107.020 8-366 110.010 10-35 112.010 8-365 118.010 10-133 118.020 10-134 118.030 10-135 118.040 10-136 118.050 10-137 118.060 10-138 118.070 10-139 118.080 10-140 118.090 10-141 119.010 10-166 119.020 10-167 119.030 10-168 119.040 10-169 119.050 10-170 119.060 10-171 119.080 10-172 119.090 10-173 - 10-174 119.100 10-175 119.110 10-176 121.010 28-1 121.020 28-49 121.030 28-50 121.040 28-51 121.050 28-52 121.060 28-53 121.080 28-54 121.082 28-55 121.090 28-48 121.100 28-84 121.102 28-21 121.104 28-22 121.110(1) 28-118 121.110(2) 28-119 121.110(3) 28-120 121.110(4) 28-121 121.110(5) 28-122 121.110(7) 28-123 121.110(8) 28-124 121.110(9) 28-125 121.110(10) 28-126 121A.010 28-84 121A.020 28-85 121A.040 28-86 121A.050 28-87 123.010 28-153 123.020 28-154 123.030 28-155 123.040 28-156 123.050 28-157 123.060 28-158 124.040 28-127 124.050 28-127 126.010 8-411 126.020 8-412 126.030 8-413 126.040 8-414 126.050 8-415 126.060 8-416 126.062 8-417 126.070 8-418 130.005 6-4 130.010 6-71 130.020 6-71 130.030 6-72 - 6-73 130.040 6-1 130.050 6-5 130.060 6-10 130.070 6-2 - 6-39 130.080 6-2 130.090 6-2 130.100 6-2 130.110 6-10 130.130 6-6 130.140 6-40 130.180 6-7 130.181 6-130 - 6-131 130.182 6-132 130.183(1) 6-163 130.183(2) 6-164 130.183(3) 6-166 130.183(4) 6-167 130.183(5) 6-164 130.183(6) 6-168 130.183(7) 6-169 130.184(1) 6-163 130.184(2) 6-163 130.184(3) 6-170 130.184(4) 6-165 130.184(5) 6-171 130.184(6) 6-172 130.184(7) 6-173 130.185(1) 6-185 130.185(1)(a) 6-189 130.185(1)(b) 6-186 130.185(2)(a) 6-186 130.185(2)(b) 6-188 130.185(2)(c) 6-190 130.186(1) 6-185 130.186(2) 6-185 - 6-193 130.186(3) 6-191 130.186(4) 6-187 130.186(5) 6-192 130.200 6-5 130.210 6-3 130.220 6-41 130.230 6-8 130.300 6-209 130.310 6-209 130.320 6-210 130.330 6-211 131.010 6-1 131.020 6-105 131.030 6-106 131.031 6-107 131.210 6-1 132.010 6-1 132.020 6-9 132.030 6-9 132.040 6-9 135.010 4-1 135.020 4-21 135.025 4-22 135.030 4-23 135.032 4-24 135.040 4-25 135.050 4-26 135.060 4-27 135.070 4-54 135.072 4-55 135.074 4-56 135.080 4-57 135.090 4-58 135.100 4-28 135.110 4-29 135.120 4-30 135.122 4-31 135.130 4-53 135.140 4-60 135.150 4-32 135.160 4-59 145.060 24-5 146.010 22-86 146.020 14-109 146.030 14-111 146.040 14-112 147.010 24-1 147.020 24-2 147.040 24-3 147.060 6-231 147.070 26-19 - 26-20 147.080 6-233 147.090 6-232 148.010 24-6 149.010 22-113 149.050 22-113 150.010 24-4 150.020 24-4 150.030 24-4 180.010 22-1 181.010 22-2 181.020 22-2 181.030 22-2 181.040 22-2 181.050 22-2 181.060 22-2 181.070 22-2 181.080 22-2 181.090 22-5 181.091 22-5 181.092 22-5 182.010 22-3 182.020 22-3 182.030 22-3 182.040 22-3 182.050 22-3 182.060 22-3 182.070 22-3 183.010 22-4 183.020 22-4 183.030 22-4 183.040 22-4 183.050 22-4 183.060 22-4 183.070 22-4 183.080 22-4 183.090 22-4 183.100 22-4 183.110 22-4 183.120 22-4 183.130 22-4 183.140 22-4 183.150 22-4 183.160 22-4 183.170 22-4 183.180 22-4 183.190 22-4 183.200 22-4 183.210 22-4 184.005 22-7 184.010 22-7 184.020 22-7 185.010 22-6 185.020 22-6 185.030 22-6 186.010 22-33 186.020 22-34 186.030 22-35 186.040 22-36 186.050 22-37 186.060 22-38 186.070 22-39 186.080 22-40 186.090 22-41 186.100 22-42 188.010 22-73 188.020 22-74 188.030 22-75 188.040 22-76 188.050 22-77 188.060 22-78 188.070 22-79 188.080 22-80 188.090 22-81 188.100 22-82 188.110 22-83 188.120 22-84 188.130 22-85 210.010 14-21 - 14-22 210.020 14-23 210.040 14-24 - 14-25 - 14-26 210.050 14-27 210.060 14-28 210.070 14-29 210.080 14-30 210.090 14-31 210.100 14-51 210.200 14-52 210.210 14-1 210.220 14-52 210.230 14-53 210.300 14-54 210.400 14-55 211.010 2-83 211.020 2-83 211.030 2-84 211.040 2-85 211.050 2-86 211.060 2-87 212.010 2-88 - 2-180 212.020 2-88 - 2-180 212.030 2-88 - 2-180 212.040 2-88 - 2-180 213.010 2-107 213.020 2-108 213.030 2-108 213.040 2-109 213.050 2-110 213.060 2-111 213.070 2-112 213.080 2-113 213.090 2-114 215.010 2-42 215.020 2-42 215.030 2-42 217.010 2-63 217.020 2-63 217.030 2-89 217.032 2-89 217.040 2-90 217.050 2-91 217.060 2-92 217.070 2-93 217.080 2-94 219.010 2-43 220.010 8-1 220.020 8-1 220.030 8-1 221.010 2-19 222.010 2-178 223.010 1-2 224.010 1-15 224.020 1-15 225.010 12-19 225.020 12-20 225.030 12-21 225.040 12-22 225.060 12-23 225.070 12-24 225.080 12-25 225.090 12-26 225.170 12-27 225.180 12-28 227.010 2-62 227.020 2-62 227.030 2-62 227.040 2-62 227.050 2-62 227.060 2-62 227.070 2-62 227.080 2-62 227.090 2-62 229.010 2-179 229.020 2-179 229.030 2-179 229.040 2-179 229.050 2-179 229.060 2-179 234.100 2-44 234.200 10-5  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances included herein. Ordinances not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 127 - 10-35 Ord. No. 161 - 2-19 Ord. No. 164 - 10-35 Ord. No. 262 - 2-19 Ord. No. 364 - 2-19 Ord. No. 427 - 2-19 Ord. No. 545 - 2-19 Ord. No. 680 - 38-3 Ord. No. 693 - 38-3 Ord. No. 8 5-26-1958 - 30-1, 30-2 - 30-23-30-30 Ord. No. 9 6-9-1958 - 22-1 - 22-3 Ord. No. 40 3-13-1961 - 8-24, 8-25 Ord. No. 55 8-24-1964 - 2-43 Ord. No. 60 9-30-1965 - 32-3 Ord. No. 74 9-19-1967 - 36-1 Ord. No. 102 11-18-1969 - 2-178 Ord. No. 108 2-17-1970 - 8-134-8-137 Ord. No. 142 3-20-1973 - 32-10 Ord. No. 182 - 10-35 Ord. No. 195 7-6-1976 - 8-158-8-160 Ord. No. 300 7-19-1983 - 22-33-22-42 Ord. No. 379 3-7-1989 - 8-218, 8-219 - 8-247-8-249 Ord. No. 388 5-15-1990 - 22-1 Ord. No. 390 7-3-1990 - 28-127 Ord. No. 392 8-21-1990 - 24-4 Ord. No. 455 9-2-1997 - 34-116-34-127 Ord. No. 476 2-2-1999 - 2-179 Ord. No. 495 12-7-1999 - 36-440-36-445 - 36-447-36-450 Ord. No. 437 2-19-2002 - 38-564-38-568 Ord. No. 560 4-20-2004 - 22-73-22-85 Ord. No. 578 9-19-2006 - 2-19 Ord. No. 598 4-3-2008 - 10-35 Ord. No. 607 1-20-2009 - 2-44 - 10-5 Ord. No. 614 12-15-2009 - 34-153-34-166 Ord. No. 621 5-18-2010 - 36-469-36-473 Ord. No. 645 1-18-2012 - 24-57-24-67 Ord. No. 646 1-18-2012 - 8-22 Ord. No. 663 1-15-2014 - 38-3 Ord. No. 680 7-1-2015 - 10-95-10-102 Ord. No. 683 11-4-2015 - 8-277-8-288 - 8-310-8-315 Ord. No. 699 9-7-2016 - 38-3 Ord. No. 705 1-4-2017 - 38-3 Ord. No. 702 2-1-2017 - 38-3 Ord. No. 708 3-15-2017 - 38-3 Ord. No. 710 3-15-2017 - 38-3 Ord. No. 713 8-2-2017 151.03 6-234 151.080 6-233 151.090 6-232 1551.010 6-231 Ord. No. 714 11-15-2017 II(152.010) 24-31 II(152.020) 24-32 II(152.030) 24-33 II(152.040) 24-34 Ord. No. 715 1-2-2018 I(6.010) 38-33 III(6.025) 38-34 IV(6.030) 38-35 V(6.035) 38-36 VI(6.040) 38-37 VII(6.050) 38-38 VII(6.060) 38-39 IX(6.120) 38-46 X(6.070) 38-43 XI(6.080) 38-44 XII(5.812) 38-3 XII(5.813) 38-3 XII(5.814) 38-3 XII(5.815) 38-3 Ord. No. 723 2-20-2018 I(5.030) 38-3 IV(9.010) 38-97 V(9.020) 38-98 VI(9.030) 38-99 VII(9.040) 38-100 VII(9.042) 38-101 VIII(9.050) 38-104 IX(10.020) 38-129 X(10.030) 38-130 XI(10.040) 38-131 XII(10.060) 38-135 XIII(11.020) 38-155 XIV(11.030) 38-156 XV(11.050) 38-158 XVI(11.052) 38-159 XVII(12.020) 38-183 XIX(12.040) 38-185 XIX(12.041) 38-186 XVIII(12.030) 38-184 Ord. No. 724 3-6-2018 I(13.020) 38-215 II(13.030) 38-216 III(13.060) 38-219 IV(13A.020) 38-248 V(13A.040) 38-250 VI(13A.050) 38-251 VII(13A.060) 38-252 VIII(13A.070) 38-253 IX(13A.080) 38-254 X(14.020) 38-273 XI(14.060) 38-277 XII(14.020) 38-304 XIII(14.030) 38-305 XIV(14.040) 38-306 XVI(14.050) 38-307 XVII(14.060) 38-308 XVIII(14.070) 38-309 XIX(14.080) 38-310 XX(15.020) 38-340 XXI(15.030) 38-341 XXII(15.060) 38-344 XXIII(18.010) 38-447 XXIV(18.020) 38-448 XXV(18.031) 38-450 XXVI(18.032) 38-451 XXVIII(18.040) 38-452 XXVIII(18.041) 38-453 XXIX(18.050) 38-454 XXX 38-3 Ord. No. 725 3-6-2018 I(9.020) 38-98 II(11.020) 38-155 III(12.030) 38-184 IV(20.045) 38-606 V(75.020) 30-2 V(75.060) 30-135 V(75.090) 30-138 V(75.100) 30-139 V(75.130) 30-142 Ord. No. 727 5-1-2018 I(127.100) 10-68 I(127.010) 10-59 I(127.020) 10-60 I(127.030) 10-61 I(127.040) 10-62 I(127.050) 10-63 I(127.060) 10-64 I(127.070) 10-65 I(127.080) 10-66 I(127.090) 10-67 I(127.200) 10-69 I(127.210) 10-70 I(127.220) 10-71 I(127.230) 10-72 I(127.240) 10-73 I(127.250) 10-74 I(127.260) 10-75 I(127.270) 10-76 I(127.280) 10-77 Ord. No. 729  9-18-2018 I-XXXII       Added Adopting Ord. VII 2-84(b) VIII 32-187(1) IX 38-215(b)(1) X 38-273(b)(10) XI 38-363(c)(2) XII 38-395(a) XIII       Rnbd 38-420(a)(7)a., b.       as 38-420(a)(8), (9) XIV 38-420(c)(13) XV 38-158 XVI 38-186 XVII 38-622 XVIII       Rpld 38-420(c)(8) XIX 38-420(a)(10) XX       Rpld 38-420(c)(13) XXI       Added 38-420(b)(3) Ord. No. 732 2-5-2019 II 38-98 III 38-164 IV 38-215 V 38-248 VI, VII 38-273 VIII 38-392 IX, X 38-420 XI 38-424 XII 38-448 XIII 38-605 att.(38-98) 38-98 att.(38-100) 38-100 att.(38-131) 38-131 att.(38-158 38-158 att.(38-184) 38-184 att.(38-215) 38-215 att.(38-253) 38-253 att.(38-309) 38-309 att.(38-693) 38-693  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Minnesota Statutes (M.S.A.). 
M.S.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 13.37(b) 30-148 14.57-14.70 10-252 65B.48, subd. 5 34-119 84.81-84.90 34-79 84.81, subd. 3(1)-(6) 34-80 103B.205, subd. 13 38-520 ch. 103G 38-521 - 38-525 103G.005 38-517 103G.005, subd. 14 36-470 - 38-519 ch. 115A 2-63 115.01 36-470 134.001 24-32 144.391 10-239 ch. 147 10-98 ch. 148 10-98 ch. 150A 10-98 152.01 22-75 152.25 38-3 ch. 169 34-1 - 34-123, 34-124 169.045, subd. 7 34-123 169.14 34-162 169.345, subd. 2 34-116 - 34-119 169.522 34-122 169.822 34-23 169.999 34-153 169.999, subds. 1(b)(1)-1(b)(3) 34-154 169.999, subd. 5 34-155 211B.045 38-693 216B.02, subd. 4 30-2 - 30-131 216B.02, subd. 6 30-2 - 30-131 237.162, subd. 4 30-139 237.162, subd. 16 30-2 - 38-606 ch. 238 30-2 - 30-131 243.166 24-33 243.166, subd. 1b 24-32 243.167 24-33 244.052 24-32 ch. 278 4-26 300.03 30-2 301B.01 30-131 326B.101-326B.16 8-21 326B.121 8-21 326B.31-326B.38 8-23 ch. 329 10-134 ch. 340A 4-27 - 4-30 - 4-54 340A.22 38-3 340A.24, subd. 2 4-1 340A.301, subd. 6(i) 38-3 340A.301, subd. 6(j) 38-3 340A.404 4-22 340A.404(5) 4-22 340A.414(2) 4-22 340A.504 38-623 343.12 6-10 343.22 6-10 343.235 6-7 - 6-10 343.29 6-10 343.31 6-10 347.14 6-10 347.50-347.56 6-130 347.541, subd. 3 6-131 ch. 349 10-59, 10-60 - 10-75 349.11-349.21 10-77 349.11-349.23 10-64, 10-65 349.12 10-62 349.12, subd. 7a 10-73 349.16 10-73 349.166 10-67 349.213 10-60 ch. 354 38-520 364.06 2-44 - 10-5 364.09 2-44 - 10-5 375.53 1-14 ch. 412 30-1 412.02 2-42 412.271, subd. 1 2-112 412.591 2-43 415.01 14-52 415.02 1-1 415.021 1-1 ch. 429 38-702 429.101 8-285 435.193-435.195 8-70 444.075 36-500 462.351-462.365 38-1 462.357, subd. 1e 38-45 462.358, subd. 2 32-217 462.3593 38-3 462.3593, subd. 9 38-604 ch. 463 22-82 471.15-471.17 2-107 473.803, subd. 1 2-63 ch. 515 38-164 515.11 38-164 515.13 38-164 561.07 6-10 - 10-77 609.033 1-14 609.0331 1-14 609.034 1-14 609.63(6) 1-9 609.75-609.763 10-64 617.80 et seq. 8-312 617.81, subd. 2 8-277 - 8-312 617.85 8-312 624.712, subd. 2 24-5 645.08 et seq. 1-2 645.44 et seq. 1-2  
