WAYZATA CITY CHARTER 
Effective: November 25, 2013 
Chapters 
CHAPTER I - General Provisions 

Section 1. - Name, Boundaries and Powers of the City. 
The City of Wayzata, Hennepin County, Minnesota shall continue to be a municipal corporation under that name and with the same boundaries as are now, or may be established. 
The city shall have all powers which it may now or hereafter be possible for a municipal corporation in this state to exercise in harmony with the constitution of this state and of the United States. It is the intention of this charter to confer upon the city every power which it would have if it were specifically mentioned. The charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city and the specific mention of particular municipal powers of the city to those mentioned. Unless granted to some other officer or body, all powers are vested in the city council. 
Section 2. - Form of Government. 
The form of government established by this charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Plan." All discretionary powers of the city, both legislative and executive, shall vest in and be exercised by the council. It shall have complete control over the city administration, but shall exercise this control exclusively through the city manager and shall not itself attempt to perform any administrative work. 
Section 3. - Charter Commission. 
There shall be at all times, a charter commission for the City of Wayzata, formed and operating pursuant to current statutes of the State of Minnesota. The mayor and council shall, at the first regular meeting of the council in January of each year, make such provisions as may be necessary to maintain a complete charter commission. The charter commission shall meet annually, at such time and place as it may determine, and may meet at such other times and places it deems necessary. 
CHAPTER II - Officers, Nominations and Elections 

Section 4. - Elective Officers. 
There shall be elected at large in the City of Wayzata a mayor and four council members, who together shall constitute the Wayzata City Council. 
Section 5. - Elections. 
The regular municipal elections shall be held annually on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November at such place or places as the city council may designate. At least fifteen days prior public notice shall be given by the secretary of the council of the time and place of holding regular and special elections, and of the officers to be elected and the propositions to be voted upon, but failure to give such notice of regular election shall not invalidate such election. 
Section 6. - Candidates for Elective Offices. 
Any person eligible and desiring to be a candidate for an elective office shall file an affidavit of candidacy with the office of the city manager within the time frame specified in state statutes. If no affidavit of candidacy is filed for an office to be voted on at the election, the city council promptly by motion may nominate one person for the office; this person shall file an affidavit of candidacy within two days following adoption of the motion in order to have the candidate's name placed on the ballot. The ballots shall be prepared in a manner consistent with state statutes and shall include the names of all persons whose affidavits of candidacy have been properly filed. 
Section 7. - Affidavits of Candidacy. 
The affidavit of candidacy shall be executed by the candidate and state the office for which the person desires to be a candidate and that the person is a qualified voter in the City of Wayzata and has not filed as a candidate for any other office at the same election. The fee to be paid the city upon filing an affidavit of candidacy for city office shall be the sum of $5.00. 
Section 8. - Judges and Clerks of Election. 
The council shall at least twenty-five days before each regular or special election, appoint such judges and clerks of the election as may be provided by ordinance. 
Section 9. - Procedure at Election. 
The conduct of elections may be regulated by ordinance, subject to the provisions of this charter. The election laws of the state shall govern in all matters not otherwise provided for in this charter or the ordinances passed thereunder. 
Section 10. - Canvass of Election. 
The council shall meet and canvass the election returns after the polls have closed at any regular or special election within the time frame provided under state law. The city manager shall present a certificate of election under the seal of the city to each person elected. 
Section 11. - Calling Special Elections. 
The council may by a resolution passed by a vote of four-fifths of its members call a special election for any purpose not forbidden by law and fix the time and place of holding the same. 
Section 12. - Term of Office. 
The term of office of the mayor and the council members shall be four years. All elective officers shall take office on the first day of January following their election and qualification. All officers in office when this charter takes effect shall remain in office for their full terms and shall continue to govern the city in the usual manner until their successors have been elected and qualified. Elective officers shall be elected for only the offices the terms of which have expired at the time, or in the case of vacancy, for the remainder of the term. 
Section 13. - Vacancies. 
Council may deem an elective office vacant in case of failure of the person elected to qualify within fifteen days after official canvass of the election at which he or she is elected, or by reason of death, resignation, removal from the city, conviction of a felony, removal from office, or failure to perform the duties of the office for a period of six weeks or for other recurring absenteeism without good cause. If a vacancy occurs in an elective office, the council shall forthwith appoint an eligible person to fill the office until the next general municipal election, when the office shall be filled by election for the remainder of the term, if any; if not, then for a full term. The council may also deem a temporary vacancy upon the request of a council member seeking a temporary leave of absence for a reasonable time period and for reasons of health, personal matters or military service. If a temporary vacancy occurs on council, the council shall forthwith appoint an eligible person to fill the council seat until such time as the council member on leave returns to resume his or her seat for the remainder of his or her term. In case of a tie vote in the council after three rounds of voting on an appointment to fill a vacancy on the council, the mayor shall make the appointment. 
Section 14. - Salaries of Elected Officers. 
The Mayor and Council members shall receive such compensation as is fixed by the council in accordance with law. The mayor and council members shall receive such compensation for each meeting (not to exceed two meetings per calendar month) as is fixed by the council in accordance with law. They may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred with performance of the duties of their office. 
Section 15. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER III - Legislation and Administration 

Section 16. - Presiding Officer. 
The mayor shall preside at council meetings. At the first regular meeting of the council, the council shall elect one of its own members as mayor pro-tem. The mayor pro-tem shall preside at the meetings of the council in the absence of the mayor and shall be acting mayor with full power as mayor during the mayor's disability or absence from the city. Should the mayor and the mayor pro-tem be disabled, absent from the city, or otherwise unavailable during an emergency, any other member of the council may fulfill the duties of the mayor. The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purpose of serving process, and by the governor for the purposes of martial law. 
Section 17. - Council Meetings. 
All meetings of the council shall be held at a time and place designated by resolution. The council shall keep a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. It shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and may hold other meetings as provided by its rules. At any meeting of the council a majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. The council may provide by resolution a means by which any number of council members may compel the attendance of absent members. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except as allowed by state statute. 
Section 18. - Commissions. 
The council shall itself be, and shall perform the duties and exercise the powers of, the local board of health, park board, and sinking fund commission. It may, however, create and appoint a city planning commission and such permanent or temporary commissions as it so desires with advisory powers to investigate any subject of interest to the municipality. Such commissions may be given the power to administer oaths, and to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and other documentary evidence. 
Section 19. - Secretary of Council. 
The council may designate any official or employee of the city, or member of the council, to act as secretary of the council. In lieu of any such designation, the city clerk shall be the secretary of the council. The secretary shall keep such records and perform such other duties as may be required by this charter or by vote of the council. 
Section 20. - Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all legislation shall be by ordinance. The votes of council members on any action shall be recorded in accordance with state statue. Any action not required by this charter or by state statute to be taken by ordinance may be taken by resolution. Administrative business may be transacted by motion. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, state law, or ordinance of the city, an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the council shall be required for the passage of all ordinances, resolutions and motions. 
Section 21. - Enacting Clause. 
The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be in the words: "The City of Wayzata Ordains." 
Section 22. - Filing and Reading Ordinances. 
Every ordinance other than an emergency ordinance shall be presented in writing and read at two consecutive regular meetings or adjourned regular meetings of the council. These meetings will be at least one week apart. A resolution may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced. An emergency ordinance is one for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare, in which the emergency is defined and declared in a preamble thereto, separately voted upon. Such preamble shall receive the affirmative vote of at least four-fifths of the members of the council. No grant of any franchise shall be construed to be an emergency ordinance. 
Section 23. - Signature and Publication of Ordinances. 
Every ordinance, except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall be signed by the mayor or by the mayor pro-tem in the mayor's absence, attested by the secretary, published and recorded by the city manager in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose. Every ordinance not so published and recorded shall be void. 
Section 24. - When Ordinances and Resolutions Take Effect. 
Resolutions and emergency ordinances shall be effective immediately upon passage or at a later date stated in the resolution or emergency ordinance. Every other ordinance shall take effect after passage and publication or at such later date as specified in the ordinance. Every ordinance and resolution adopted by the voters of the city shall take effect immediately upon its adoption or at such later date as stated in the ordinance or resolution. 
Section 25. - Amendment, Revision and Codification of Ordinances and Resolutions. 
Every ordinance or resolution amending or repealing all or part of a previous ordinance or resolution shall give the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. No ordinance or resolution shall be amended by reference to the title alone, but the amending ordinance or resolution shall set forth in full each section or subdivision to be amended and shall indicate, by appropriate type or symbols, matters to be omitted or added. 
The council may revise, rearrange and codify the ordinances of the city with the additions or deletions found necessary. The ordinance code may be prepared in book, pamphlet or continuously loose-leaf form. Copies of the code must be kept available at City Hall for public inspection or for distribution free or for a reasonable charge. The publication requirements of this Charter shall be satisfied by printing a notice in the official newspaper stating that (i) an ordinance is adopted, revised or recodified and (ii) copies are available in the office of the City Manager. 
CHAPTER IV - Administration of City Affairs 

Section 26. - The City Manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be chosen by the council on the basis of training, experience and administrative qualifications; the choice shall not be limited to inhabitants of the city or state. The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite period, and shall be removable by the council at any time. If removed at any time after one year of service the city manager may request written charges and a public hearing on the same before the council prior to the date on which the final removal shall take effect. Pending and during such hearing the council may suspend the city manager from office. During the absence or disability of the city manager, the duties of the office shall be performed by a properly qualified person designated by the council. 
Section 27. - Powers and Duties of the City Manager. 
Subject to provisions of this charter and any regulations consistent therewith which may be adopted by the council, the city manager shall control and direct the administration of the city's affairs. The powers and duties of the city manager shall be: 
a)  To see that this charter and the laws, ordinances and resolutions of the city are enforced; 
b)  To appoint, and, except as herein provided, remove all heads of departments, and all subordinate officers and employees in the departments, all appointments to be based upon merit and fitness alone; 
c)  To exercise control over all departments and divisions of the city administration created by this charter or which may be hereafter created by the council; 
d)  To attend all meetings of the council, with the right to take part in the discussions but having no vote; but the council may at its discretion exclude the city manager from meetings when evaluation or removal of the city manager is considered; 
e)  To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as may be deemed necessary for the welfare of the people and the efficient administration of the city's affairs; 
f)  To keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city, and to prepare and to submit to the council the annual budget; 
g)  To submit to the council for adoption an administrative code incorporating the details of administrative procedures, and to suggest amendments to the same; and 
h)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required by ordinance or resolutions adopted by the council. 
Section 28. - Departments of Administration. 
The council may create or eliminate departments, divisions, and bureaus for the administration of the city's affairs and/or alter their powers and organization. It shall, in conjunction with the city manager, prepare and maintain an administrative code for the city, which may be amended by ordinance. Such administrative code shall establish the departments, divisions, and bureaus for the administration of the city's affairs, including the operations and duties related thereto, and shall be codified in the Wayzata City Code of Ordinances. 
Section 29. - Subordinate Offices. 
There shall be such offices subordinate to the city manager as the council may deem appropriate, and the council may combine the duties of various offices as it may see fit. 
Section 29(a). - Assessor and Attorney. 
The council shall appoint a city attorney and an assessor to serve at the will of the council. 
Section 30. - Purchases and Contracts. 
The city manager shall be the chief purchasing agent of the city. All purchases on behalf of the city and all contracts let by the city manager shall be subject to the approval of the council. Such approval must be given in advance whenever the amount of such purchase or contract exceeds the amount provided under state law, as amended from time to time, for statutory cities or such other amount as determined by city council by resolution. All contracts, bonds and instruments of every kind to which the city shall be a party shall be signed by the mayor on behalf of the city as well as by the city manager or city clerk, and shall be executed in the name of the city. 
In all cases of work done by contract, or for the purchase of property of any kind, the Uniform Municipal Contracting Law, established by State Statute Chapter 471, shall apply, unless the Council by emergency ordinance shall provide otherwise. 
Section 31. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER V - Taxation and Finance 

Section 32. - Council to Control Finances. 
The council shall have full authority over the financial affairs of the city, and shall provide for the collection of all revenue, the auditing and settlement of accounts, and the safekeeping and disbursement of public funds. 
Section 33. - System of Taxation. 
Subject to the state constitution, and except as forbidden by it or by state law, the council shall have power to provide, by ordinance, for a system of local taxation. The authority of taxation includes the power to assess, levy, and collect taxes on subjects or objects of taxation except as limited or prohibited by the state constitution, by this charter or by laws imposing restrictions upon the city. 
Section 34. - Fiscal Period. 
The fiscal period of the city shall be the calendar year. 
Section 35. - Preparation of the Annual Budget. 
The city manager shall prepare the estimates for the annual budget and submit the budget to the council for approval. The estimates of expenditures shall be arranged in a manner consistent with generally accepted accounting principles and guidelines established by the State Auditor's Office. 
Section 36. - Passage of the Budget. 
The budget shall be the principal item of business at a regular meeting of the city council in August or September each year. The council shall hold adjourned meetings until all budget items have been considered. The final budget resolution shall be adopted not later than December 31 each year. 
At the budget meetings, budget items shall be explained to the extent required by the council. Interested citizens will be given time to comment and to ask questions. The final budget shall itemize projected revenue amounts and sources, projected expenditure amounts and purposes, and be passed by the council in resolution form. 
The budget resolution shall contain a contingency line item which may be used for any lawful purpose as approved by a four-fifths vote of all the council. The contingency amount shall be determined by the council and shall not exceed ten percent of the total budget. 
Section 37. - Alterations in the Budget. 
The council shall have no power to increase the adopted budget except to the extent bonds or emergency debt certificates have been authorized in the manner provided in this chapter or by State law; or to the extent actual receipts exceed estimated revenue. The sum fixed in the budget shall be appropriated as of the first day of January for the purposes named therein. The council may, by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all its members, adjust salaries or the sums appropriated for any other purpose. The council may, by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote, transfer any portion of unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any other purpose or object, but no such transfer shall be made in any other manner. 
Section 38. - Enforcement of the Budget. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce the provisions of the budget. The city manager shall not approve any expenditure or any contract involving any expenditure unless there is a sufficient amount remaining in the budget. 
Section 39. - Levy and Collection of Taxes. 
By December 31, the council shall by resolution levy the taxes necessary to meet the requirements of the budget for the coming year, taking into account estimated revenues from sources other than taxation. By December 31, the city manager shall send to the county auditor a statement of all taxes and assessments levied. The taxes and assessments included in this resolution shall be enforced and collected by the county as real estate taxes. 
Section 40. - Board of Equalization. 
The council shall constitute a board of equalization and shall meet in the usual place for holding council meetings on a date established by the city council in each year, to equalize the assessments according to law. Public notice of such meeting shall be given at least ten days prior to the date fixed, as provided by law. The assessor shall be in attendance but shall have no vote. 
Section 41. - Receipts. 
All income of the city from any source shall be paid to the City of Wayzata. Duplicate receipts will be created with one copy of the receipt kept as a permanent record. All money shall be deposited promptly in depositories designated by the council. All depositories shall furnish a surety bond or collateral, in an amount adequate to protect the city. Money deposited in any bank shall not be in excess of the bond or collateral furnished, plus the amount of such deposit covered by federal deposit insurance. Under the direction of the council, funds not presently needed for other purposes may be invested or reinvested in authorized financial instruments. 
Section 42. - Disbursements. 
Except for payments which may be made by wire transfer, disbursements of city funds must be made by check bearing the manual or facsimile signature of the mayor and the city manager. The city manager must institute safeguards to ensure that checks are issued only by authorized individuals, for properly authorized public purposes and in compliance with this charter. Each check must specify the purpose for which the disbursement is made and the fund from which it is drawn, or a check register must be prepared which contains this information. A check may not be issued until the claim to which it relates has been supported by an itemized bill, payroll, or time-sheet approved and signed by the responsible city officer or authorized city employee who vouches for its correctness and reasonableness. The council may by ordinance or resolution make further regulations for the safekeeping and disbursement of city funds. 
Section 43. - Funds. 
There must be maintained in the city treasury a general fund and the funds required by law, ordinance, the budget resolution or other resolution. The council may make inter-fund loans and transfers except from trust or agency funds or where prohibited by this charter or law. 
Section 44. - Accounts and Reports. 
The city manager shall be the chief accounting officer of the city. The council may prescribe and enforce proper accounting methods, forms, blanks and other devices consistent with the law, this charter and the ordinances passed under it. The city manager shall submit to the council an annual statement of all funds and such other information relative to the finances of the city as the council may require. The accounts of all city officers who receive or have custody of public funds shall be audited annually by a competent public accountant or by the state auditor, and an annual statement showing the receipts and disbursements of the city shall be published. 
Section 45. - Bonded Debt. 
The city may borrow money and issue and sell bonds for any and all of the purposes authorized and subject to the limitations and procedural requirements now or hereafter provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota applicable to cities of the same class, and subject to the further provisions of this section. No bonds shall be issued to pay current expenses. A resolution submitting the proposition of issuance of bonds to the electors of the city shall be adopted only by a vote of four-fifths of all the members of the council. In cases where an election on bonds is not required by law, the issuance thereof shall be authorized by ordinance adopted by a four-fifths vote of all the members of the council and stating the maximum amount and purpose or purposes of the issue. The form and details of bonds, and all covenants to be made by the city for the security thereof may be established by the council by resolution adopted after the bonds have been authorized by the electors or by ordinance. The full faith and credit of the city shall be pledged for the payment of all bonds, except that when net revenues to be derived from the operation of any public utility or combined utility or revenue-producing enterprise of the city are pledged for the payment of bonds issued for the acquisition or betterment of such utility or enterprise, such bonds may in the discretion of the council be issued as general obligations of the city or may be made payable solely from said net revenues. No election shall be required for the authorization of bonds for the following purposes: 
1)  Extending, enlarging or improving water, light, heat, power and sewage disposal plants and systems, or any of them, owned and operated by the city, and acquiring property needed in connection therewith. 
2)  Acquiring property, real or personal, for any municipal purpose, provided that the total amount of bonds authorized for this purpose without an election which are outstanding at any time shall not exceed one-half of one percent (.5%) of the estimated market value of the city. 
3)  For any purpose authorized by the laws of the State of Minnesota, when such laws permit the issuance of bonds for such purpose without an election. 
Section 46. - Reserved. 
Section 47. - Reserved. 
Section 48. - Reserved. 
Section 49. - Reserved 
Section 50. - Certificates of Indebtedness. 
In addition to bonds, the city may issue certificates of indebtedness, for the payment of which its full faith and credit shall be pledged, for the following purposes and subject to the following conditions: 
1)  If in any year the receipts of the city become insufficient for the ordinary expenses of the city, or if any calamity or other public emergency should make necessary extraordinary expenditures, the council may by a resolution approved by four-fifths of all the members thereof authorize the sale of emergency debt certificates to run not to exceed eighteen months. A tax sufficient to redeem all such certificates at maturity shall be levied as a part of the budget of the next year following the issuance of such certificate. 
2)  At any time after the first day of the year following the making of an annual tax levy, the council may by a resolution approved by four-fifths of all the members thereof authorize the sale of tax anticipation certificates to an amount not exceeding and in anticipation of the collection of the taxes so levied which are not yet collected. The certificates shall mature not later than the first day of April of the year following the year of issuance. The proceeds of said taxes shall be irrevocably pledged for the payment of the principal of and interest on said certificates when due, but if the collection of said taxes should be insufficient to make such payment in full, the same shall be made from any other available funds of the city, and the city shall levy additional taxes in amount sufficient to restore said deficiency. These certificates shall not be included within the net debt of the city for the purpose of charter or statutory debt limitations. 
3)  The certificates authorized in this section may be sold in such manner and upon such terms as shall be directed by the council, and no election shall be required for the authorization thereof. 
CHAPTER VI - Public Improvements 

Section 51. - City Plans. 
The city council shall, prepare, amend and adopt action plans for the future physical development and redevelopment of the city consistent with the city's Comprehensive Plan. The council may include provisions for the planning and development of new areas, for the planning and location of public buildings, parks, playgrounds, bridges, streets, and other public facilities, as well as for all other matters which may seem essential to such plans. 
Section 52. - Public Improvements and Special Assessments. 
The city shall have power to make any and every type of public improvement as allowed by the laws of the state, and to levy special assessments upon properties benefited. 
Section 53. - Improvements. 
The council may adopt a comprehensive ordinance prescribing the procedure which shall be followed in making all improvements and making assessments and such ordinance when adopted shall supplant all other provisions of the law on the same subject and may be amended only by a vote of four-fifths of all the members of the council. Such ordinance shall provide for such notice and hearing in the ordering of improvements and the making of assessments as shall be necessary to meet constitutional requirements. All plans, specifications, maps, charts, and field notes prepared by order of the council shall be the property of the city. 
Section 54. - Eminent Domain. 
Condemnation proceedings by this city shall be carried out as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 117 as amended. 
CHAPTER VII - Franchises 

Section 55. - Definition of Franchise. 
The word "franchise" as used in this chapter shall be construed to include all privileges granted to any person or entity in, over, upon, or under any of the highways or public places of the city, whether such privileges have been or shall hereafter be granted either by the city or by the State of Minnesota. 
Section 56. - Franchise Ordinances. 
The council may grant franchises by ordinance adopted by a four-fifths vote of all its members, but in no case shall a franchise be adopted by an emergency ordinance. Franchise rights shall always be subject to the superior right of the city and public to use streets and public places. Unless prohibited by applicable state or federal laws, any person or entity desiring to make use of the streets or public places by placing in, over, upon, or under any street or public place any permanent or semipermanent fixtures for the purposes of transportation, utilities, communications, or other similar uses, or for any other purpose, shall be required to obtain a franchise from the city before proceeding to make such use of the street or public places, or before proceeding to place such fixtures in such places. 
Section 57. - Term Limited. 
All franchises shall be granted for a fixed term not to exceed twenty-five years. 
Section 58. - Rates and Charges. 
Every grantee of a franchise to operate a public utility shall give service at rates approved by the city. 
Section 59. - Conditions of Franchise. 
Every franchise which does not contain the provisions prescribed in this section shall be absolutely void and incapable of ratification by estoppel or otherwise. Every franchise shall contain the following provisions: 
a)  That the grantee shall be subject to and will perform all the terms of Chapter VII of the City Charter. 
b)  That the grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or the value thereof, and the grantee shall have no right to receive, upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire the public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account of the franchise or its value. 
c)  That no sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective until the assignee or lessee shall have filed in the office of the city manager an instrument, duly executed, reciting the fact of such sale or lease, accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee thereunder. 
d)  A provision for the acceptance of the franchise in writing by the grantee within thirty days after its passage. 
Section 60. - Further Provisions in Franchises. 
The city shall have the right to insert in any franchise such conditions and restrictions as the council may deem proper to protect the city's interests. Nothing contained in this charter shall limit any right or power possessed by the city over existing franchises. 
Section 61. - Acceptance of Franchise. 
Every ordinance granting any franchise shall contain all the terms and conditions of the franchise writing, signed by all parties and filed with the city manager. The grantee shall bear the cost of publication of franchise ordinances and shall guarantee such payment in a manner satisfactory to the council before the ordinance is passed. 
Section 62. - Renewals or Extensions. 
Every extension, renewal or modification of any existing franchise or of any franchise granted shall be subject to the same limitations and granted in the same manner as a new franchise. 
CHAPTER VIII - Miscellaneous and Transitory Provisions 

Section 63. - Charter a Public Act. 
This charter shall be a public act and need not be pleaded nor proved in any case. It shall take effect thirty days from and after its adoption by the voters of the city. Amendments to the charter shall be adopted and take effect in accordance with State Statute Chapter 410.12, as amended. 
Section 64. - Oath of Office. 
Before assuming the duties of an office, each elected or appointed officer of the city shall appear before the city manager and take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed by law and file the same with the city manager. Every officer of the city shall hold over until a successor has been elected or appointed and has become fully qualified. The officer shall deliver to the successor, all official books, papers, and records regardless of form. 
Section 65. - Official Bonds/Insurance. 
Adequate faithful performance bonds/insurance coverage shall be purchased to protect the City from dishonesty and malfeasance by employees and elected officials. 
Section 66. - Officers Not to Accept Favors. 
No officer or employee of the city shall solicit or receive any pay, commission, money or thing of value or derive any benefit, profit or advantage, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of any improvement, alteration or repair required by the city, or any contract to which the city shall be a party, except the lawful compensation or salary as such officer or employee, or except as his or her property may be benefited incidentally by the making of public improvements. No officer or employee of the city, except as otherwise provided by law, shall solicit, accept, or receive directly or indirectly from any public utility company or the grantee of any franchise any service upon terms more favorable than those granted to the public generally. 
Section 67. - Forfeiture of Office. 
Any willful violation or omission by any elected officer to perform the provisions of this charter or the lawfully enacted ordinances shall constitute malfeasance or nonfeasance in office. The District Court of Hennepin County is given exclusive jurisdiction to try such cases, upon the written complaint of any fifty legal voters. Such cases shall be preference cases and shall be tried in a summary manner within thirty days after the complaint is filed. A judgment of conviction by the court shall mean an immediate forfeiture of office. 
Section 68. - Official Publication. 
The council shall designate as an official newspaper any newspaper of general circulation in this city for the purpose of publishing notices. Whenever any public notice or publication shall be required either by this charter or by any ordinance of the city, such notice or publication may be given by publication in such official newspaper, public posting and/or by mail to affected parties. 
Section 69. - Application of General Laws. 
All general laws of the state applicable to cities of the class to which the City of Wayzata belongs, not inconsistent with the provision of this charter, shall apply to the City of Wayzata and shall be construed as supplementary to the provisions of this charter. All acts and parts of acts giving the city authority and powers to be exercised outside of the corporate limits are hereby expressly retained. 
Section 70. - Vacation of Streets. 
The council shall have the exclusive power, by ordinance passed by a unanimous vote of all the members thereof, to vacate or discontinue highways, streets and alleys within the city. Such vacations may be made only after notice and hearing of affected property owners and upon such further terms and by such procedure as the council may, by ordinance, prescribe. A record of each such vacation shall be filed in the office of the Register of Deeds of Hennepin County. 
Section 71. - Adverse Possession. 
No right, title, estate or easement of the city in any property shall be lost by adverse possession or occupancy, and no statute of limitations shall operate against the city in favor of any person occupying any public property or highway, whether or not such property or highway shall have been improved. 
Section 72. - Damage Suits. 
No action shall be maintained against the city on account of any injuries or damages to persons or property unless such action shall be commenced within one year from the occurrence of such injury or damage, nor unless notice shall have been given in writing to the city manager within thirty days after the occurrence of such injury or damage, stating the time when and the specific place where and the circumstances under which the same occurred and that the person injured or damaged will claim damages of the city therefor, and the amount of such claim. The time given for giving such notice shall not include any period of time next succeeding the occurrence of the injury and not in excess of 90 days during which the person injured is incapacitated from giving such notice by reason of the injury sustained. 
Section 73. - Recovery of Judgment. 
If any judgment shall be recovered in any action against the city for any injury or damage caused by any construction, excavation, opening or defect in any public place, caused or occasioned by the act or omission of any person, firm, association or corporation, the city shall have the right to recover the amount of the judgment from the person or persons responsible for such defect. 
Section 74. - Ordinances to Carry Out Charter. 
The council shall by ordinance make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out and make effective the provisions of this charter. 
Section 75. - Existing Ordinances Continued. 
All ordinances not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter and in force when this charter takes effect are hereby continued in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the council. 
Section 76. - Pending Condemnation and Assessments. 
Any condemnation or assessment proceedings in progress when this charter takes effect shall be completed under the laws under which such proceedings were begun. All assessments made by the city prior to the time when this charter goes into effect shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as if this charter had not been adopted. 
Section 77. - Reserved. 
Section 78. - Rights and Liabilities. 
The City of Wayzata shall remain vested with and continue to have, hold and enjoy all property, property rights, rights of action, and rights of every kind now belonging to or pertaining to the city and shall be subject to all liabilities which now exist against the city. 
PART I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 101 - CITY CODE 

101.01 - Citation. 
This Code of Ordinances shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Wayzata City Code." This Code of Ordinances may be referred to herein as "this Code." 
101.02 - Copies. 
One copy of this Code shall be marked "Official Copy," shall be filed permanently as part of the official records of the City, and shall be kept current by the City Manager. Additional copies of this Code shall be made available in the City offices for public use and inspection and for public purchase, at a price to be determined by the City Council. 
101.03 - Prima Facie Evidence. 
This Code shall be prima facie evidence of the law of the City. 
CHAPTER 102 - ORGANIZATION 

102.01 - Numbering. 
Each Section number in this Code shall consist of two component parts, separated by a decimal. The first three digits of each such number, immediately to the left of the decimal, shall correspondence to the Chapter number. The last two digits of each such number, immediately to the right of the decimal, shall refer to the position of that Section within the Chapter. 
102.02 - Title Headings. 
Part, Chapter, Section, Subdivision and other titles herein shall not be considered part of the subject matter of this Code. Such titles are intended for convenience only, and they are not necessarily intended to be comprehensive. 
102.03 - Amendments. 
New ordinances proposing amendments or additions to this Code shall be assigned appropriate Code numbers and shall be incorporated into this Code as of their effective date. Reference or citation to this Code shall be deemed to include such amendments and additions. When an ordinance is integrated into this Code, there may be omitted from said ordinance the title, enacting clause, section numbers, definitions of terms identical to those contained herein, the clause indicating the date of adoption, and validating signatures and dates. In integrating ordinances into this Code, the City Manager, in cooperation with the City Attorney, may correct obvious grammatical, punctuation and spelling errors; may change reference numbers to conform with Sections and Chapters herein; may substitute figures for written words and vice versa; may substitute dates for the words "the effective date of this Ordinance"; and may perform like actions to ensure a uniform Code of Ordinances without, however, altering the meaning of the ordinances so enacted. 
CHAPTER 103 - INTERPRETATION 

103.01 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be observed in this Code, unless otherwise expressly provided herein, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  "City." The word "City" shall mean the City of Wayzata, Minnesota. 
B.  "City Code." The words "City Code" and "this Code" shall mean the Wayzata City Code. 
C.  "City Council." The words "City Council" and "Council" shall mean the City Council of Wayzata, Minnesota. 
D.  "City Manager." The words "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager of Wayzata, Minnesota. 
E.  "Owner." The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall mean and include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
F.  "Person." The word "Person" shall mean and include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as individuals. It also shall include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever a violation of any Section of this Code is punishable by a penalty or fine, and whenever the word "Person" is used in such a Section, "Person" shall include partners or members of partnerships or associations, and as to corporations shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for the violation of said Section. 
G.  "Property." The word "property" shall mean and include real property and tangible and intangible personal property. 
H.  "Signature." Where the written signature of any person is required, the proper handwriting of such person or his mark shall be intended. 
I.  "Street." The word "Street" shall mean and include any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words shall mean and include every other of them. 
J.  "Tenant, occupant." The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall mean and include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
103.02 - Rules of Construction. 
The following rules of construction shall be observed in this Code, unless otherwise provided herein, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council, or unless the content clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  And, Or. The word "and" may be read "or" and the word "or" may be read "and," as the sense requires. 
B.  Gender. When any subject matter, party or "person" is described or referred to by words importing the masculine gender, females as well as males, and associations and bodies corporate as well as individuals, shall be deemed to be included. 
C.  Number. When any subject matter, party or "person" is described or referred to by words importing the singular number, the plural and separate matters of persons and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. 
103.03 - Adoption of Chapter 645. 
The definitions and rules of construction, presumptions and miscellaneous provisions pertaining to construction contained in Minn. Stats. Ch. 645, hereby are adopted by reference and are made a part of this Code as if set out in full herein. The references in said Chapter to laws and statutes shall be interpreted herein to mean provisions of this Code, and the references in said Chapter to the Legislature shall be interpreted herein to mean the City Council. 
CHAPTER 104 - VIOLATIONS 

104.01 - Misdemeanor. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this Code, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing this Code. It also shall be a misdemeanor for any person to attempt to commit a misdemeanor or to cause, aid, assist, counsel or advise another to commit a misdemeanor. Any person who commits a misdemeanor, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties therefor established by State Statute. 
104.02 - Petty Misdemeanor. 
Whenever a violation of any provision of this Code is declared to be a petty misdemeanor, any person committing such violation, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties therefor established by State Statute. 
104.03 - Separate Violations. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, each act in violation of this Code shall constitute a separate offense, and each and every day that such a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 105 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 

105.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide the public and the City of Wayzata with an informal, cost effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for misdemeanor violations and petty misdemeanor violations of certain City Code and State Law provisions. The City finds that such an alternative will have the effect of reducing nuisance violations within the City, and provide the City's law enforcement officials with an additional, effective enforcement tool. 
(Ord. 689 [9-11-2008]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.02 - Administrative Offense Defined. 
An administrative offense is a violation of any section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of the Wayzata City Code or ordinance excluding any misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor which would be subject to the Uniform Traffic Regulations Act in Minn. Stats. Ch. 169, and is subject to the penalties identified in the City's administrative offense penalty schedule, updated from time to time by Council and adopted by City Council Resolution. An administrative offense is not a crime. 
(Ord. 689 [9-11-2008); 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.03 - Enforcement. 
Any police officer or other person employed by the City with authority to enforce City Code may, upon determining that there has been a violation of City ordinance or Code, issue an administrative citation to the violator, or party responsible for the violation. The administrative citation shall state the nature, location, date, and time of the violation, provide a citation to the section of the City Code violated, identify the official issuing the administrative citation and the amount of the penalty and where and when it must be paid, state a brief description of the appeal process, and required compliance actions, if applicable. The administrative citation must also include notice that the fine stated in the administrative citation could become a lien on the property if the violator fails to properly and timely respond to the administrative citation. 
(Ord. 689 [9-11-2008); 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.04 - Responding to an Administrative Citation. 
A party who has received an administrative citation must, within ten days after the administrative citation is issued, pay the penalty amount set forth on the notice and satisfy any outstanding orders for compliance within the notice of violation. The penalty may be paid in person at City Hall or by mail. Payment shall be deemed an admission of the violation and the City shall not bring a criminal charge for such violation. Alternatively, a party who has received an administrative citation may, within ten days after the administrative citation is issued, contest the administrative citation by following the appeal process set forth in Section 105.10 below. Payment of an administrative citation shall not excuse the failure to satisfy any compliance orders referenced in the administrative citation and such payment shall not bar further enforcement activity by the City. 
(Ord. 689 [9-11-2008]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.05 - Failure to Respond to an Administrative Citation. 
In the event a party who has received an administrative citation fails to pay the penalty specified on the administrative citation or request an appeal as set forth in Section 105.10 herein within ten days of issuance of the administrative citation; a separate administrative citation may be brought against the party for failure to respond, or alternatively, the City may charge out the initial violation as a petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor charge in which case the administrative offense procedure set forth in this Chapter shall terminate. Failure to pay any fee for an administrative offense as set forth in an administrative citation shall constitute grounds for suspending or revoking any license or permit held by the violators. 
Property owners shall be notified in September of each year by U.S. Mail of any outstanding notices of administrative citations and that the fees contained in the notices, and any associated late fees, will be assessed against the real property, if any, identified in the administrative citation. Thirty days after mailing such letter, the Clerk shall file any outstanding notices of administrative citations and special assessments against each such property which shall become liens on such lots or lands. This shall be an additional remedy and not in lieu of any other penalty provided for in the City Code or State Law. 
(Ord. 689 [9-11-2008]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.06 - Repeat Violations. 
Except for administrative offense penalties arising out of Chapter 801.01 of the City Code which are not subject to this Section 105.06, repeated violations of two or more administrative offenses arising from the same Chapter of the City Code within a 12-month period shall result in a fine which is double the fine established for the previous violation. Additional administrative offenses within the following 12-month period shall result in additional fines not to exceed five times the amount of the original fine. 
(Ord. 689 [9-11-2008]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.07 - Maximum Penalty. 
Except for administrative offense penalties arising out of Chapter 801.01 of the City Code, the maximum amount of an administrative offenses penalty charged for a single offense may not exceed twice the maximum fine authorized by state law for misdemeanor offenses or the maximum fine authorized by state law for an administrative process. The maximum amount of an administrative offense penalty arising out of a continuing violation of Chapter 801.01 of the City Code may not exceed $5,000.00. 
(Ord. 689 [9-11-2008]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.08 - Optional Procedure. 
The City of Wayzata, in its sole discretion, may choose not to utilize administrative citations and may instead bring criminal charges. In the event a party participates in the administrative citation procedures described in this Chapter, but does not pay the monetary penalty imposed and the party is not otherwise absolved of the administrative offense, the City of Wayzata shall seek to collect the costs of the administrative offense procedure including, without limitation, the City's attorney fees and costs as part of a subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is found guilty of the violation. 
(Ord. 689 [9-11-2008]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.09 - Disposition of Penalties. 
All penalties collected pursuant to this Section shall be paid to the City of Wayzata and deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.10 - Appeals. 
A.  Right of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an administrative citation may appeal to the Council. Such appeals must be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, must be accompanied by a filing fee, and must be filed with the Clerk within ten days after receipt of the administrative citation. The filing fee shall be set by the Council. Failure to file an appeal shall constitute a waiver of rights to contest the administrative citation and the imposition of the administrative penalty or penalties. 
B.  Decision. Upon at least five business days' notice to the appellant of the time and place for hearing the appeal, and within 30 days after said appeal is filed, the Council shall hold a hearing thereon, at which the applicant may appear and present evidence as to why a compliance order or administrative order, consistent with the administrative citation or any portion thereof, should not be issued. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm, in whole or in part, the administrative citation and shall order return of all or part of the filing fee if the appeal is upheld. The Council may postpone a meeting and hold a hearing at a later date, not to exceed 60 days after the appeal is filed. 
C.  Refund of Fine in Certain Circumstances. Any fine paid pursuant to this Section shall be refunded if it is determined, after an appeal hearing, that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. The City shall not be obligated to reimburse for any cost undertaken pursuant to a compliance order, even if it is determined, after an appeal hearing, that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. 
(Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
105.11 - Failure to Pay is Separate Violation. 
Failure to pay a fee for an administrative offense in a timely manner, either by order of the Council, or upon losing an appeal in the appeals process described in Section 105.10 above, or within the ten-day deadline described in Section 105.04 above, shall constitute a separate and additional violation of the City Code. 
(Ord. 702 [12-22-2009]) 
CHAPTER 106 - SEPARABILITY 

106.01 - Application. 
Should any Chapter, Section or other part of this Code be held invalid or suspended by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or suspension shall not apply to any other Chapter, Section or part hereof, unless specifically provided otherwise. Should any ordinance or part thereof hereinafter enacted and incorporated into this Code be held invalid or suspended by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or suspension shall not apply to any other part of said ordinance or to any other ordinance incorporated herein, unless specifically provided otherwise. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 689 [9-11-2008]) 
PART II - OPERATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 201 - STATEMENT OF ORGANIZATION 

201.01 - City Council. 
The duties and responsibilities of the City Council shall be as set forth in the City Charter. 
201.02 - City Manager. 
The duties and responsibilities of the City Manager shall be as set forth in the City Charter. 
201.03 - City Departments. 
The functions of municipal government within the City shall be exercised through the following departments: 
A.  A Department of Administration and Finance, which shall be responsible for accounting, treasury, record keeping, budgeting and personnel functions of the City. 
B.  A Department of Public Works, which shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of the City's streets, parks, water treatment and distribution systems, and sewage collection system. 
C.  A Police Department, which shall exercise those responsibilities enumerated in Chapter 202 of the City Code. 
D.  A Fire Department, which shall exercise those responsibilities enumerated in Chapter 203 of the City Code. 
E.  A Municipal Liquor Department, which shall exercise those responsibilities enumerated in Chapter 205 of the City Code. 
F.  Such other departments as may be established from time to time by the Wayzata City Council. 
CHAPTER 202 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

202.01 - Establishment. 
There is hereby established a Department of Police in the City of Wayzata, which shall be referred to herein as the Police Department. 
202.02 - Personnel. 
The Police Department shall consistent of the Chief of Police, who shall be the chief executive officer of the Department, and such subordinate police officers as shall be prescribed by ordinance, resolution or other action of the City Council. Each member of the Police Department, including the Chief of Police, shall be appointed by the City Manager, may be removed by the City Manager and is subordinate to the authority of the City Manager. Personnel of the Police Department shall receive such compensation as shall be determined by the City Manager, in accordance with applicable ordinances, resolutions and other actions of the City Council. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 476 [5-5-1987]) 
202.03 - Duties of Chief of Police. 
The Chief of Police shall have direct control and management of all members of the Police Department, and he shall be responsible for the lawful exercise of the duties of said personnel, subject to the laws of the State of Minnesota, the ordinances of the City of Wayzata and orders of the City Manager. The Chief shall be responsible for the maintenance of order, the enforcement of laws, ordinances and regulations of the City, the prevention of crime, and the protection of life and property within the City. He shall maintain discipline so as to secure complete efficiency in the Department, with departmental efficiency to be evaluated by the Chief, the City Manager and the City Council. The Chief shall also make and file such other reports as may be required by the Council or City Manager. In case of the absence or disability of the Chief, with approval of the City Manager, the Chief shall designate a police officer to be Acting Chief. Such an Acting Chief shall perform the duties and shall exercise the power and authority of the Chief, but he shall be entitled to no additional salary therefor. In event of the absence or disability of both the Chief and the City Manager, the Acting City Manager shall designate a police officer to be Acting Chief. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 476 [5-5-1987]) 
202.04 - General Duties. 
The Chief of Police and each police officer shall perform such duties as may be required by law, ordinance or City regulation and such other duties as may be imposed by the City Manager. Each member of the Department shall give such assistance as is necessary or as may be directed by the City Manager to any other City department. 
202.05 - Departmental Rules. 
The Chief of Police shall promulgate, subject to approval of the City Manager, rules and regulations for the operation of the Department and for the duties, discipline, equipment and uniforms of police officers, prescribing penalties for the violation of any such rules and regulations. The City Manager shall be responsible for the maintaining and enforcement of those departmental rules and regulations. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 476 [5-5-1987]) 
202.06 - Departmental Property. 
The Chief of Police shall have custody, care and control of all property and equipment of the Police Department, subject to the direction of the City Manager. The Chief of Police shall conduct periodic surveys of such property and equipment, arrange for the salvaging of discarded or impaired items, and he shall submit annual recommendations to the City Manager as to future needs of the Department. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 476 [5-5-1987]) 
202.07 - Uniform Regulations. 
Each member of the Police Department shall wear a suitable badge, to be furnished by the City, and every member of the Police Department shall, while on duty, wear a uniform which shall comply with Department rules and regulations pertaining thereto. The Chief of Police may issue written orders authorizing the performance of specific duties while not in uniform. Whenever any police officer shall terminate membership in the Department, he shall immediately deliver his badge and all other property issued by the City and in his possession to the City Manager, and all sums due said officer shall be withheld pending such final settlement. 
202.08 - Minimum Standards. 
Each candidate considered for appointment to the Police Department shall meet all minimum standards for police officers which are established by the State of Minnesota, prior to their actual appointment to the Department. 
202.09 - Discipline-Repealed. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 476 [5-5-1987]) 
202.10 - Emergencies. 
In case of riot or other emergency, as defined by the City Council, the City Manager may appoint for a specified time as many special police officers as may be necessary for the maintenance of law and order. During such term of appointment the special police officers shall possess only those powers and shall perform only those duties as shall be specifically assigned to them by the City Manager or the Chief of Police. All appointments as a special police officer automatically shall expire upon a determination by the City Council that said riot or other emergency has ceased to exist. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 476 [5-5-1987]) 
202.11 - Background Investigations. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is to establish regulations that will allow the Wayzata Police Department to access Minnesota's computerized criminal history information to conduct background checks on individuals in connection with employment, contracts, licenses, permits and/or volunteer work with the City. 
B.  Authority. The Wayzata Police Department is required to do a criminal history background investigation on individuals in connection with applications for the following positions, licenses and permits within the City of Wayzata: 
1.  Regular and part-time employment with the City. 
2.  Certain volunteer positions with or for the City. 
3.  Independent contractors that have: 
a)  Direct access to, or management of, public funds; 
b)  Substantial contact with juveniles in a setting where other adults are not present; 
c)  The task of entering private property on a regular basis; or 
d)  Supervisory responsibilities. 
4.  Massage licenses, including managers and owners of the business. 
5.  Liquor licenses, including managers of the establishments. 
6.  Charitable gambling licenses. 
7.  Sexually oriented business licenses. 
8.  Solicitor and peddler permits. 
9.  Pawnbroker and precious metal dealer permits. 
In conducting criminal history background investigations under this Section, the Wayzata Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension's (BCA) computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired must be maintained at the Police Department under the care and custody of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be released by the Police Department to other city staff involved in the application process. 
C.  Applicant Consent. Before a background investigation is undertaken, the City must obtain written consent from the applicant, authorizing the Wayzata Police Department to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of state law, including Minn. Stats. Ch. 13, regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. 
D.  Rejection of Employment Application. Except for the positions set forth in Minn. Stats.  364.09, the City will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: 
1.  The grounds and reason for the rejection; 
2.  The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minn. Stats.  364.06; 
3.  The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and 
4.  That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. 
E.  Fees. All applications under this Section must be accompanied by a fee set by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Such fees may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 613 [5-27-1999]; Ord. 748 [10-30-2014] 
202.12 - Abuse or Interference with Dogs Used by Police Department. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or meddle with, or to intentionally torture, harass, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the Wayzata Police Department or by any other law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. 440 [8-6-1985]; Ord. 613 [5-27-1999]) 
202.13 - Retirement Policy-Repealed. 
(Ord. 498 [4-19-1988]; Ord. 613 [5-27-1999]; Repealed by Ord. 770 [4-13-2017]) 
CHAPTER 203 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

203.01 - Organization. 
For the proper protection of the lives and property of the citizens of Wayzata and others the Department may serve there is hereby organized a Volunteer Fire Department, which shall be referred to herein as the Fire Department. The City is committed to maintaining the Department as primarily a volunteer organization, but some regular City employees may be assigned to the Department when appropriate. The volunteer members of the Fire Department are governed by this Section, Department by-laws and directives adopted by the Fire Chief ("Chief"). Any amendment to the by-laws is subject to approval by the City Council before becoming effective. If not approved, the amendment is null and void. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.02 - Composition. 
The Fire Department shall consist of not less than twenty members, sometimes referred to herein as firefighters, to which may be added as many members as from time to time may be deemed necessary for proper functioning of the Department. The selection of new members, the qualifications required, and other regulations relative thereto shall be prescribed in the by-laws of the Department. The designated human resource director for the City of Wayzata shall serve on all Fire Department membership selection committees and ensure that recommendations for new members are based solely upon merit and ability. The Department is within the direction and control of the Fire Chief. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.03 - Officers. 
The officers of the Department shall be a Chief, an Assistant Chief, a Captain and a Lieutenant, whose duties shall be as hereinafter stated. The civil officers of the Department shall be a President, a Vice-President, a Secretary and a Treasurer, whose duties shall be prescribed in the by-laws of the Department. 
203.04 - Election of Officers. 
Subject to Section 203.06 and 203.07, the Chief, Assistant Chief and all other officers of the Department shall be elected by the members of the Department at its annual meeting. The method of election and the terms of the offices shall be as the by-laws provide. The Secretary of the Department, as soon as practical after the election of officers, shall submit a list of the officers so elected to the City Manager. The Chief has the right to reject an elected officer. The City Manager has the right to reject an elected Chief. The names of the Chief, Assistant Chief, and Officers shall be submitted for approval to the City Council. If the City Council or City Manager rejects or disapproves of an elected Chief or Assistant Chief, such person(s) shall not run for such position again for a period of at least two years. All elections must be based solely on merit and ability. If for any reason the City Manager or City Council rejects or removes an elected candidate, a new election must be promptly scheduled. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.05 - Meetings and Drills. 
The Department shall meet at least once each month, and it shall have at least one regular drill per month. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.06 - Government. 
The Department shall adopt by-laws and such other regulations as the members deem necessary for the proper and efficient functioning of the Department. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.07 - Duties of the Chief. 
The Chief shall exercise complete supervision and control over the Fire Department and all Departmental apparatus. Except as provided for in this Chapter, the Fire Chief has final authority over all matters involving the Fire Department. The Chief shall examine the apparatus as often as may be necessary and see that it is properly kept, cared for and always ready for service. The Chief shall order drills of the Department as often as the Chief may deem necessary, and the Chief shall see to it that all members are fully trained for their work. The Chief, or the person exercising the powers and duties of his/her office, in case of fire shall have the power to direct that any building or structure be pulled down or removed in such a manner as the Chief may see fit, if such action is deemed by the Chief to be necessary to arrest the progress of any fire. The Chief, or the person in command at any fire, shall have the same power to suppress all tumults or disorders as police officers of the City, and the Chief shall have the power to prescribe limits within which no person shall come, and the Chief shall have the further power to order any person away from the neighborhood of said fire. The Chief may command assistance from inhabitants of the City, not members of the Fire Department, for the extinguishment of fires and for the preservation of property exposed to fires such as he may require. Any person who shall refuse or neglect to obey any lawful order of the officers in command at a fire, or who shall refuse or neglect to depart from a fire when ordered to do so as aforesaid shall for such offense be subject to the applicable penalties therefor. The Chief shall, in January of each year, report to the City Council the number of fire calls responded to during the preceding year, giving the value of buildings and contents concerned and the losses sustained, reporting both calls responded to in the City limits and those outside of the City limits. In the absence of the Chief the Assistant Chief, and in his absence the next ranking officer, shall carry out the duties of the Chief. 
The Chief is elected by the members pursuant to Section 203.04, and is approved and removed by, and works under the authority and direction of, the City Manager. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.08 - Education, Physical Testing, and Training. 
The Chief, together with other officers of the Department, shall be responsible for preparing and carrying out a proper education, physical testing and training program for all members of the Department. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.09 - Police Officers. 
It shall be the duty of all police officers of the City to keep all idlers and suspicious persons from any fire and its vicinity and to use all proper methods to preserve goods and other property endangered at fires. 
203.10 - False Alarms-Repealed. 
(7-21-81 Code; repealed by Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.11 - Police Powers of Firefighters. 
All members of the Fire Department are hereby given special police powers for the purpose of enforcing the terms of this Chapter and other provisions of the City Code pertaining to fires. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.12 - Calls Outside the City. 
The Fire Department is hereby authorized to answer fire calls outside of the City limits, and when so doing the members shall be considered on duty as firefighters of the City. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 656 [3-15-2005]) 
203.13 - Retirement Policy-Repealed. 
(Ord. 499 [4-19-1988]; Repealed by Ord. 770 [4-13-2017]) 
CHAPTER 204 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

204.01 - Policy and Purpose. 
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure or other major incidents, and in order to ensure that preparations of the City of Wayzata (City) will be adequate to deal with such disasters and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this City, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary: 
A.  To establish a City emergency management organization responsible for City Planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters. 
B.  To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters. 
C.  To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the City, and other political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions. 
D.  To comply with the provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 12, known as the Minnesota Emergency Management Act of 1996. 
E.  To participate as a member of the Lake Minnetonka Regional Emergency Management, Preparedness Planning and Review Committee and accept its emergency plan as the City's basic plan for responses to emergencies, disasters, major incidents, mutual aid and other projects consistent with this Chapter and Minn. Stats. Ch. 12. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
204.02 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Emergency Management" means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material mishaps or other major incidents. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out of the foregoing functions. Emergency management includes those activities sometimes referred to as "Civil Defense" or "Emergency Preparedness" functions. 
B.  "Disaster" means a situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in major loss to property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss. 
C.  "Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action to respond, or prevent from developing or occurring. 
D.  "Emergency Management Forces" means the total personnel resources engaged in city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provision of this Chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from City department authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies. 
E.  "Emergency Management Organization" means the City staff element responsible for coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides City liaison and coordination with federal, state and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities, major incidents, mutual aid, and other projects consistent with this Chapter and assures implementation of federal, state, county and other program requirements. 
F.  "Major Incident" means any incident which exhausts local resources. 
G.  "Emergency Management Mutual Aid" means any disaster or major incident which requires the dispatching of city personnel, equipment or other necessary resources within or without the city limits. 
H.  "Lake Minnetonka Regional Emergency Management, Preparedness, Planning and Review Committee" means a committee made up of the Lake Minnetonka area emergency management directors which develops, renews and establishes a basic emergency plan, and identifies and coordinates training for member communities and reviews local plans, exercises, major incidents and disaster responses which are consistent with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
204.03 - Establishment of an Emergency Management Organization. 
There is hereby created with the City an emergency management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the Emergency Management Director, hereinafter called the "director." The director shall be appointed by the Mayor. The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness organization. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
204.04 - Powers and Duties of the Director. 
A.  The director shall represent the City at any regional or state conference for emergency management. The director may develop additional mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present such agreements to the City Council for its action. The arrangements shall be consistent with the Emergency Plan. The director shall also be the City's representative on the Lake Minnetonka Regional Emergency Management, Preparedness Planning and Review Committee. 
B.  The director shall make assessments of personnel, businesses and industries, resources and facilities of the City as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency, major incident or disaster. 
C.  The director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness of the City and shall present the plan to the City Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all City agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the City to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The director shall coordinate the basic emergency management activities of the City to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the basic emergency plan of the Lake Minnetonka Regional Emergency Management, Preparedness Planning and Review Committee, and Federal and State Governments. 
D.  In accordance with the Emergency Plan, the director shall institute such training programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the Emergency Plan when a disaster, major incident or mutual aid occurs. 
E.  The director, during an emergency, major incident or mutual aid, shall utilize the personnel services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all the departments and agencies shall be, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperative with and extend such services and facilities to the Emergency Management organization. The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the director shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the department or agency. 
F.  The director shall, in cooperation with the existing departments and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of such emergency management personnel, that may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans. To the extent that such emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular department or agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to such departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency. 
G.  The director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the City Council with reference to emergency management. 
H.  The director shall prepare and submit such reports on emergency preparedness activities as may be requested by the governing authority. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
204.05 - Local Emergencies. 
A.  A local emergency, including a disaster, major incident or mutual aid response, may be declared by the Mayor, or his or her legal successors. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order, or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly by the City Clerk. 
B.  A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable plans including fiscal expenditures which are consistent with this Chapter. 
C.  No other jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
204.06 - Emergency Regulations. 
A.  Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for such an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the City Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with the applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulation, drills, or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies. 
B.  Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk where a copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of such regulation and its availability for inspection at the City Clerk's Office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or at such other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution. By like resolution, the Council may modify or rescind any such regulation. 
C.  The City Council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to the extent the conflict exists. 
D.  During a declared emergency, the director is, notwithstanding any statutory or charter provision on the contrary, empowered through its governing body acting within or without the corporate limits of the City, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. The director may exercise such powers in the fight of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of call for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirements for budgets. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
204.07 - Emergency Management a Governmental Function. 
All functions thereunder and all other activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this Section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the workers' compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
204.08 - Participation in Labor Dispute or Politics. 
The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute. The director may express professional opinions on legislative or other legal regulations consistent with the areas found in Minn. Stats. Ch. 12. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
204.09 - Authorizing Dispatch and Use of City Equipment and Services by the Director in Emergency Situations (Mutual Aid). 
A.  The City authorizes the director to dispatch City equipment and personnel to local communities who request aid to combat their emergency, disaster, or major incident consistent with this Chapter, and Section 204.04.E. 
B.  The director shall evaluate the internal needs of the City, and dispatch appropriate available aid. The director shall immediately recall, order and terminate the use of any dispatched equipment and personnel when the need for their use no longer exists, or earlier, when it appears in the best interest of the City. Aid requested from outside the Lake Minnetonka Regional Area, or extended local aid, shall require mutual agreement between the director and the City Manager/Administrator or their designee. 
C.  The director shall be fully authorized as an act of the City, and all provisions for compensation of personnel, rental of equipment, liability insurance coverage, workman's compensation insurance and all other safeguards and matters pertaining to the City, its equipment and personnel, shall apply in each case as if specifically authorized and directed at such time, whether or not the governing body or authority of the place in which the disaster, major incident, mutual aid, or other occurrence exists, has previously requested and provided for assistance and the use of equipment and personnel under a mutual protection agreement or other type protection agreement within the City. 
(Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Chapter 204 (Civil Defense) repealed and replaced by Ord. 604 [7-15-1998]) 
CHAPTER 205 - MUNICIPAL LIQUOR DISPENSARY 

205.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Intoxicating Liquor" and "Liquor" shall mean distilled, vinous and fermented beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight. 
B.  "Beer" shall mean any beer, ale or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 488 [12-15-1987]; Ord. 728 [05-24-2012]) 
C.  "On-Sale" shall mean sale by the drink for consumption in the dispensary. 
D.  "Off-Sale" shall mean retail sale in the original package for consumption away from the dispensary. 
E.  "Sale," "Sell" and "Sold" shall mean and include all sales, barters, exchanges, gifts and other means of furnishing intoxicating liquor, beer or wine, including such acts in violation or evasion of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 728 [05-24-2012]) 
F.  "Minor" shall mean any person considered a minor under Minnesota Statutes for the purposes of this Chapter. 
G.  "Municipal Liquor Dispensary" or "Dispensary" shall mean one or more City-owned and operated locations or stores within the City that provide "on-sale" and "off-sale" distribution of beer, wine and liquor. 
(Ord. 728 [05-24-2012]) 
H.  "Wine" shall mean any vinous beverage created by fermentation. 
(Ord. 728 [05-24-2012]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 488 [12-15-1987]) 
205.02 - Liquor Dispensary Established; Off-Sale Limited to Municipal Liquor Stores; Public Consumption Limited. 
No liquor, beer or wine may be sold at "off-sale" anywhere in the City other than at the established municipal liquor dispensary or by anyone not employed in said dispensary except as lawfully authorized by the City Council prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and any renewals thereof. No person shall consume liquor, wine or beer in a public park, on a public street, or in any public place other than the "on-sale" dispensary and such clubs, restaurants and other locations open to the public as lawfully may be authorized. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 488 [12-15-1987]; Ord. 728 [05-24-2012]; Ord. 767 [2-16-2017]) 
205.03 - Location and Operation. 
A.  The locations or stores of the municipal liquor dispensary shall be established at such suitable places in the City as the Council shall determine. However, no premises upon which taxes or other special levies are delinquent shall be leased for dispensary purposes. 
B.  The dispensary shall be in the immediate charge of a Liquor Manager selected by the City Manager. The Liquor Manager shall operate the dispensary under the direction of the City Manager, and shall be responsible to the City Manager for the conduct of the dispensary in full compliance with this Chapter and with all laws relating to the sale of liquor, beer and wine. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 488 [12-15-1987]; Ord. 728 [05-24-2012]) 
205.04 - Dispensary Fund Created. 
A municipal liquor dispensary fund is hereby created in which all revenues received from the operation of the dispensary shall be deposited and from which all ordinary operating expenses of the dispensary shall be paid. Any amounts which may be necessary to borrow from the general fund or other funds of the City for rent, fixtures and stock or for operating expenses shall be reimbursed to said fund out of the first available moneys coming into the dispensary fund thereafter. Surpluses accumulating in the dispensary fund may be transferred to the general fund or to any other appropriate fund of the City by a resolution of the Council and may be expended for any municipal purpose. The handling of municipal liquor dispensary receipts and disbursements shall comply with the procedures prescribed by law for the receipts and disbursements of City funds generally. 
205.05 - Hours of Operation. 
The "off-sale" municipal liquor dispensary may be open for operation from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays, or as otherwise permitted by State Statute. The "on-sale" municipal liquor dispensary may be open for operation on Mondays through Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the following morning, and on Sundays as permitted by State Statute. Both the "on-sale" and "off-sale" operations shall be closed when sales are prohibited by State Statute. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 406 [12-15-1981]; Ord. 420 [7-19-1983]; Ord. 488 [12-15-1987]; Ord. 728 [05-24-2012]) 
205.06 - Conditions of Operation and Restrictions on Consumption. 
A.  No person shall keep, possess or operate in any part of the municipal liquor dispensary any gambling device or permit the same to be kept or used, except such devices authorized by City ordinance. 
B.  No liquor, wine or beer shall be sold or served to a minor, directly or indirectly. 
C.  No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of obtaining liquor, wine or beer. 
D.  No person shall purchase liquor, wine or beer for the purpose of selling or otherwise providing liquor, wine or beer to a minor. 
E.  No liquor, wine or beer shall be sold or served to an intoxicated person. 
F.  No person shall be permitted to loiter about the dispensary habitually. 
G.  No disorderly person shall be permitted on the dispensary premises. 
H.  The dispensary shall be inspected by the Health Officer as many times as deemed necessary to ensure that the premises are maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 488 [12-15-1987]; Ord. 728 [05-24-2012]) 
205.07 - Violations. 
It shall be the duty of all police officers of the City to enforce the provisions of this Chapter, to search premises and seize evidence of any such violation, to preserve said evidence, and to prepare the necessary processes and papers therefor. Persons violating any provisions of this Chapter or applicable State Statute shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any employee of the dispensary violating any provision of this Chapter or applicable State Statute shall be subject to discipline. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 488 [12-15-1987]) 
205.08 - Examination of Books and Records. 
The Council and any officer or officers formally authorized by it shall have the power to make investigations into the municipal liquor dispensary's affairs, subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books and papers. The Council may at any time provide for an examination or audit of the accounts of the municipal liquor dispensary. At the beginning of each fiscal year the Council shall employ either a certified public accountant or the state public examiner to audit all accounts of the municipal liquor dispensary for the preceding fiscal year. Such auditor, so employed, shall have unlimited privileges of investigation to examine under oath or otherwise all officers, clerks and employees of the municipal liquor dispensary, who shall give all required information and assistance and who shall submit for examination all such books and papers relating to the business of the municipal liquor dispensary as is requested. Any City official or employee failing to respond appropriately to a reasonable request of the auditor shall be subject to discipline. A duplicate report of any such audit shall be presented to the Mayor and each Council Member, one copy shall be filed with the City Manager, and one copy shall be filed with the Manager of the dispensary. The Council shall provide for the payment of each such audit. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 488 [12-15-1987]) 
CHAPTER 206 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES 

206.01 - Procedures Established. 
Unless specifically undertaken pursuant to Minn. Stats. Ch. 429, the following provisions shall govern, control and provide the method of making local improvements and special assessments in the City. 
206.02 - Classification and Costs. 
All public and local improvements shall be divided into three classes, as following: 
A.  Class "A" Improvements which are of general benefit to the City as a whole, the cost of which shall be paid out of City funds. 
B.  Class "B" Improvements which are both of general benefit and which also directly benefit abutting property, the cost of which shall be paid out of City funds and by special assessments against the property benefited in proportion to the benefit received, as determined by the City Council. 
C.  Class "C" Improvements which are expressly for the benefit of adjacent property, the cost of which shall be paid entirely by special assessments against the property found to benefit thereby or abut thereto. 
206.03 - Initiation. 
The proceedings to be followed in making all public and local improvements shall be initiated either by a resolution adopted by the Council or by a request petition signed by owners of not less than 35 percent of the real property abutting on the street or streets or within the area named in the petition as the location of the petitioned improvement. The Council shall by resolution declare the adequacy of such petition and signatures thereto. The terms "improvement" or "project" may be taken to mean any kind of construction, property, material, equipment, alteration, maintenance, service or any combination thereof. Several improvements may be included in one project and in the same proceedings. 
206.04 - Preliminary Plans. 
At its meeting at which said proceedings are initiated, the Council shall direct the City's engineer to prepare preliminary plans for and a description of the nature and location of the improvement, together with an estimate of its cost and an assessment basis, all of which shall be filed with the City Manager without delay. 
206.05 - Public Hearing. 
After initiation of improvement proceedings and receipt of the City Engineer's report, the Council shall arrange for a public hearing to consider said improvements. Preliminary plans and cost estimates must be on file with the City Manager at least seven days before said hearing. A notice of said hearing, outlining the nature and general location of the improvement, stating that the preliminary plans and cost estimates may be seen at the City Manager's office, and stating that all citizens interested in the improvement will be heard at the public hearing at the time and place therein designated, shall be published once in the official newspaper of the City at least seven days before the hearing. A copy of said notice also shall be mailed to each owner of property to be assessed for the cost of any part of said improvement at least seven days prior to said hearing, as such ownership is shown in records of the Hennepin County Auditor. 
206.06 - Hearing Procedure. 
At the public hearing on an improvement, business shall be taken up in the following order: 
A.  Reading a description and cost estimates of the proposed improvement. 
B.  Designating and classifying said improvement and determining district boundaries within which property may be assessed for the cost of the improvement. 
C.  Hearing of interested citizens. 
D.  Amending, approving or rejecting said improvement by motion of the Council. 
E.  If the improvement is approved, authorizing by resolution the making of said improvement, and directing the City Engineer or a specially appointed engineer to prepare complete working plans, specifications and detailed cost estimates of said improvement. 
Reasonable opportunity shall be given all citizens to be heard on any matter relative to the proceedings on said improvement. If practicable the hearing shall be completed in one session; otherwise the meeting may be adjourned to a stated time and as many adjourned sessions as may seem expedient. In case the proposed project is amended by extension so that it will directly affect property the owners of which have not been served a notice of the hearing as provided in Section 206.05, the hearing shall be adjourned for not less than ten days nor more than 21 days, and notice thereof together with the original hearing notice shall be served on said property owners. Said service, as to manner and time, shall be as specified in Section 206.05. An adjourned session shall be conducted in the same manner as stated above. 
206.07 - Supplemental Petitions. 
In the event improvement proceedings have been initiated by a petition on which the Council does not take favorable action at the hearing specified in Section 206.05, said hearing shall be adjourned to a time not less than 21 days nor more than 30 days from the date thereof and copies of the preliminary plans, cost estimates and assessment basis, together with petition forms, shall be given out for circulation and signatures at or after the hearing on request of the original petitioners. These petitions, herein termed supplemental petitions, shall give a legal description of the property owned by each signer, and each signature shall be duly acknowledged. Said supplemental petitions shall be filed with the City Manager within 30 days after said hearing. Thereupon, the City Manager shall compare the names of signers and property descriptions with the County Auditor's records, and if he finds that said supplemental petitions have been signed by owners of at least 51 percent of abutting property to be directly affected by said improvement he shall refer said petitions to the Council at said adjourned meeting, whereupon the Council shall authorize said improvement and proceed with construction as herein provided. 
206.08 - Bids and Award of Contract. 
If the filed estimate of an improvement is $2,500.00 or more the Council shall, on approval of the plans and specifications for said improvement, advertise for sealed bids in the official newspaper of the City and in such other publications as it may decide, giving not less than ten days' notice of the meeting of the Council to open and consider bids, unless the Council by an emergency ordinance shall provide otherwise. Each bid shall be accompanied by cash or a certified check or bidder's bond in such an amount as the Council may specify as a guarantee that the successful bidder will enter into a contract satisfactory to the Council. Bids may be opened and a contract awarded at a regular, an adjourned or a special meeting of the Council. The consideration of bids and awarding of a contract shall comply with the provisions of Section 31 of the Revised City Charter. The whole project may be covered by one contract or different parts may be covered by separate contracts. Unless the improvement is an emergency measure, the Council shall not award a contract at a cost price which exceeds the Engineer's detailed estimate by more than 25 percent without first re-advertising and accepting new bids. 
Acting under express permission of the Council secured prior to the award of the contract, as above specified, property owners may make local improvements in front of their respective properties, such as sidewalks, curbs, gutters, branch sewers and tree planting, provided the work is done within the time specified by the Council according to plans and specifications furnished by the City and under the supervision of the City Engineer or other inspection authorized by the Council. 
In preparation for a contemplated improvement, such as street oiling or pavement, the Council may require property owners to make local improvements in front of their respective properties, such as watermain connections, curbs, gutters and branch sewers by so notifying said owners thirty days before said local improvements are to be completed; the serving of said notice to be the same as specified in Section 206.05. In case any property owner fails to comply with said notice, the Council may cause said local improvements to be made and may assess the cost thereof on the benefited property. 
206.09 - Contract Provisions. 
Every contract for an improvement shall specify: 
A.  That the contractor shall be responsible for the condition of the project until its acceptance by the Council; 
B.  That the contractor shall save the City harmless from all defective materials or insufficiency of labor or materials and from all claims for damages resulting directly or indirectly under his contract; 
C.  That the contractor shall be paid monthly on the basis of 90 percent of the acceptable construction completed during the preceding month plus 90 percent of the acceptable delivered unused materials, according to the certificate of the City Engineer or other engineer specially appointed; 
D.  That final payment shall not be made until the improvement covered by the contract has been completed, its operation has been tested, and it has been accepted by the Council; 
E.  That the plans and specifications are parts of the contract; and 
F.  That in case the contractor fails to fully comply with the contract requirements the Council may order the work suspended and either relet the contract or have the work completed by City labor. Every contract shall be accompanied by an acceptable surety bond in the full amount of the contract price, conditioned on full compliance with, and completion of, the contract acceptable to the Council, and for the payment of all materials used and labor performed. The contract also may provide that the contractor's bond shall further be conditioned on replacing all defective workmanship and material and making good all defects and omissions which may be detected within two years after the completion of the contract and to pay the City for all damages resulting from such defects, omissions and all acts of the contractor under the contract; 
G.  That the engineer under the contract shall be paid in full only after he furnishes the City Manager with complete "as built" plans, showing the contract improvements as existing. 
206.10 - Inspection. 
When public improvements are under construction the City's engineer shall make frequent inspections of all work in progress and shall make tests of the materials used. He shall report to the Council promptly any deviation from the contract, or any faulty material or workmanship, which comes to his attention. If a maintenance bond is required under Section 206.09.F, he also shall inspect the work during the two years following completion of the contract and particularly just before the maintenance bond expires, and he shall report to the Council any defect which gives the City the right of action under the maintenance bond. 
206.11 - Confirmation of the Assessment. 
At any time after the public hearing authorized in Section 206.05 hereof, and after the authorization of an improvement, the City Manager shall prepare and file a complete assessment roll assessing the cost of each improvement separately. Property abutting upon an improvement shall be assessed at a uniform rate per front foot, an area basis and/or an equal amount per lot, whichever is most equitable. If the benefits are also spread over an area outside of abutting property, the additional assessment shall be levied on a uniform area basis on all non-abutting property, provided that under exceptional conditions whereby the assessment on any property, would be equitable if computed according to either the front or the area basis, said assessments may be adjusted in proportion to the benefits accruing to such property. The costs of an improvement or specific parts of an improvement common to more than one assessment district may be apportioned over two or more such districts as indirect benefits. 
Upon the filing of the assessment roll the City Manager shall mail a notice of a public hearing thereon to each owner of property to be assessed for the cost of any part of the improvement at least seven days prior to said hearing, as such ownership is shown in records of the Hennepin County Auditor. Said notice shall state that the assessment roll is open for public inspection in the City Manager's office and the place, date and hour of said hearing whereat the Council will consider the assessments and will hear all interested persons. At said hearing the assessment roll shall be read in full. The Council shall hear all interested persons and may amend the assessments. Finally, either at the first or an adjourned session of said hearing, the Council shall confirm the completed assessment roll by resolution. 
206.12 - Reassessment and Refunds. 
On the completion of any improvement, the cost of which has been assessed on abutting and/or benefited property, and the final cost of the project, including engineering, inspection and other incidental expenses has been determined, the Council may reassess any additional costs not yet assessed on abutting and/or the benefited property in the same manner and on the same basis as the original assessment, and such reassessment amounts shall be added thereto. If the assessment exceeds the actual cost of the improvement, the City Council shall by resolution provide for a pro-rata refund of such assessment to the persons who are by law entitled to the same by a proper correction of the assessment roll certified to the County Auditor or otherwise, or by direct payment with City warrants of the amounts of the adjustment if the assessment has been made. 
206.13 - Appeals. 
Any person who may deem that there is any irregularity in the proceedings for an improvement, or who is dissatisfied with the amount assessed against his property, may at any time within 20 days after the passage of the resolution confirming the assessment appeal from such action to the District Court of Hennepin County by serving upon the Mayor a notice setting forth the grounds of appeal, which notice with proof of service shall be filed with the City Manager forthwith. The appellant shall file with the City Manager for the benefit of the City a bond in the sum approved by the City Manager, conditioned to pay all costs and disbursements which may be awarded against him and abide the order of the Court. Appellant shall file certified copies of the Notice of Appeal and bond on appeal, together with all endorsements, with the Clerk of the District Court within ten days after the service of said Notice of Appeal. Upon the filing of such certified copies with the Clerk of the District Court the City Manager shall furnish the appellant with certified copies of such records as may be necessary to present the appeal, on payment by the appellant of the City Manager's proper charges thereof. The appeal shall be entered by the Clerk of said Court upon the civil calendar for trial at the next term of said Court commencing not less than ten days after serving the notice of appeal. In case the judgment is adverse to the City, the Council shall have the power to levy a corrected assessment against the property of an appellant in accordance therewith. Assessments shall be conclusive as against any and all persons who do make such appeal. 
206.14 - Collection of Assessments. 
The Council shall provide for the collection of assessments in annual installments over a period of not to exceed 20 years, provided that all assessments for improvements of a temporary character shall be levied and collected in a lump sum. The whole of any such assessment may be paid to the City, without interest, if paid within 30 days from the date of passage of the resolution confirming the assessment. When payment of any assessment is deferred, interest shall be charged annually on the unpaid balance at a rate not to exceed that permitted by State law from the date of the passage of the resolution confirming the assessment, and such assessment shall be a lien upon the premises benefited until paid. It shall be the duty of the City Manager annually, at the time of certifying other taxes, to certify to the County Auditor all special assessments due from property in the current year and previous years with interest on all unpaid installments, which sums shall be extended on the tax rolls against such property in the same manner as other taxes are collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City as other taxes are collected and paid. 
206.15 - Financing. 
In compliance with the Revised City Charter, the Council may, at the time of passing the resolution approving any improvement, or at any time subsequent thereto, provide for the issuance of certificates of indebtedness or bonds of the City sufficient to pay the cost of constructing and installing said improvement. The Council may, for the purpose of creating a working capital for such construction, also issue temporary certificates of indebtedness. All certificates of indebtedness or bonds of the City shall mature serially in annual installments within not more than 20 years after issue, and if so specified at the time of sale such certificates or bonds may be made payable on call of the City. No annual maturing installment of principal shall be more than 21/2 times the amount of the smallest installment thereof maturing in any one year. 
206.16 - Irregularities. 
No error or irregularity which does not materially affect the rights of property owners affected shall invalidate these proceedings or any assessment levied under this Chapter. 
CHAPTER 207 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 

207.01 - Custody. 
The City Manager or his duly authorized representative shall be responsible for the custody of all abandoned or stolen personal property coming into possession of the City and remaining unclaimed by its lawful owner. All such property shall be retained in a safe place for a minimum period of 60 days, unless claimed by its lawful owner or otherwise disposed of as provided in Section 207.03, and every effort shall be made to return such property to said owner. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 599 [12-23-1997]) 
207.02 - Disposition. 
All property held in custody by the City and remaining unclaimed after 60 days shall be deemed abandoned, and together with any surplus or obsolete property of the City may be sold at public auction. Said auction shall be held no less than two weeks after published notice thereof in the City's legal newspaper, which notice shall state the time and place of said auction and a list of the property to be sold. In lieu of said auction, following approval by the City Council, the City Manager also may dispose of any such property by donating it to a regularly constituted civic or charitable organization. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 599 [12-23-1997]) 
207.03 - Summary Disposal. 
The City Manager may dispose of any unclaimed property in custody of the City in a summary manner, if such property is of a dangerous or perishable nature, without notice and in such a manner as he deems appropriate. 
207.04 - Proceeds. 
The proceeds of a public auction to dispose of unclaimed property first shall be applied to payment of the necessary expenses of the auction and all costs relative thereto. The remaining proceeds then shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the City. 
CHAPTER 208 - PEOPLE AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE CITATIONS 

208.01 - Authority. 
Pursuant to Minn. Stats.  626.862, persons other than peace officers, constables and part-time peace officers, may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention if specifically authorized by ordinance. 
(Ord. 496 [4-19-1988]; Ord. 594 [7-10-1997]) 
208.02 - Authority to Issue Citations. 
The following City employees and agents are hereby authorized to issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention for violations of state law, for violations of state regulations and for violations of the City Code within their respective assigned jurisdiction: 
A.  Code enforcement officer; 
B.  Public health sanitarian; 
C.  Animal control officer; 
D.  Fire marshal; 
E.  Weed inspector; 
F.  Park supervisor/forester; and 
G.  Police reserve officer. 
(Ord. 496 [4-19-1988] Ord. 594 [7-10-1997]) 
PART III - STREETS, PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 301 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

301.01 - Adoption of State Regulations. 
The regulatory provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 169, as amended, hereby are adopted as regulations governing the use of all highways, streets and alleys within the City, and said provisions shall be considered a part of this Chapter as if set out herein in full. A violation of the provisions or of any traffic regulation established pursuant to this Chapter shall be considered a violation of this Chapter. All words and terms used in this Chapter and defined in said Chapter 169 shall have the meanings given them therein. 
301.02 - Speed Limits. 
Whenever necessary to prevent accidents or to otherwise maintain public safety, the City Council by motion may request the State Commissioner of Transportation to authorize specific speed limit zones within the City. 
301.03 - Through Streets; One-Way Streets. 
Whenever necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic, to prevent accidents or to otherwise maintain public safety, the City Council by motion may designate any street or any portion thereof within the City as a through highway or as a one-way roadway. 
301.04 - Stop Intersections. 
Whenever necessary to prevent accidents or to otherwise maintain public safety, the City Council by motion may designate any intersection within the City as a stop intersection. 
301.05 - Turning Movements. 
Whenever necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic, to prevent accidents or to otherwise maintain public safety, the City Council by motion may designate any intersection within the City as one where the turning of vehicles to the left or to the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specified hours. No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any street or at any intersection where such a movement is prohibited or where traffic is regulated by a traffic control signal. 
301.06 - Safety Zones; Lanes of Traffic. 
Whenever necessary to assist in the direction and control of traffic, to prevent accidents or to otherwise maintain public safety, the City Council by motion may establish safety zones and may designate lanes of traffic on any street or any portion thereof within the City. 
301.07 - Restrictions on Trucks. 
No truck in excess of 14,000 pounds gross weight per axle shall travel on any street within the City, other than designated truck routes, unless a permit therefor first has been obtained from the Director of Public Works. Said permit shall be issued subject to such restrictions and conditions as the Director deems appropriate, including the posting of a cash deposit or performance bond to guarantee the repair of any damages resulting therefrom. 
A.  Designated Truck Routes. All U.S. Highways, State Highways and County Roads within the City hereby are designated as truck routes. The City Council by motion may designate any other street or highway as a truck route. 
B.  Exempted Vehicles. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following vehicles: emergency vehicles; trucks owned or operated by the City; school buses, when engaged in transporting pupils to or from school; trucks owned or operated by utility companies, when engaged in the construction or repair of utility company facilities; and refuse collection vehicles, when engaged in the collection of refuse from homes within the City. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 437 [4-2-1985]) 
301.08 - Seasonal Weight Restrictions. 
During the spring of each year no vehicle in excess of 8,000 pounds gross weight per axle shall travel on any street within the City, other than U.S. Highways, State Highways and County Roads, unless a permit therefor first has been obtained from the Director of Public Works. Said permit shall be issued subject to such restrictions and conditions as the Director deems appropriate, including the posting of a cash deposit or performance bond to guarantee the repair of any damages resulting therefrom. The dates and duration of the City's seasonal weight restrictions shall be as set by the Director of Public Works. The only vehicles exempted from the provisions of this Section shall be those enumerated in Section 301.07.B. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 411 [6-15-1982]) 
301.09 - Vehicles on Sidewalks. 
A.  No person shall drive or ride any automobile, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized bicycle or other motor vehicle upon any sidewalk within the City, except for crossing a sidewalk at an alley, driveway or other authorized location. 
B.  No person shall stop, stand or park any automobile, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized bicycle or other motor vehicle upon any sidewalk within the City. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 623 [8-16-2000]; Ord. 774 [10-12-2017]) 
301.10 - Exhibition Driving. 
No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor vehicle within the City in a manner simulating a race or in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying or the throwing of sand or gravel. Unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires or the unreasonable throwing of sand or gravel by tires shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section. 
301.11 - Police Powers. 
All police officers hereby are authorized to direct traffic within the City, either in person or by visible or audible signal, in conformity with this Chapter and State traffic regulations. During a fire or other emergency, when required to preserve the free flow of traffic, or when required to otherwise maintain public safety, police officers may direct traffic as conditions necessitate notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter and State traffic regulations. 
301.12 - Traffic Control Devices. 
Following a motion of the City Council establishing a traffic regulation authorized in this Chapter, the Director of Public Works shall have installed the traffic control device necessary to put into effect such regulation. 
301.13 - Current Traffic Regulations. 
All traffic regulations previously established and currently in effect, as evidenced by the appropriate traffic control device, shall continue in effect until repealed by a motion of the City Council. 
301.14 - Visibility at Intersections. 
No person shall place or allow to remain upon any private property or public property adjacent thereto any tree, hedge, planting, decoration or other obstruction which would prevent the operator of any motor vehicle from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection. 
CHAPTER 302 - PARKING REGULATIONS 

302.01 - Adoption of State Regulations. 
The regulatory provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 169, as amended, governing the parking of motor vehicles hereby are adopted by reference to regulate parking within the City, and said provisions shall be considered a part of this Chapter as if set out herein in full. A violation of said provisions or of any parking regulation established pursuant to this Chapter shall be considered a violation of this Chapter, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device. All words and terms in this Chapter and defined in said Chapter 169 shall have the meanings given them therein. 
302.02 - No Parking Zones; Limited Parking Zones. 
The City Council by motion may prohibit parking on any street or any portion thereof within the City. The City Council by motion also may prohibit parking during specified hours or limit parking to a specified length of time on any street or portion thereof or in any public parking area or portion thereof. All "no parking" zones shall be marked by a sign or by a solid yellow painted curb. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 585 [10-23-1996]) 
302.03 - Angle Parking. 
The City Council by motion may establish angle parking on any street or any portion thereof within the City. In all areas where angle parking is required, every vehicle shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing the curb or edge of the traveled portion of the roadway and with the vehicle located within the designated parking space. For purposes of this Section, angle parking shall be all parking which is not parallel or perpendicular to the curb or edge of the traveled portion of the roadway. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 411 [6-15-1982]) 
302.04 - Loading Zones. 
The City Council by motion may designate specified parking spaces on any street within the City as a loading zone. During posted loading zone hours no person shall stop or park any vehicle in a designated loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers or freight, and then only for a period of time no longer than is necessary for that purpose. 
302.05 - Bus Stops; Taxi Stands. 
The City Council by motion may designate specified parking spaces on any street within the City as a bus stop or a taxi stand. Except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, no vehicle other than a bus shall be stopped or parked at a bus stop and no vehicle other than a taxicab shall be stopped or parked at a taxi stand. 
302.06 - Fire Lanes. 
No person shall stop or park any vehicle in a properly posted fire lane except to receive or discharge passengers or freight, and then only for a period of time no longer than is necessary for that purpose. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 642 [2-11-2003]) 
302.07 - Restrictions on Trucks. 
No truck in excess of 10,000 pounds gross weight shall stop or park on any street within the City other than a designated truck route, except for those vehicles enumerated in Section 301.07.B. of this Code. No semi-trailer shall be stopped or parked unattached from a tractor unit on any street or street right-of-way within the City, except in an emergency or to change tractor units. 
302.08 - Temporary Parking Restrictions. 
The City Manager, the Chief of Police and the Director of Public Works each may prohibit or otherwise restrict parking on any street or any portion thereof within the City for a temporary period of time by having signs posted to indicate said restriction. No vehicle shall be stopped or parked in violation of such signs during the period they are posted. 
302.09 - Hours of Parking. 
No vehicle or trailer unit shall be stopped, parked or left standing on any street or street right-of-way within the City for a continuous period of time in excess of 72 hours. 
302.10 - Vehicles for Sale. 
No vehicle shall be stopped or parked on any street within the City for the purpose of displaying it for sale. 
302.11 - Parking Control Devices. 
Following a motion of the City Council establishing a parking regulation authorized in this Chapter, the Director of Public Works shall have installed the parking control device necessary to put into effect such regulation. 
302.12 - Current Parking Regulations. 
All parking regulations previously established and currently in effect, as evidenced by the appropriate parking control device, shall continue in effect until repealed by a motion of the City Council. 
302.13 - Rule of Evidence. 
The presence of any vehicle stopped or parked in violation of this Chapter shall be considered prima facie evidence that the registered owner of said vehicle committed or authorized the commission of such violation. 
CHAPTER 303 - TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTIONS AND RESTRICTED PARKING 

303.01 - Snow Plowing and Removal. 
No vehicle shall be parked or allowed to remain upon any street within the City in such a manner so as to obstruct or interfere with the plowing and removal of snow, sleet, slush or ice from said street. 
303.01A - Restricted Parking. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on any public street in the City of Wayzata commencing at 2:00 a.m. after a snowfall of two inches or more in depth has fallen. The parking ban shall remain in effect until the snow has been removed or plowed to the curb line. 
(Ord. 434 [2-5-1985]) 
303.02 - Wrecked or Damaged Vehicles. 
Any wrecked or damaged vehicle left upon any street within the City shall be removed therefrom without unreasonable delay and with as little disruption as possible in the free flow of traffic. 
303.03 - Impoundment of Vehicles. 
A police officer may have a vehicle removed at the expense of the owner or operator thereof from any street within the City to a garage or other place of safety in the following situations: 
A.  When the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
B.  When the vehicle violates any provision of Chapter 302 and constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
C.  When the vehicle violates Section 303.01 or 303.01A of this Chapter; or 
D.  When the vehicle obstructs or interferes with street improvement or maintenance operations of the City. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 434 [2-5-1985]) 
303.04 - Rule of Evidence. 
The presence of any vehicle stopped or parked in violation of this Chapter shall be considered prima facie evidence that the registered owner of said vehicle committed or authorized the commission of such violation. 
CHAPTER 304 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 

304.01 - Interference with Streets and Alleys. 
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to impede the traffic of any street or public alley or to unnecessarily interfere with the same in the removal of any dwelling or other structure, except as provided herein. 
304.02 - Permit Required. 
Before any person may begin the removal of any dwelling or other structure within the corporate limits of the City, a written permit to remove the same shall be secured from the City Manager and the City's Building Inspector. Said permit shall designate the streets and alleys along which said dwelling or other structure may be removed, as well as any other conditions of the removal. 
CHAPTER 305 - CLEANING OF SIDEWALKS 

305.01 - Cleaning of Sidewalks. 
The owners or occupants of all buildings and grounds within the City shall remove all snow, ice, and other debris from the public sidewalks adjacent thereto as follows: 
A.  The owner or occupant of any building or lot (except one- and two-family dwellings) shall, within the first four hours of daytime after the ceasing to fall of any snow, cause the snow and/or ice to be removed from the public sidewalk adjoining said building or lot. 
"Daytime," for the purposes of this Section, shall be the period of time from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
B.  The owner or occupant of any building that is a one- or two-family dwelling shall, within the first 24 hours after the ceasing to fall of any snow, cause the snow and/or ice to be removed from the public sidewalk adjoining the lot upon which such building is situated. 
C.  Except as provided above, the owner or occupant of any building or lot shall keep and maintain the public sidewalk adjoining said building or lot free and clear of all snow, ice and other debris. 
D.  In the event the snow or ice cannot be removed by reasonable efforts, the owner or occupant shall take whatever action is necessary to eliminate hazardous conditions on said public sidewalk. 
E.  At the discretion of the City Manager, the City may remove snow from sidewalks located immediately adjacent to the street curbs on Central Avenue North and on Wayzata Boulevard. At the discretion of the City Manager, residential properties on the above streets may be exempted from this Chapter. 
(Ord. 446 [12-17-1985]) 
305.02 - Removal by City; Assessment of Costs. 
Any snow, ice or other debris remaining on the public sidewalks of the City in violation of this Chapter, may be removed by the Director of Public Works or his designee. The Director of Public Works shall determine the cost of such removal, and the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk from which the City has removed the snow, ice or other debris shall be charged for said costs. If said charge is not paid prior to the following September 1, the City Council shall assess and levy, and cause to be collected, the amount of such charge as a special assessment upon and against the property involved, in the manner as provided by law for the levy and collection of other special assessments. 
(Ord. 446 [12-17-1985]) 
305.03 - Penalty. 
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits or neglects, or refuses to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 405 [12-1-1981]; Ord. 446 [12-17-1985]) 
(Chapter deleted and replaced by Ord. 446 [12-17-1985]) 
CHAPTER 306 - BUILDING MATERIALS ON STREETS AND ALLEYS-REPEALED 

306.01 - Permit Required-Repealed. 
(Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
306.02 - Conditions of Permit-Repealed. 
(Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
CHAPTER 307 - STREET EXCAVATIONS-REPEALED 

307.01 - Permit Required-Repealed. 
(Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
307.02 - Fees Established-Repealed. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]; Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
307.03 - Surety Bond-Repealed. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986; Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
307.04 - General Regulations-Repealed. 
(Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
CHAPTER 308 - TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY-REPEALED 

308.01 - Permit Required-Repealed. 
(Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
308.02 - Application Procedures-Repealed. 
(Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
308.03 - Approval of Permit-Repealed. 
(Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
308.04 - Conditions of Permit-Repealed. 
(Repealed by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
CHAPTER 309 - USE OF PUBLIC PARKS 

309.01 - Hours of Closing. 
All public parks shall be closed between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. During said hours no person shall frequent, congregate, enter, or remain within any public park. 
(Ord. 773 [6-29-2017]) 
309.02 - Liquor Prohibited. 
No person shall consume or have in his or her possession within any public park any intoxicating liquor or any beer, as such terms are defined in Section 205.01 hereof. 
(Ord. 773 [6-29-2017]) 
309.03 - Location of Public Parks. 
The following locations within the City of Wayzata are hereby designated public parks and subject to the provisions of this Chapter: 
A.  Wayzata Municipal Beach and Marina. 
B.  Bell Courts. 
C.  Klapprich Field. 
D.  Wayzata Depot and adjacent land and docks. 
E.  Broadway dock and adjacent land. 
F.  Big Woods Preserve. 
G.  Heritage Park. 
H.  Little Beach Pedestrian Pier. 
I.  Margaret Circle Park. 
J.  Post Office Pocket Park. 
(Ord. 410 [4-20-1982]; Ord. 422 [8-16-1983]; (Ord. 773 [6-29-2017]) 
309.04 - Motorized Vehicles. 
No motorized vehicles shall be driven or parked in any public park except upon the designated roadways or parking areas within such parks. 
(Ord. 422 [8-16-1983]; Ord. 773 [6-29-2017]) 
309.05 - Municipal Boat Dock, Charter Boats. 
(Repealed by Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
309.06 - Fishing from Docks. 
Fishing from public docks shall be regulated as follows: 
A.  Fishing shall be allowed on the Wayzata Depot docks from 5:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. daily, with the exception that fishing shall be prohibited on the easterly extension from 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
B.  Fishing shall be allowed on the Broadway Dock from 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. daily. 
C.  Fishing shall be allowed in the Wayzata Municipal Marina from November 2 to April 30 during such times set by the City Manager. Fishing shall be prohibited in the Wayzata Municipal Marina from May 1 to November 1, with the exception that fishing shall be permitted from the three loading platforms, only. 
D.  Fishing from public docks in areas and at times other than allowed in this section shall be prohibited. The City Manager may modify the hours, days and areas of fishing allowed from public docks for any reason related to health, safety or welfare. Days, hours and areas for fishing shall be posted on public docks in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 583 [07-17-1996]; Ord. 773 [6-29-2017]) 
CHAPTER 310 - MUNICIPAL BEACH 

310.01 - Beach Season. 
The dates of the opening and closing of the Wayzata municipal beach, hours of operation, and lifeguard staffing decisions, shall be determined each year by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 697 [6-9-2009]) 
310.02 - Hours for Swimming. 
The municipal beach may be attended by lifeguards who shall work at hours and times designated by the City Manager. The head lifeguard or any other lifeguard on duty at the municipal beach shall close the beach whenever in his/her judgment the water is too rough or too cold for swimming or weather conditions threaten the safety of swimmers. No person shall be permitted in the water during periods in which the beach is declared closed by a lifeguard or by posted notice. If no lifeguard is on duty, persons may be on the beach and in the water if posted notice permits, and such persons assume all associated risks. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 697 [6-9-2009]) 
310.03 - Parking Permits. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall leave or park any automobile or other motorized vehicle on any public lands or grounds adjacent to or in the neighborhood of the municipal beach without having attached to said vehicle in a conspicuous place a permit therefor each year. 
B.  Issuance of Permits. Permits for the parking of automobiles or other motorized vehicles on public lands or grounds adjacent to or in the neighborhood of the municipal beach shall be issued by the City Manager to any resident of the City and to any person owning or holding real property situated within the City upon request and without charge. Such permits shall be issued to any person not a resident of the City or not owning property within the City upon payment to the City of a fee as established by resolution. Temporary one-day permits may be issued at the discretion of the City Manager or his designee. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 433 [1-22-1985]; (Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
C.  Parking During Hours of Closing. No person shall leave or park any automobile or other motorized vehicle on any public lands or grounds adjacent to or in the neighborhood of the municipal beach between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the following day without having attached to said vehicle in a conspicuous place both a permit issued pursuant to Section 310.03.A and B and a permit issued pursuant to Section 311.04 for the current year. 
(Ord. 410 [4-20-1982]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 410 [4-20-1982]; Ord. 433 [1-22-1985]) 
310.04 - Rules and Regulations. 
All persons using the municipal beach shall abide by the following rules and regulations: 
A.  No person shall throw, cast, deposit, damage, lay, place or scatter in the water or upon the beach any lighted cigars or cigarettes or any glass, bottles, nails, tacks, wire, crockery, cans or other sharp or cutting substance, or any other refuse matter or article of any kind. If any glass is broken, the person responsible for the breakage immediately shall pick up the pieces and place them in a trash container. 
B.  No person shall bring into or use in the water artificial floats of any kind or description, except as such specifically are permitted by the lifeguard(s) on duty or as permitted by posted notice. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 697 [6-9-2009]) 
C.  No person shall bring, drive, lead, carry or permit any dog or other animal, whether leashed or unleashed, muzzled or unmuzzled, onto the premises of the beach. All dogs found on the beach shall be picked up and impounded at the owner's expense until claimed. 
D.  No person shall light or make use of any fire on the beach, except in ovens or other locations provided for that purpose. 
E.  No person shall swim or bathe in the water fronting the beach between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., during electrical storms, or outside the designated swimming area. 
F.  No swimmer or bather shall enter the water or enter onto the beach unless clothed in a suitable bathing dress or suit. 
G.  No persons shall change clothes on the beach or in vehicles parked at the beach. 
H.  No person shall appear in a state of nudity, nor shall any person make any indecent exposure of his or her person upon or adjacent to the beach. 
I.  No person shall use profane, offensive or vulgar language or conduct himself or herself in a rough, boisterous, suggestive or offensive manner while in the water or upon the beach. 
J.  No person shall bring or carry any bicycle upon the beach, except to install such vehicle in racks provided therefor by the City. 
K.  No person shall carry on unnecessary conversation with lifeguards, falsely call for help or assistance, stand or sit upon or cling to any lifeguard perches or towers, except in an emergency, or go into or cling to any lifeguard boat, except in an emergency. 
L.  No person shall conduct himself upon the beach or in the water in such a manner as to jeopardize the safety and welfare of himself or others. 
M.  No person having, or apparently having, any infectious disease shall be admitted to the beach or permitted in the water. 
N.  No person, except children, their parents, custodians or guardians, shall be permitted in any play area on the beach designated for children. 
O.  No child under 12 years of age shall be allowed on the beach unless such child is under the supervision of a competent person not less than 16 years of age. 
P.  Other such rules and regulations posted by sign on the beach. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 697 [6-9-2009]) 
310.05 - Conduct of Lifeguards. 
All lifeguards shall be subject to rules and regulations prescribed by the City Manager. 
310.06 - Authority of Lifeguards. 
All duly appointed lifeguards or other city staff designated by the City Manager are hereby authorized and empowered to order swimmers out of the municipal beach waters at such times and under such conditions as they deem necessary for the public safety and welfare. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 697 [6-9-2009]) 
CHAPTER 311 - BOAT SLIPS 

311.01 - Permit Required. 
No person shall moor, dock, maintain or place any boat or other watercraft upon, in or adjacent to any part of the shoreline of the lagoon owned and maintained by the City adjacent to the municipal beach without first having secured a valid permit therefor as herein provided. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 676 [12-20-2006]) 
311.02 - Application for Permit. 
Any qualified person desiring a permit for a municipal boat slip shall make application therefor on an application form supplied by the City. A completed application must contain the applicant's name, address, type of boat to be moored, State boat license number and all other information requested on the application. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 435 [2-19-1985]; Ord. 676 [12-20-2006]) 
311.03 - Permit Restrictions. 
A permit for a municipal boat slip shall authorize the person to whom it is issued to park and store the boat or other watercraft described on the permit in the boat slip assigned by the City and noted on the permit, for the current year's boating season. No such permit shall be assignable or transferable by the permit holder to another person. As a condition of being issued a permit, the permit holder must hold the City harmless from any and all damage or loss whatsoever arising from the use of the slip authorized by the permit. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 435 [2-19-1985]; Ord. 676 [12-20-2006]) 
311.04 - Policy and Priority for Issuing Permits. 
The City Manager shall prepare and review annually a policy to carry out the provisions of this Chapter. The number of permits issued annually shall be limited to the number of slips available, and the permits shall be issued in the following order of priority: 
A.  Class 1: residents of Wayzata. 
B.  Class 2: persons owning real property in Wayzata who do not reside in Wayzata. 
C.  Class 3: persons who work in Wayzata. 
D.  Class 4: all other applicants. 
Applications for permits under this Chapter will be processed annually. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 676 [12-20-2006]) 
311.05 - Limitations on Use of Boat Slips. 
The City shall provide all mooring structures and slips within the City-owned lagoon, and no person may construct a dock or any other attachment to said structures. Each boat slip shall be numbered, and no permit holder may use any other slip than the one assigned to that person by the City as indicated on the permit. Only one permit for a municipal boat slip may be issued to applicants sharing a common address. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 416 [4-19-1983]; Ord. 581 [12-28-1995]; Ord. 676 [12-20-2006]) 
311.06 - Cancellation of Permits. 
Any boat slip for which a permit has been issued that is not used by June 10 in the year in which it is issued shall be declared vacated, the permit for said slip shall be canceled, and the fee paid for the permit shall not be refundable. 
The City Council, by resolution, may set further restrictions on the types of watercraft for which permits may be issued under this Chapter and the fees to be charged for such permits. 
(Ord. 676 [12-20-2006]) 
311.07 - Parking Permits. 
A permit for the parking of an automobile or other motorized vehicle on public lands or grounds adjacent to or in the neighborhood of the municipal beach between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. shall be issued by the City Manager to each person to whom a permit for a municipal boat slip is issued. Such parking permit shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. 410 [4-20-1982]; Ord. 676 [12-20-2006]) 
CHAPTER 312 - CITY CEMETERIES 

312.01 - Establishment of Cemeteries. 
Public cemeteries known as the Summit Park, Greenlawn and Old Wayzata Cemeteries have been established and hereby are continued upon property of the City. All premises constituting these cemeteries shall be subject to the rules and regulations herein adopted for their use and maintenance. A map of the Summit Park Cemetery, as drawn by Charles H. Ramsdell, Landscape Architect, is on file in the office of the City Manager and with the Register of Deeds of Hennepin County, and said map hereby is adopted as the official map of said cemetery. 
312.02 - Interment Privileges. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to grant interment privileges in lots in any City cemetery to persons paying the price therefor established by the City Council. Any person paying the price thus fixed shall be entitled to a "Burial Easement," executed by the Mayor and the City Manager. Upon obtaining an "interment permit," such a purchaser shall have the right to bury a person having residence in the City at the time of death, a person who at the time of death was a relative of a resident of the City, or a person who was a relative of one already interned in the cemetery. The Burial Easement shall expressly require the holder to observe all rules and regulations adopted from time to time relative to use of the cemetery. The Burial Easement shall provide that the privilege of interment is inalienable. The City Manager hereby is authorized to repurchase the unused portions of any burial lot at a price not to exceed the original purchase price paid to the City therefor. Every deceased person buried in the cemetery shall be placed in a concrete or steel outside container, and the funeral director handling interment shall be responsible for placing and closing all such containers. 
312.03 - Cemetery Fund. 
All money received for the sale of Burial Easements, the digging of graves, and other services of the cemetery shall be paid directly to the City. No Burial Easement to any cemetery lot shall be issued nor shall any services be performed in or about the cemetery until payment to the City therefor has been made. All money received from the sale of Burial Easements and for the performance of services in or about the cemetery shall be placed in a Cemetery Fund, which monies shall be used for the purchase of cemetery grounds and for maintenance and improvements thereto, but for no other purpose whatsoever. 
312.04 - Duties of Sexton. 
The City Manager shall have control and management of the City cemeteries and of the maintenance and improvement of the cemetery grounds. He shall have such powers and duties relative thereto as are prescribed by law or this Code, and he may designate an employee of the City as Sexton of the cemeteries. The Sexton shall have the following duties: 
A.  He shall keep the grounds, walks and streets in order and free from obstructions. 
B.  He shall have charge of all interments made in the cemetery, and he shall hire and supervise all labor used therein. 
C.  He shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter and of all regulations adopted by the City Council for the government of the cemetery. For that purpose he shall be qualified to act in the capacity of a peace officer and to make arrests for the violation of any ordinance or cemetery regulations. 
D.  He shall require the exhibition to him of a properly executed burial permit before allowing any interment to take place in the cemetery. 
E.  He shall have charge of the digging of all graves in the cemetery, and he shall charge such fees therefor as the City Council from time to time shall determine. 
F.  He shall keep a complete record of the ownership of all Burial Easements in the cemetery. For this purpose it shall be the duty of every purchaser of a Burial Easement to exhibit to the City Manager the original conveyance by which he claims the privilege of burial in any lot. 
G.  He shall keep a record of all interments in the cemetery, showing the exact location of every grave, the name, sex, age, time, place and cause of death of the person buried therein, and the date of burial. 
H.  He shall prevent any burial in any lot until the City shall have been paid for the Burial Easement. He also shall prevent the interment of any body in any lot without the consent of the person recorded as owner of said Burial Easement in his records, and he may require the consent to be in writing. 
I.  He shall keep the cemetery open during such times as the City Council from time to time shall determine. 
312.05 - Monuments. 
All monuments and markers placed in the cemetery shall be of bronze, granite or marble. All foundations for monuments or other structures shall be of sufficient depth and stability to support the proposed structure. No monuments, markers or other such structures may be erected until the foundation therefor has been approved by the City Manager or the Sexton of the cemetery. The City Manager or Sexton also shall approve the location of any monument on a grave before its installation. No monument shall be allowed in Sections C and D of the Summit Park Cemetery, which sections shall be reserved for markers only. 
312.06 - Ground Improvements. 
No owner of a Burial Easement shall be allowed to plant any trees, shrubs or plants thereon, which shall not be interpreted as preventing or prohibiting the placement of removable potted plants. The City Manager or Sexton shall have the right to enter upon any lot and to remove any planting which is deemed detrimental to the cemetery or unsightly or inconvenient to the public. No owner of a Burial Easement shall change the grade of any lot or interfere with the general plan for lot arrangement within the cemetery. No fences shall be permitted in the cemetery, other than those erected by the City. 
312.07 - Ground Regulations. 
The following regulations shall govern the use of all City cemeteries: 
A.  No person shall discharge any firearm or have possession of any firearm within the cemetery grounds without the written permission of the City Manager, except in the case of military funerals and on Memorial Day. 
B.  No grave shall be opened except by order of the husband, wife, father, mother, son or daughter of the deceased, and then only for good cause, the City reserving the right to refuse any such request. This provision shall not apply when disinterment is ordered by a duly authorized public official. 
C.  No person shall remove any object from any place in the cemetery or make any excavation therein without the consent of the Sexton. 
D.  All rubbish, unsightly material or debris accumulating from any work or other cause shall be removed at once by the person or persons causing its accumulation. All derricks and tools also shall be removed at once, and the grounds shall be left in as good condition as found. 
E.  No person shall obstruct any drive or path in the cemetery or in any way injure, deface or destroy any stone structure, grave, flower, tree, shrub, vine or other thing in the cemetery. 
F.  If any object or structure or any part thereof within the cemetery shall be deemed to be objectionable or to have become objectionable or unsightly, the Sexton shall have the right to remove the same. 
G.  No person shall drive any vehicle faster than a walk within the cemetery nor drive over any path or roadway where prohibited by the Sexton. 
H.  No person shall disturb the quiet of the cemetery by noise of any kind or by any improper conduct. 
I.  No person shall enter or leave the cemetery except at the gates thereof. 
J.  No person shall use the cemetery grounds or any road therein as a public thoroughfare nor drive any vehicle through the cemetery except for the purpose of making deliveries in the cemetery. 
K.  No child shall be permitted within the cemetery unless in the custody and control of an adult. 
L.  No person shall allow his or her dog to run at large in the cemetery. 
M.  No person shall loiter in or on the walks, drives or lots in the cemetery, and any person found within the cemetery shall have a good and sufficient reason for his presence therein. 
N.  No person shall leave unattended or unfastened any horse or other animal in the cemetery. 
CHAPTER 313 - LUCE LINE TRAIL 

313.01 - Motorized Vehicles Prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this Chapter for any person to operate any motorized vehicle whatsoever on that property within the City known as the "Luce Line Trail," which property is legally described as right-of-way for the Minneapolis Industrial Railway in the North 1/2 of Section 6, Township 117, Range 22 and in the South 1/2 of Section 31, Township 118, Range 22. The term "motorized vehicle" as used herein specifically shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motorbikes and snowmobiles. 
CHAPTER 314 - PRIVATE BOAT BUOYS 

314.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Buoy" shall mean any floating or stationary object used or employed to support, sustain or aid in anchoring or holding in a limited area a boat, canoe, raft or watercraft of any character on any public waters. 
B.  "Riparian Owner" shall mean the owner or owners of record of any property located on the shore of any natural body of water, and particularly Lake Minnetonka, and it shall include the immediate family members of such owner or owners. 
C.  "Riparian Area" shall mean that area in any natural body of water adjacent to a riparian owner's property and extended into the public waters to the point of navigation by the public. 
D.  "Harbor Limits." The harbor limits of the City shall commence at the line of the shore of any lake or other body of water in or adjacent to the City and extend in, on and over the navigable waters of such body of water to the harbor limits of any adjoining municipality or other governmental unit. The harbor limits of the City shall be deemed not to extend beyond the point half way between the shores of the body of water over which the City has jurisdiction and the shores of the body of water located in another city or governmental unit. 
314.02 - Prohibited Buoys. 
No person other than a riparian owner, as defined herein, or any person authorized by such a riparian owner shall anchor, keep, maintain or utilize a buoy of any character within the harbor limits of the City. No person shall anchor, keep or maintain a buoy of any character within the harbor limits of the City which interferes with, impedes or restrains the public use or enjoyment of any public waters. 
314.03 - Buoy Density. 
There shall be a maximum of two buoys within any riparian area, as defined herein, except that any riparian owner with more than 200 feet of lakeshore frontage shall be entitled to or shall be allowed to authorize one additional buoy for each full 100 feet of such frontage above the first 200 feet. 
CHAPTER 315 - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]; Ord. 518 [9-6-1988]; Repealed and recreated by Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 

315.01 - Election to Manage the Public Rights-of-Way. 
In accordance with the authority granted to the City under state and federal statutory, administrative, and common law, the City hereby elects, pursuant to this Chapter, to manage Rights-of-Way within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.02 - Definitions. 
The definitions included in Minnesota Statute Section 237.162, Minnesota Rules 7810.0100, subps. 1 through 23, and Minnesota Rules 7560.0100 subps. 1 through 12 are hereby adopted by reference and are incorporated into this Chapter as if set out in full. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.03 - Prohibition; Permit Requirement. 
A.  Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct, encroach upon, encumber, interfere with, or excavate any right of way or install or place facilities in the right of way without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the City. 
1.  Excavation Permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate that part of the right of way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right of way by placing facilities or any other encroachment described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. 
2.  Obstruction Permit. An obstruction permit is required to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right of way by placing equipment, obstacles or any other encroachment described therein on the right of way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An Obstruction Permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid Excavation Permit for the same project or the obstruction is permitted under an Encroachment Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
3.  Small Wireless Facility Permit. A small wireless facility permit is required to place a new wireless support structure (collocate) in the right-of-way managed, with the exception that a permit is not required for the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes. 
4.  Small Wireless Conditional Use Permit. In addition to the provisions of this Chapter, a conditional use permit issued pursuant to Chapter 904 of this Code is required to install a new wireless support structure in a right-of-way where the underlying district is zoned as R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A or any other single-family residential use or historic district established by federal or state law or City ordinance. 
5.  Encroachment Permit. An encroachment permit is required to construct and maintain the following structures and private improvements in the right of way. 
a)  "Awnings" , meaning awnings attached to the entryways or windows of buildings adjacent to the right of way. 
b)  "Private Improvements" , meaning permanent landscaping features, driveways, walkways, irrigation systems, pet containment systems, or other similar improvements constructed and maintained by owners of property adjacent to the applicable right of way. 
c)  "Structures" , meaning walls, fences, steps, staircases, driveway entrance monuments, signs, landscape walls, or other similar structures constructed and maintained by owners of property adjacent to the applicable right of way. 
All other structures and private improvements not identified in Sections 315.03 Subd. A.5.a. through d, including but not limited to buildings or portions thereof, roof overhangs, building cantilevers and similar wall projections, shall not encroach into or upon the right of way. 
6.  Outdoor Sidewalk Caf Permit. An outdoor sidewalk caf permit is required to operate an outdoor sidewalk caf in the right-of-way where the underlying zoning district allows an outdoor sidewalk caf as a permitted accessory use. 
7.  Landscaping Permit. A right of way landscaping permit is required to plant, trim, replace or otherwise impact any tree or other plantings in the right of way as described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right of way by placing trees or any other plantings described therein. 
B.  Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the permit requirements of this Chapter: 
1.  Any activities undertaken by the City; 
2.  The displacement of snow and ice by snow and ice removal operations of the City, County or State; 
3.  The displacement of snow and ice from privately owned property, provided that such snow and ice are deposited only upon boulevards which are adjacent to and not separated by the traveled portion of the street from the private property form which the snow or ice is removed; 
4.  Vehicles lawfully parked on streets; 
5.  Trees and other plantings made by the City, provided that such plantings are approved by the City Forester; 
6.  Trees and other plantings on private property which overhang the traveled portion of streets or sidewalks, provided that no portion of such tree or planting is less than 16 feet above the traveled portion of the street or less than eight feet above the sidewalk, provided such does interfere with the use of the right of way, or present a health or safety issue, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works; 
7.  Privately owned bus stop benches and street furnishings and publicly owned bus stop shelters placed on streets, sidewalks and boulevards, subject to the written approval of the Director of Public Works as to location; 
8.  Newspaper vending machines and U.S. Postal Service drop boxes placed on sidewalks and boulevards, subject to the written approval of the Director of Public Works as to location; 
9.  Mailboxes subject to U.S. Postal Service standards, provided that mailboxes which are integral to a structure must be approved in writing by the Director of Public Works; 
10.  Wires or cables installed by a public utility. 
C.  Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right of way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted. 
D.  Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000, subp. 3 and notwithstanding any other part of this Chapter, the City shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council resolution. 
E.  Permit Display. Permits issued under this Chapter shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the City. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.04 - Permit Applications. 
An application for a permit issued under this Chapter shall be complete only upon meeting all of the following requirements: 
A.  Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed location in the right of way, and the following information: 
1.  Each permittee's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers. 
2.  The name, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of Application. 
3.  A certificate of insurance or self-insurance: 
a)  Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the permittee by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the City. 
b)  Verifying that the permittee is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the: 
1)  Use and occupancy of the right of way by the permittee, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and 
2)  Placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right of way by the permittee, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities, and collapse of property; 
c)  Naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages; 
d)  Requiring that the City be notified 30 days in advance of cancelation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; 
e)  Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage established by the City in amounts sufficient to protect the City and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this Chapter. 
4.  A copy of the actual insurance policies. 
5.  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed under Minnesota Statutes Section 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State. 
6.  If applicable, a copy of the order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the applicant is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency. 
B.  A Small Wireless Facility Permit applicant may file a consolidated Small Wireless Permit Application to collocate up to 15 small wireless facilities provided that all the small wireless facilities in the application: 
1.  are located within a two-mile radius; 
2.  consist of substantially similar equipment; and are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures. 
C.  Payment of money due the City for: 
1.  permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs; 
2.  any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the City; 
3.  franchise fees, or other charges, if applicable; 
4.  inspection fees, if applicable and if not included in the permit fee. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.05 - Review and Issuance of Permit; Conditions. 
A.  Application Review and Permit Issuance. 
1.  Applications for Excavation Permits, Obstruction Permits, Small Wireless Facility Permits, Encroachment Permits for Awnings and Private Improvements, and Landscaping Permits shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works. If the Director of Public Works determines that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this Chapter, the City shall issue a permit. Denial of any application by the Public Works Director may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council within 30 days of the date of denial. 
2.  Applications for Small Wireless Conditional Use Permits, Encroachment Permits for Structures, and Outdoor Sidewalk Cafe Permits shall require the review and approval of the City Council. 
B.  Permit Conditions Generally. The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right of way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited to Minnesota Statutes Section 216D.01 - .09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7560. 
C.  Additional Excavation Permit Conditions. In addition to the conditions for permits generally in Section 315.05.B, the excavation of any street or public right of way shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  General Regulations. Street openings shall be made in a manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the general public. Provision shall be made for the safe passage of water along the gutters of any such street, and at least one-half of the traveled portion of any such street shall be left open and in good condition for the safe passage of vehicles. All open excavations shall be guarded with substantial barriers and shall be marked with bright flags during the daytime and with flashing lights at night. Pipes or mains exposed to freezing temperatures shall be protected so as to prevent their freezing. All excavations shall be refilled as soon as possible after the work is completed, and the surface of any excavation shall be replaced in as good condition as before the excavation, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Any person or firm failing to comply with these regulations within 24 hours after notice from the City of such failure shall be liable for the full cost incurred by the City in remedying the failure, which cost shall become an obligation of the surety bond required herein. 
2.  Trenchless Excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter. 216D and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating as determined by the City. 
3.  Surety Bond. All applicants for an Excavation Permit, except for locally bonded plumbers or public utility companies, shall provide a security in the form of a bond, letter of credit or cash to insure that the holder will perform all work in connection with any such excavation in accordance with the ordinances and regulations applicable thereto, that the holder will indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all damage or liability to others caused in the performance of such work, and that the holder will pay any and all costs either directly or indirectly suffered by the City due to failure of the holder to observe all ordinances and regulations applicable to such work or due to holder's negligence in the performance of such work. 
D.  Additional Small Wireless Facility Permit Conditions. In addition to the conditions for permits generally in Section 315.05.B, the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, or the collocation of a small wireless facility, in the right of way shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application. 
2.  No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height without the City's written authorization, and further provided that an applicant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit. 
3.  No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its wireless support structure. 
4.  Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, the City may impose separation requirements between such support structures and any existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way. 
5.  The applicant shall employ all reasonable methods of screening for all aboveground wireless facilities, including the use of stealth or camouflaged design to appropriate mask such facility. All small wireless facilities to be collocated on wireless support structures in and around the right-of-way shall be painted or repainted to precisely match the support structure or utility pole, the overall color scheme of which is subject to the City's discretion and approval. No visible text or printing shall be allowed on wireless facilities. 
6.  Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, the City may impose additional reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure. 
7.  Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the City may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure. 
8.  The execution of a Small Wireless Facility Collocation Agreement that incorporates any additional terms and conditions mutually agreed upon by the City and the applicant. A small wireless facility collocation agreement is considered public data not on individuals and is accessible to the public under Minnesota Statutes Section 13.03. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the City and applicant. 
E.  Additional Conditions for Encroachment Permits. In addition to the conditions for permits generally in Section 315.05.B, the following additional conditions shall apply to encroachment permits: 
1.  Awnings. The issuance of an encroachment permit for Awnings must comply with the following conditions: 
a)  The edge of the Awning must be set back a minimum of three feet from the curb. 
b)  The Awning must have a minimum height of eight feet measured from the sidewalk grade to the base of the structural support. 
c)  The Awning must have a minimum height of seven feet measured from the sidewalk grade to the lowest part of the awning. 
d)  The property owner must agree to the following additional conditions: 
1)  The property owner shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the Awning. 
2)  The City will assume no responsibility for the Awning; the property owner shall be responsible for any and all damage to or caused by the Awning located in the right of way. 
3)  The City shall have the right to revoke the Encroachment Permit at any time upon 60 days written notice to the property owner. Upon such revocation, the property owner shall remove the encroachment and restore the right of way to a condition that is consistent with the surrounding area. The City shall not exercise its right of revocation arbitrarily or capriciously, but it may do so upon the Director of Public Works determination that the revocation is in the City's best interest. 
2.  Private Improvements. The issuance of an encroachment permit for Private Improvements must comply with the following conditions: 
a)  The determination by the Director of Public Works that the encroachment by the Private Improvement(s) will not adversely impact the City's current or future use of the right of way, which determination will be based on the following factors: 
1)  The impact the Private Improvement will have on snow plowing and snow storage; 
2)  The impact the Private Improvement will have on public safety, including traffic operations and pedestrian safety; 
3)  The impact of the Private Improvement will have on public land and public utilities. 
b)  The property owner must agree to the following additional conditions: 
1)  The property owner shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the Private Improvement. 
2)  The City will assume no responsibility for the Private Improvement; the property owner shall be responsible for any and all damage to or caused by the Private Improvement. 
3)  The City shall have the right to revoke the Encroachment Permit at any time upon 60 days written notice to the property owner. Upon such revocation, the property owner shall remove the encroachment and restore the right of way to a condition that is consistent with the surrounding area. The City shall not exercise its right of revocation arbitrarily or capriciously, but it may do so upon the Director of Public Works determination that the revocation is in the City's best interest. 
3.  Structures. The issuance of an encroachment permit for Structures shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a)  The City Council must find that the encroaching Structure meets all of the following conditions: 
1)  The Structure will not adversely impact the City's current or future use of the right of way. 
2)  There are exceptional circumstances or conditions applying to the encroachment in question, which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to other Structures or property within the City. 
3)  Under the circumstances of the particular situation, the encroachment will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of residents of the surrounding area or of the community as a whole. 
b)  The property owner must agree to the following additional conditions: 
1)  The property owner must enter into a written agreement with the City setting forth the conditions of approval and the maintenance obligations for the encroaching Structure. The agreement must include a clause under which the property owner agrees to hold the City harmless from all liability, losses or injuries directly or indirectly resulting from the encroaching Structure. 
2)  The City shall have the right to revoke the Encroachment Permit at any time upon 60 days written notice to the property owner. Upon such revocation, the property owner shall remove the encroachment and restore the right of way to a condition that is consistent with the surrounding area. The City shall not exercise its right of revocation arbitrarily or capriciously, but it may do so upon the City Council's determination, in its absolute discretion, that the revocation is in the City's best interest. 
F.  Additional Outdoor Sidewalk Caf Conditions. In addition to the conditions for permits generally in Section 315.05.B, the placement and operation of an outdoor sidewalk caf in the right of way, shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Functional Requirements. 
a)  Existing and/or proposed principal use shall conform to existing City zoning regulations. 
b)  Cafe shall be a minimum distance from a R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, and R-4 residential zoning district, unless the City Council determines that a lesser distance is acceptable that ensures the outdoor sidewalk cafe would not adversely impact the residential properties: 
1)  Two hundred-foot minimum for non-alcoholic cafes. 
2)  Five hundred-foot minimum for alcoholic establishments. 
c)  Cafe area shall be limited to the public right-of-way abutting the lot front as defined by the Zoning Ordinance. 
d)  Cafe area shall be segregated from through pedestrian circulation by means of temporary fencing, bollards, ropes, plantings, etc. Segregation device(s) must not cause destruction to the sidewalk or other elements within the public right-of-way. 
e)  Minimum clear passage zone for pedestrians at the perimeter of the caf shall be at least five feet without interference from parked motor vehicles, bollards, trees, treegates, curbs, stairways, trash receptacles, street lights, parking meters, etc. 
f)  Overstory canopy of tree/umbrellas extending into the pedestrian clear passage zone or pedestrian aisle shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet above sidewalk. 
g)  All service aisles and walkways must be located within the enclosed area of the cafe. Service aisles must not occur from the minimum clear passage zone for pedestrians. 
h)  Furniture and enclosed perimeter shall be movable to allow for seasonal changes. 
i)  No storage of furniture on sidewalk shall be allowed between the months of October and April. 
j)  No outside bar, cooking facility, food preparation, or holding area shall be located within the right of way. 
k)  Any lighting used to illuminate the cafe area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining property and public streets or alleys, and be in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. 
l)  No electronically amplified outdoor music, intercom, audio speakers, or other such noise generating devices shall be allowed in the cafe area. 
2.  Liability Requirements. 
a)  The property owner, restaurant operator and the City shall enter into a hold harmless agreement, as provided by the City, exempting the City from all liability claims associated with the cafe use. 
b)  Maintenance of public right-of-way, including landscaping, for which the cafe is located upon shall be the property owner's responsibility. 
c)  Security of the cafe area shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
d)  Property owner shall pick up litter within 100 feet of the cafe on a daily basis. 
3.  Aesthetic Requirements. 
a)  Furniture shall be washable, constructed of metal, plastic or other weather resistant materials and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
b)  Plant material shall be in containers to allow for movement. 
c)  Annual/perennial flowers shall be used to enhance streetscape aesthetics. 
d)  Canopies/umbrellas shall be used for summer sun protection subject to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
e)  Trash receptacles matching the appearance and color scheme of other furniture shall be provided. 
f)  Design of site furnishings and cafe layout shall be reviewed prior to installation by the City subject to the above provisions. 
4.  An Outdoor Sidewalk Cafe Permit approved by the City Council expires one year from the date of the Council approval. The applicant must submit an application annually for renewal of the Outdoor Sidewalk Cafe Permit. 
G.  Payment of Rent. 
1.  For collocations of small wireless facilities, the City can, either in its permit or in a standard collocation agreement, require annual rental payments for the small wireless collocations of up to: 
a)  $150 per year for rent to collocate on the City structure. 
b)  $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation. 
c)  A monthly fee for electrical service as follows: 
1)  $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts; 
2)  $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or 
3)  The actual cost of electricity if the actual cost exceeds the foregoing 
2.  For collocations or placements, other than of small wireless facilities, the City can charge a mutually agreed upon rent reached between the City and the applicant. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.06 - Timeline for Action on Permit Applications. 
A.  Denial in General. The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this Chapter or if the City determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. 
B.  Procedure for Denial on Permits other than Small Wireless Facilities Permits. The denial of a permit must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The City must notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days of the decision to deny a permit. If an application is denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the City and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be imposed. The City must approve or deny a resubmitted application within 30 days after such application has been received by the City and deemed complete. 
C.  Procedure for Denial on Small Wireless Facilities Permits. The City shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application within 60 days after receiving a complete application, including when the proposed collocation is on a support structure that already qualifies as an existing wireless tower or base station under Section 6409(a), codified at 47 U.S.C. 1455(a). The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny a complete application within the 60-day review period established in this section. 
D.  Tolling of Deadline on Small Wireless Facility Permit. The deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if: 
1.  The City receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the City may extend the deadline for all such applications by 30 days and shall inform the affected applicant in writing of such extension. 
2.  The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the City provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the City shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of any still-missing information. 
3.  The City and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.07 - Permit Fees. 
A.  Excavation Permit Fee. The City shall establish an excavation permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs: 
1.  the City management costs; 
2.  degradation costs, if applicable. 
B.  Obstruction and other Permit Fees. The City shall establish an obstruction and other permit fees in an amount sufficient to recover the City management costs. 
C.  Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee. The City shall impose a one-time small wireless facility permit fee at the time of approval of the collocation application in an amount sufficient to recover: 
1.  management costs; 
2.  restoration costs or degradation fee, if applicable; 
3.  inspection fees, if applicable; 
4.  city engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small wireless facilities. 
The City will not impose a small wireless facility permit fee for any of the following activities: 
1.  routine maintenance of a small wireless facility; 
2.  replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or structural loading than the small wireless facility being replaced; or 
3.  installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes. 
D.  Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The City may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing. 
E.  Non-Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the City has revoked for a breach as stated in Section 315.14 are not refundable. 
F.  Application to Franchises. For right-of-way users subject to a franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise, unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise. 
G.  Rules. All permit fees shall be established consistent with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1000, when applicable. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.08 - Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration. 
A.  Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable. 
B.  Patch and Restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The City may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way itself. 
1.  City Restoration. If the City restores the right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If following such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the City, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with having to correct the defective work. 
2.  Permittee Restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules 7819.3000. 
3.  Degradation Fee In lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities. 
C.  Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by the City and shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100 
D.  Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Permittee, upon notification from the City, shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the City. Said work shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable. 
E.  Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the City, the City at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the City, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.09 - Permit Limitations. 
A.  Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area: 
1.  Submit an application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby; and 
2.  Be granted a new permit or permit extension. 
B.  Obstruction from Small Wireless Facility Work. City will not require an additional small wireless facility permit fee or require a new collocation agreement for routine maintenance of a small wireless facility, for replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or structural loading than the small wireless facility being replaced; or for installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes. The City may require advance notification, however, of these activities if the work will obstruct the public right-of-way. 
C.  Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. For a Small Wireless Facility Permit, the term of the permit is equal to the length of time that the small wireless facility is in use, unless the permit is revoked under this section. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.10 - Installation Requirements. 
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100, when applicable, and other local requirements, when applicable, and in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Minnesota Statutes Sections 237.162 and 237.163. 
315.11 - Inspection. 
A.  Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minnesota Rules 7819.1300. 
B.  Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to city personnel and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
C.  Authority of City. 
1.  At the time of inspection, the City may order the immediate cessation of any work, which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety, or well-being of the public. 
2.  The City may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the City that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the City may revoke the permit pursuant to Section 1.215. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.12 - Work Done Without a Permit. 
A.  Emergency Situations. Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately notify the City of any event regarding its facilities that it considers being an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the owner shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this Chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency. 
If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the City will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility owner affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the City may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the emergency. 
B.  Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this Code, deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.13 - Supplementary Notification. 
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the City of the accurate information as soon as this information is known. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.14 - Revocation of Permit. 
A.  Substantial Breach. The City reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit; 
2.  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens; 
3.  Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit; 
4.  The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittees control; or 
5.  The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition of the permit 
B.  Written Notice of Breach. If the City determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the City shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations might be cause for revocation of the permit. 
C.  Procedural Requirements. If the City decides to revoke the permit, the revocation must be made in writing and must document the basis for the revocation. The City must notify the right-of-way user in writing within three business days of the decision to revoke a permit. 
D.  Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.15 - Mapping Data. 
A.  Information Required. If allowed by statute, each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the City in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. 
B.  Service Laterals. Permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the City reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the City evidence of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this subdivision 2 and with applicable Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals install after December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for: 
1.  payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including those under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429, and 
2.  City approval of performance under development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462. The City shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.16 - Location of Facilities. 
A.  Placement. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Minnesota Statutes Sections 237.162 and 237.163, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities. 
B.  Corridors. The City may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the City expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued by the City involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. 
C.  Limitation of Space. Subject to Minnesota Statutes Section 237.163, to protect health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the City shall have the power to deny permits and the City shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.17 - Damage to Other Facilities. 
When the City does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the City shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible and placed as required. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that facility owner and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another caused during the City's response to an emergency occasioned by that owner's facilities. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.18 - Right-of-Way Vacation. 
Vacation of any portion of a City street, highway and alley in the City shall be governed by City Charter and the notice and hearing requirements of Minnesota statutes for vacation of rights-of-way generally. At a minimum, notice of any proposed vacation shall be given to all owners of property (i) abutting the area to be vacated, and (ii) within 350 feet of the area to be vacated. If the City vacates a right-of-way that contains facilities, the facility owner's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rule 7819.3200. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.19 - Indemnification and Liability. 
By applying for and accepting a permit under this Chapter, a permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the City in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.20 - Abandoned Facilities. 
Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless the City waives this requirement. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.21 - Appeal. 
A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied a permit; (2) has had permit revoked; or (3) believes that the fees imposed are invalid may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.22 - Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. 
A permittee's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
315.23 - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance will become effective upon passage and publication. 
(Ord. 781 [8-9-2018]) 
CHAPTER 316 - NATURE CENTER 

316.01 - Definition. 
The Wayzata Nature Center is herein defined to be property owned or controlled by the City, including parking areas, located on land legally described as follows: 
Plat 64805, Parcels 1500, 3910 and 4100; Plat 65492, Parcel 9000; Plat 65498, Parcels 3000 and 6100; Plat 65430, Parcels 3110, 3120, 3130, 3140, 3150, 3160, 9615, 9620, 9625, 9630, 9635, 9640, 9650, 9660, 9665, 9690, 9695, 9698, 9702, 9705, 9710, 9715, 9720, 9722, 9724, 9728, 9735, 9740, 9743, 9745, and 9748. (The listed Parcels within Plat 65430 represent Blocks 43, Block 57 and a portion of Block 59, Minnetonka Arlington Heights Addition.) 
316.02 - Hours of Closing. 
The Wayzata Nature Center shall be closed between sunset and sunrise. No person shall frequent, congregate, enter or remain within the Wayzata Nature Center during said hours of closing. 
316.03 - Other Regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to conduct within the Wayzata Nature Center: 
A.  No open fires shall be permitted. 
B.  No person shall possess or consume wine, beer or liquor. 
C.  Public ingress and egress shall be permitted only at the Boardwalk and LaSalle Street locations, where parking and gates are provided. 
D.  No bicycles or motorized vehicles shall be permitted. 
CHAPTER 317 - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR 

317.01 - Primary Responsibility. 
It is the primary responsibility of the owner of property upon which there is abutting any sidewalk to keep and maintain such sidewalk in safe and serviceable condition. 
(Ord. 424 [9-6-1983]) 
317.02 - Construction, Reconstruction and Repair Specifications. 
All construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks shall be done in strict accordance with specifications on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 424 [9-6-1983]) 
317.03 - Notice-No Emergency. 
Where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, no emergency exists, notice of the required repair or reconstruction shall be given to the owner of the abutting property. Such notice shall require completion of the work within 90 days, and shall be mailed to the owner or owners shown to be such on the records of the County Officer who mails tax statements. 
(Ord. 424 [9-6-1983]) 
317.04 - Notice-Emergency. 
Where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, an emergency exists, notice of the required repair or reconstruction shall be given to the owner of the abutting property. Such notice shall require completion of the work within ten days, and shall be mailed to the owner or owners shown to be such on the records of the County Officer who mails tax statements. 
(Ord. 424 [9-6-1983]) 
317.05 - Failure of Owner to Reconstruct or Make Repairs. 
If the owner of the abutting property fails to make repairs or accomplish reconstruction as herein required, the City Engineer shall report such failure to the Council and the Council may order such work to be done under its direction and the cost thereof assessed to the abutting property owner as any other special assessment. 
(Ord. 424 [9-6-1983]) 
317.06 - Duty to Inspect. 
In order to accomplish the purpose of this Section, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to inspect sidewalks within the City, or cause the same to be inspected under his direction. 
(Ord. 424 [9-6-1983]) 
CHAPTER 318 - MUNICIPAL DOCKS 

318.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Charter Boat" means any boat or watercraft which is used for the transportation of passengers for a fee. 
B.  "Pilot" means the person operating any charter boat. 
C.  "Municipal Docks" means the municipal mooring nearest to the intersection of Lake Street and Broadway Avenue and the municipal mooring nearest to the intersection of Lake Street and Barry Avenue. 
D.  "Depot Dock" means the municipal mooring nearest to the intersection of Lake Street and Barry Avenue. 
E.  "Broadway Dock" means the municipal mooring nearest to the intersection of Lake Street and Broadway Avenue. 
(Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
318.02 - Permit Required. 
No charter boat shall be parked, moored, stored, placed, kept at or tied up to the Depot Dock without first having secured a Charter Boat Permit from the City of Wayzata. Permits will not be issued for the Broadway Dock, as Charter Boats are expressly prohibited from docking at that location. 
(Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
318.03 - Permit Application and Insurance. 
Any person desiring to secure such a permit shall make application on a form supplied by the City. Each application shall be accompanied by an annual fee and by evidence of liability insurance coverage with a minimum limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. Such insurance policy shall name the City as an additional insured, shall be filed with the City Manager, shall be subject to approval by the City Manager as to form and content and shall be issued by companies duly licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota. 
(Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
318.04 - Non-Transferability. 
Permits issued under this Chapter shall be non-transferable. 
(Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
318.05 - Responsibility of Charter Boat Owner. 
Every charter boat owner is responsible for the conduct of its pilots while docking, departing, or doing business at a municipal dock. Any violation of this Chapter by a pilot shall also be considered an act of the charter boat owner for the purpose of imposing a penalty under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
318.06 - Alcohol Prohibited. 
No owner, employee or agent of a licensed charter boat which has been issued an "on-sale liquor" or "on-sale wine" license by the Lake Minnetonka Conservation District shall sell, serve or allow to be consumed any alcoholic beverage while that boat is at the Wayzata Municipal Docks. 
(Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
318.07 - Prohibited Acts. 
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for the owner and/or any person operating any boat to do any of the following: 
A.  Dock a charter boat at the Depot Dock without a permit. 
B.  Dock any charter boat at the Broadway Dock. 
C.  Dock any boat at the Municipal Docks which exceeds any limitations set forth in a conspicuously posted notice. 
(Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
318.08 - Revocation. 
Permits may be revoked by the City Council. Grounds for such revocation shall include, but shall not be limited to, any alcohol-related offenses committed by the permit holder or any of his agents or employees while operating a charter boat or any other watercraft. 
(Ord. 592 [5-29-1997]) 
CHAPTER 319 - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE ORDER, SAFETY, AND PROTECTION OF PROPERTY OWNED BY THE CITY OF WAYZATA 

319.01 - Policy and Purpose. 
The City recognizes the need to maintain order and safety on the property owned and operated by the City, including its facilities and equipment. The City also recognizes the need to protect, on behalf of its citizens, said property. In furtherance of those goals, the City finds that from time to time it may be necessary to establish rules and regulations to enhance public order and safety and to protect its property, as follows: 
A.  To control parking on City property; 
B.  To control access to City property; 
C.  To establish hours of use for City property; and 
D.  To establish conditions for use of City property. 
(Ord. 605 [07-29-1998]) 
319.02 - Authority. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to enact rules and regulations to ensure order and safety on and to protect the property of the City of Wayzata. 
(Ord. 605 [07-29-1998]) 
319.03 - Notice. 
In order for any rules or regulations promulgated under this Chapter to be enforceable, such rules or regulations must be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the subject property. 
319.04 - Enforcement. 
The Wayzata Police Department may enforce any rule or regulation established under this Chapter which is posed in accordance with Section 319.03. 
(Ord. 605 [07-29-1998]) 
319.05 - Repeal. 
All rules and regulations promulgated by the City Manager under this Chapter shall remain in full force and effect until repealed by the City Manager or by a motion of the City Council. 
(Ord. 605 [07-29-1998]) 
319.06 - Violations. 
A violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor, subject to the penalties therefor established by State law. 
(Ord. 605 [07-29-1998]) 
CHAPTER 320 - PROHIBITING SEAPLANE MOORINGS 

320.01 - Prohibiting Seaplane Moorings. 
Prohibiting seaplane moorings on Wayzata Bay. 
A.  No person shall permanently moor a seaplane within the harbor limits of Wayzata Bay in the City of Wayzata nor base said plane on any land area of property immediately adjacent to Wayzata Bay. 
B.  Any person who as of November 22, 1983, has a seaplane moored or based on Wayzata Bay in the City of Wayzata shall be given until December 31, 1985, to cease operation of said mooring or base. 
(Ord. 426 [11-22-1983]) 
CHAPTER 321 - DOCK USE 

321.01 - Dock Use. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  "Dock" shall mean any dock, buoy, marina or boat launching or land area located in or adjacent to Lake Minnetonka where a boat or watercraft may be moored, launched or located. 
2.  "Establishment" shall mean a facility or business which is defined as a "Food Establishment," pursuant to Section 603.01.H, or as a "Restaurant," pursuant to Section 502.01.C, or is required to have an On-Sale Wine License or On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License by Sections 503 and 502, respectively of the Wayzata City Code. 
B.  Restrictions on Hours of Operation. Any Establishment whose customers, employees or invitees have access to the Establishment by launching, landing or mooring their boats or watercrafts on a Dock which is owned or leased by the Establishment, or to which Dock customers, employees or invitees of the Establishment have access by virtue of any license or use agreement, shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  The hours during which the Establishment shall be open for business shall be limited as follows: 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, except holidays 11:00 p.m. Friday, Saturday, Sunday and holidays 12:00 midnight  
2.  The hours during which customers, employees or invitees of the Establishment shall be permitted to arrive or tie up at or make their initial use of the Establishment's Dock shall be limited as follows: 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, except holidays 10:00 p.m. Friday, Saturday, Sunday and holidays 11:00 p.m.  
Provided, however, that any boat or watercraft which is moored or has landed at the Establishment's Doc within the hours prescribed by this Section 321.01.B may remain moored or otherwise stationary at the Dock after the expiration of the hours prescribed by this Section 321.01.B, but must depart the Dock by the time of the closing of the Establishment. 
C.  Signage, Monitoring. Every Establishment subject to this chapter shall have one employee with security authority assigned to monitor and police boat noise, boat parking and waiting in the dock. Illuminated "quiet" signs shall be placed at and turned on at the dock at 10:00 p.m. and turned off at closing of the restaurant. An additional illuminated sign shall be placed at and turned on as needed to show: 
1.  That all boat parking spaces are full; and 
2.  That, as required by Section B., the Dock is closed to restaurant patrons arriving by boat. 
(Ord. 458 [7-15-1986]) 
PART IV - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 401 - WATER SYSTEM 

401.01 - Permits Required. 
No person or entity shall tap or make any direct or indirect connection to or extension of the City water system, nor shall any person or entity disconnect or terminate the use of any service from the system, without first having obtained from the City a permit to do so and without having paid to the City the required fee(s) therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made at the City offices, on forms supplied by the City, and each such application shall be accompanied by the required fee(s). Upon issuing any such permit, the City Manager shall retain a copy thereof as part of the permanent records of the City. 
(Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
401.02 - Fees Established. 
Fees and charges for the permits required in Section 401.01 shall be set by resolution of the City Council and shall include: 
A.  A minimum inspection fee. 
B.  An inspection fee for each tap or connection made either directly or indirectly to any water main abutting or benefiting any real property which is not within the corporate limits of the City. 
C.  A charge for each temporary or permanent disconnection of a service from the City water system, and a charge for each restoration of any such service. 
D.  Such additional fees or charges as are required otherwise in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]; Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
401.03 - Obligation of Existing Users. 
No person having a direct or indirect connection with the City water system shall allow, suffer or permit any other person to connect therewith from any lot or any building of whatsoever nature, owned or controlled by such other person, unless the other person shall first have obtained a permit from the City as required in Section 401.01 that permits such connection to be made. 
(Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
401.04 - Permanent or Temporary Termination of Water Service. 
Any water service to be terminated because of demolition, remodeling, or other reason, will be disconnected at the City main before demolition, remodeling, etc. takes place. The corporation will be shut off and the pipe cut off within six inches of the corporation or valve. If the water service is to be reused after the intended work takes place and the City inspector determines that the water service could be damaged during the intended work, the water service will be disconnected outside of the work area before the intended work begins. 
(Ord. 531 [9-19-1989]; Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
401.05 - Property Not Previously Assessed. 
If an application for a permit required in Section 401.01 is made to serve real property not heretofore assessed for the installation of water mains or to serve real property which was assessed for such installation as a land use less intensive than its current or proposed use, no permit shall be issued unless the person owning or in possession of said property first shall pay to the City a sum of money equal to such amount as was assessed against other property subject to assessment at the time the water main was constructed, together with interest from the date of construction to the date of payment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, said amount shall in no case exceed the present cost of constructing a six-inch water main in front of said property. 
(Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
401.06 - Seasonal Restrictions on Water Use. 
To conserve the City's water resources and help the City's water system meet peak demands, from May 1 to September 30 of each year, the following outdoor water use restrictions shall be in effect for all outdoor use of water supplied by the City of Wayzata: 
A.  Water supplied by the City of Wayzata may not be used to water lawns, sod or seeded areas between 12:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily. 
B.  Properties with even-numbered addresses may only use water supplied by the City of Wayzata outdoors on even-numbered calendar days. Properties with odd-numbered addresses may only use water supplied by the City of Wayzata outdoors on odd-numbered calendar days. 
C.  Homeowners associations and apartment complexes with multiple addresses that provide a common outdoor water irrigation system may only use water supplied by the City of Wayzata outdoors every other day. Such associations and complexes must inform the City that they have this type of system. 
D.  The following uses are exempt from the seasonal restrictions on water use in this section: 
1.  Vehicle washing and the watering of trees, shrubs and flowers only if conducted by a person holding a squeeze-activated type nozzle equipped with an automatic shutoff. 
2.  Watering of new landscaping, sod or seed within 30 days of installation, except between 12:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily. 
3.  Watering from a source other than the City's water supply. Under this exemption the City may inspect the property watered and the source of water used to ensure compliance. 
4.  Watering by employees and agents of the City in such instances where lawn, turf or grass used for playfields or other plantings and areas owned or operated by the City require more frequent watering to prevent damage thereto. 
5.  Reasonable and intermittent use of an outdoor watering system exclusively for residential recreational uses. 
6.  Upon written request and approval of the Director of Public Service and subject to any terms and conditions imposed by the Director of Public Service with respect to the approval, any person owning or operating a commercial or business enterprise whose economic well-being is dependent on sprinkling, irrigation or watering of lawn, grass or turf owned, leased or operated by it. Such exemption shall only apply to the property specified in the written approval. 
(Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
401.07 - Watering Systems. 
All outdoor water irrigation and watering systems must be managed and operated in good repair and in such a fashion as to avoid water waste due to misalignment, leaks, damage, malfunctions or other inefficiencies in the system. 
(Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
401.08 - Water Emergency. 
In addition to the other water use restrictions imposed in this Chapter, whenever the City Manager shall determine that a shortage or anticipated shortage of water supply threatens the health, safety or welfare of the City or its water supply, the City Manager may impose such emergency regulations pertaining to the use of City water that the City Manager determines shall best address the water shortage. 
A.  Emergency water regulations may include, but are not limited to, the total prohibition of outdoor watering, sprinkling or irrigation of lawns, grass, turf, plantings, car washing, air conditioning, or other uses of City water. 
B.  Notice of the emergency water regulations shall be given in such a manner as the City Manager may determine. Such notice shall contain the text of the emergency regulations and state the date on which the emergency regulations are effective. 
C.  Emergency water regulations shall continue in effect until the end of the emergency is declared by the City Manager. Notice of such shall be given in the same manner as notice of the imposition of the emergency water regulations were given. 
(Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
401.09 - Penalties. 
Any person or entity that causes or permits water to be used in violation of this Chapter shall be given a warning by the City Manager as to such violation and thereafter a violation of this Chapter by such person or entity shall result in a penalty set forth in Chapter 403, Section 403.09 for each day of such violation, which charge or charges shall be added to the next water bill issued by the City for the premises upon which the violation or violations have occurred. Continued violations after such warning shall also be cause for discontinuance of City water service. 
(Ord. 509 [6-21-1988]; Ord. 710 [9-16-2010]) 
CHAPTER 402 - SEWER SYSTEM 

402.01 - Permits Required. 
No person or firm shall tap or make any direct or indirect connection to or extension of the City sewer system, nor shall any person or firm disconnect or terminate the use of any service from said system, without first having obtained from the City a permit to do so and without having paid to the City the required fee(s) therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made at the City offices, on forms supplied by the City, and each such application shall be accompanied by the required fee(s). Upon issuing any such permit, the City Manager shall retain a copy thereof as part of the permanent records of the City. 
402.02 - Fees Established. 
The fees and charges for the permits required in Section 402.01 are hereby adopted by reference and are as established by City Council. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 501 [5-17-1988]) 
402.03 - Connection Required. 
A.  Any building or structure within the City which has sanitary facilities but which has no available municipal sewer service is hereby required to connect such facilities to the City sewer system within 24 months of written notice from the City that the service has been provided. 
B.  Any new building or structure which is built within the City upon property which has available to it municipal sewer service is hereby required to connect its sanitary facilities to the City sewer system immediately upon construction, and no private sewage disposal system shall be allowed for any such building or structure. 
C.  Any building or structure within the City which has a private sewage disposal system and which has available to it municipal sewer service is hereby required to connect its sanitary facilities to the City sewer system immediately if within the 24-month period allowed for the connection said private disposal system becomes inoperable, requires major repair or requires an extension of drainfield. 
402.04 - Obligation of Existing Users. 
No person having a direct or indirect connection with the City sewer system shall allow, suffer or permit any other person to connect therewith from any lot or any building of whatsoever nature owned or controlled by such other person, unless such other person shall first have obtained a permit from the City as required in Section 402.01. 
402.05 - Property Not Previously Assessed. 
If an application for a permit required in Section 402.01 is made to serve real property not heretofore assessed for the installation of sewer mains or to serve real property which was assessed for the installation as a land use less intensive than its current or proposed use, no permit shall be issued unless the person owning or in possession of the property first shall pay to the City a sum of money equal to such amount as shall have been assessed against other property subject to the assessment at the time the sewer main was constructed, together with interest from the date of construction to the date of payment. Notwithstanding, said amount shall in no case exceed the cost of constructing an eight-inch sewer main in front of such property at the time of the connection. 
402.06 - Subdivision of Property. 
Whenever real property heretofore assessed for expansion of the sewage treatment plant in the year 1955 is subdivided in any manner, and whenever an application for a sewer tap or connection is made to serve the subdivided property, a new parcel or parcels shall be deemed to have been created requiring additional fees and charges in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 402.02. 
402.07 - Service Availability Charge. 
Any "service availability charge" which is established by the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission and which is collected from the City for a property connecting to the City sewer system shall be the responsibility of the property owner making such a connection, and said charge shall be collected by the City from the property owner before a permit is issued for the connection. 
402.08 - Metropolitan Disposal System. 
That document entitled "Sewage and Waste Control Rules and Regulations for the Metropolitan Disposal System," which is dated December 1, 1971, and which has been duly adopted by the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, together with all amendments thereto, is hereby incorporated in this Code in its entirety, as if set out herein in full. 
402.09 - Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors. 
Pursuant to Minnesota Plumbing Code, SS 4715.1100, grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of a City Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. Where installed, interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in efficient operation at all times. Any damage resulting from the improper maintenance of an interceptor shall be the responsibility of the owner, including the cost of cleaning and repairing the lines. Any owner who fails to comply with the request for damages resulting from the improper maintenance shall be liable for the costs and attorneys' fees the City incurs in enforcing this Section. 
(Ord. 491 [1-5-1988]) 
402.10 - Permanent or Temporary Termination of Sewer Service. 
Any sewer service to be terminated because of demolition, remodeling, or other reason, will be disconnected and capped off before demolition, remodeling, etc. takes place. If the sewer service is to be reused after the intended work takes place, and the City inspector determines that the sewer service could be damaged during the intended work, the disconnect will be located outside of the work area. If the disconnection is permanent, the sewer service will be disconnected at the property line unless otherwise deemed acceptable by the City inspector. 
(Ord. 531 [9-19-1989]) 
CHAPTER 403 - WATER AND SEWER USAGE CHARGES 

403.01 - Water Usage Charges Established. 
All water supplied to consumers from the City waterworks shall be provided at rates established by resolution of the City Council. Such charges shall be billed quarterly throughout the year, based upon actual water consumption. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 432 [1-8-1985]) 
403.02 - Sewer Usage Charges Established. 
All sewerage service supplied by the City shall be provided at the rates set forth by resolution of the Council. In the case of residential users such charges shall be billed quarterly throughout the year but shall be based upon water consumption during one or more winter months. In any given calendar year should any subsequent quarter's water consumption be less than that of the winter usage the user shall be charged based upon the lower consumption. However, at no time shall the residential user be charged on a quarterly basis for more than winter usage. In the case of multiple dwelling and commercial users such charges shall be billed quarterly throughout the year and shall be based upon water consumption each quarter, except that water used for air conditioning and discharged into the City storm sewer system may be deducted from such consumption. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 432 [1-8-1985]) 
403.03 - Service Fee for Bills in Arrears. 
All water and/or sewer bills shall be paid within 30 days from the date of billing, except that those accounts billed on a monthly basis shall be paid within 15 days from the date of billing. Amounts which are not paid within this period shall be in arrears, and a service fee of five percent on all such amounts then shall be due and shall be added to the following quarterly or monthly bill. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 414 [12-21-1982]; Ord. 432 [1-8-1985]) 
403.04 - Certification of Water and Sewer Usage Bills in Arrears. 
Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Stats.  444.075, Subd. 3, unpaid water and sewer charges under this Chapter that are in arrears, as well as any authorized and permitted penalties, may be certified to the county auditor and assume the same status of other taxes against the benefited property. In addition, the City shall also have the right to bring a civil action or take other legal action to collect the unpaid water and sewer charges. 
(Ord. 673 [10-4-2006]) 
403.05 - Reserved. 
403.06 - Reserved. 
403.07 - Reserved. 
403.08 - Reserved. 
403.09 - Violation of Water Sprinkling Ban. 
Any violations of Chapter 401, Section 401.05 shall result in a fine of $100.00 for each day of said violation. 
(Ord. 509 [6-21-1988]) 
CHAPTER 404 - INDUSTRIAL USER SEWER STRENGTH CHARGES 

404.01 - Establishment of Strength Charges. 
For the purpose of paying the costs allocated to the City each year by the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission (herein "the Commission") which are based upon the strength of discharge of all industrial users receiving waste treatment services within or served by the City, there is hereby approved, adopted and established, in addition to the sewer charge based upon the volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon each such company or corporation based upon the strength of industrial waste discharged into the sewer system of the City (herein "the strength charge"). 
404.02 - Establishment of a Strength Charge Formula. 
For the purpose of computing the strength charge established in Section 404.01 hereof, there is hereby established the same strength charge formula as is designated in Resolution No. 76-172 of the Commission, dated June 15, 1976, said formula being based upon pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the sewage produced through an evaluation of pollution qualities and quantities in excess of an annual average base and the proportionate costs of operation and maintenance of waste treatment services provided by the Commission. 
404.03 - Strength Charge Payment. 
The strength charge established in Section 404.01 hereof shall be paid by each industrial user subject to such charge before the twentieth day next succeeding the date of billing thereof by or on behalf of the City, and such payment shall be deemed to be delinquent if not paid to the billing entity before said date. If such payment is not paid before said date, an industrial user also shall pay interest compounded monthly at the rate of two-thirds of one percent per month on the unpaid balance due. 
404.04 - Establishment of a Tax Lien. 
If payment of the strength charge established in Section 404.01 hereof is not paid before the sixtieth day next succeeding the date of billing thereof to an industrial user by or on behalf of the City, said delinquent charge, plus accrued interest pursuant to Section 404.03 hereof, shall be deemed to be a charge against the owner, lessee or occupant of the property served, and the City Manager shall certify such unpaid delinquent balance to the County Auditor as a tax lien against the property served for collection as other taxes are collected. Such certification shall not preclude the City from recovery of said delinquent charge and interest thereon under any other available remedy. 
CHAPTER 405 - INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM-REPEALED 

405.01 - Conformance With and Adoption of State Requirements. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.02 - Administration. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.03 - Definition. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.04 - Additional Local Requirements. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.05 - Order to Cease Use. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.06 - Power to Enter Upon Property. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.07 - Construction Permit Program. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.08 - Application. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.09 - Construction Permit, Issuance, Fee and Period of Validity. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.10 - Construction Inspection. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.11 - Backfilling. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.12 - Maintenance Inspection. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.13 - Additional Inspections. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.14 - Records. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.15 - Emptying Septic Tanks. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.16 - Storage Distance from Buildings. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.17 - Disposal of Contents. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
405.18 - Violations. 
(Ord. 694 [01-27-2009]; Repealed by Ord. 705 [04-29-2010]) 
CHAPTER 406 - STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY 

406.01 - Stormwater Drainage Utility. 
A.  Stormwater Drainage Utility Established. The municipal storm sewer system shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to Minn. Stats.  444.075 from which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this Chapter and Minnesota Statutes. The stormwater drainage utility will be part of the Public Works Department and under the administration of the City Manager. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "Residential Equivalent Factor (REF)." One REF is defined as the ratio of the average discharge rate generated by one acre of a land use to the discharge rate generated by one acre of typical single family residential land, during a standard ten year, one-half hour, rainfall event. 
(Ord. 540 [2-28-1991]) 
406.02 - Stormwater Drainage Fees. 
Stormwater drainage fees for parcels of land shall be determined by multiplying the REF for a parcel's land use by the parcel's acreage and then multiplying the resulting product by the stormwater drainage rate. The REF values for various land uses are as follows: 
Class Land Uses REF 1 Single, Duplex and Triplex 1.00 2 Multiple 3.00 3 Commercial/Institutional 5.00 4 Schools 1.25 5 Churches 3.00 6 Parks .25 7 Golf Courses .25 8 Cemeteries .25 9 Open Space/Undeveloped .25 10 Industrial 5.00  
For the purpose of calculating stormwater drainage fees, all developed single, duplex, and triplex parcels shall be considered to have an acreage of one-third acre. The stormwater drainage rate per REF-acre shall be established per resolution of the Council. All single, duplex and triplex parcels in excess of one-third acre shall be charged at one REF, plus open space charge for remaining acreage. 
A.  Adjustments. The Council may adopt policies, by resolution, for adjustment of the stormwater drainage fee for parcels based upon hydrologic data to be supplied by property owners, which data demonstrates a hydrologic response substantially different from the standards used by City to establish the REF. Such adjustments of stormwater drainage fees shall not be made retroactively. 
B.  Exemptions. The following land uses are exempt from stormwater drainage fees: 
1.  Public rights-of-way; 
2.  Railroad rights-of-way; 
3.  All land that is at or below the existing and/or proposed normal elevation of a wetland/stormwater detention basin as designated in the Stormwater Management Plan for the City of Wayzata, dated May 1988, or the most recent revision thereof. 
(Ord. 540 [2-28-1991]) 
406.03 - Payment of Fee. 
Statements for stormwater drainage fees shall be computed every month and invoiced by the Finance/Utility Department for each account on or about the 20th day of the month following the billing period. Such statement shall be due on or before the day of the month stated on the billing. Any prepayment or overpayment of charges shall be retained by the City and applied against subsequent fees. 
A.  Recalculation of Fee. If a property owner or person responsible for paying the stormwater drainage fee questions the correctness of an invoice for such charge, such person may have the determination of the charge recomputed by written request to the City Manager made within 60 days of mailing of the invoice in question by the City. 
B.  Penalty of Late Payment. Each billing for stormwater drainage fees not paid when due shall incur a penalty charge per month of 11/2 percent of the amount past due or up to that amount allowed by law, whichever is less. 
C.  Certification of Past Due Fees on Taxes. Any past due stormwater drainage fees in excess of 90 days past due on October 1 of any year may be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes in the following year pursuant to Minn. Stats.  444.075, Subd. 3. In addition, the City shall also have the right to bring a civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid fees. 
(Ord. 540 [2-28-1991]) 
406.04 - Drainage Fee. 
The City Council may, by resolution, increase, diminish or change the amount and basis of the drainage fee herein established, from time to time. 
(Ord. 540 [2-28-1991]) 
CHAPTER 407 - REGULATION OF DISCHARGE INTO THE SANITARY SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM 

407.01 - Prohibited Discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewer collection system any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage. Any person having a roof drain, sump pump, unauthorized swimming pool discharge, cistern overflow pipe or surface drain connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer shall disconnect and remove any piping or system conveying the water to the sanitary sewer system by June 1, 1993. 
(Ord. 562 [1-28-1993]) 
407.02 - Inspection; Compliance Required. 
Compliance shall occur through inspection by authorized City employees or its agents of all properties or structures connected to the sanitary sewer system to confirm there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Any owner of any property found to violate this Section shall make the necessary changes to comply with this Chapter by June 1, 1993, and the change shall be verified by authorized City employees or its agents. Any property or structure not inspected or not in compliance by June 1, 1993 shall, following notification from the City, comply within 14 days or be subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided for. 
(Ord. 562 [1-28-1993]) 
407.03 - Sump Pumps. 
All sump pumps shall have a discharge pipe installed to the outside wall of the building. The pipe attachment must be a rigid permanent-type plumbing such as PVC, copper or galvanized pipe. The discharge shall extend at least three feet outside of the foundation and may not be pumped directly or indirectly onto public right-of-way unless approved by the City Engineer. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed and repaired in compliance with applicable codes. 
(Ord. 562 [1-28-1993]) 
407.04 - Reinspection. 
Upon verified compliance with this Chapter, the City reserves the right to reinspect such property or structure at least yearly to confirm continued compliance. Any property found not to be in compliance upon reinspection or any person refusing to allow their property to be reinspected shall, following notification from the City, comply within 14 days or be subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided for. 
(Ord. 562 [1-28-1993]) 
407.05 - Surcharge. 
A surcharge of $100.00 per month is hereby imposed and shall be added to every utility billing mailed on or after June 1, 1993, to properties not in compliance with this Chapter. The surcharge shall be added to every monthly billing until the property is in compliance. If, after six months of surcharges for non-compliance, any property is still found to be in violation of the ordinance, the surcharge shall increase to $300.00 per month. 
(Ord. 562 [1-28-1993]) 
407.06 - Injunction. 
The imposition of the surcharge shall not limit the right of the City to seek an injunction in District Court ordering the person to disconnect the non-conforming connection to the sanitary sewer or from pursuing any other legal remedies available, or in the alternative, the City may correct the violation and certify the costs of correction as a special assessment against the property on which the correction was made. 
(Ord. 562 [1-28-1993]) 
407.07 - Requests for Waivers. 
The City Manager shall have the authority to hear and decide requests for waivers from the provisions of this Chapter where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration. Any request for waiver shall be submitted to the City Manager in writing. 
(Ord. 562 [1-28-1993]) 
407.08 - Additional Fees. 
Upon approval of a waiver from the provisions of this Chapter, the property owner shall agree to pay an additional fee for sanitary sewer services based on the number of gallons discharged into the sanitary sewer system as estimated by the City. 
(Ord. 562 [1-28-1993]) 
CHAPTER 408 - SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN 

408.01 - Wayzata Surface Water Management Plan. 
Pursuant to the legislative authority set forth in Minn. Stats.  462.351, 103B and 103D, the 2011 Update of the Wayzata Surface Water Management Plan is hereby adopted by reference, and all notations, references and other matters shown therein shall be as much a part of this Chapter as if such notations, references and other matter were all fully set forth herein. Said Plan shall be amended in the same manner as this Chapter and shall be made available to the general public at the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 622 [7-26-2000]; Ord. 643 [3-22-2003]; Ord. 700 [9-1-2009]; Ord. 717 [8-23-2011]) 
CHAPTER 409 - LAND DISTURBANCE 

409.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property, public welfare and the environment by regulating land disturbing activities and controlling erosion and sedimentation within the City. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.02 - Scope. 
This Chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control land disturbing activities, erosion and sedimentation; establishes the requirements and administrative procedures for issuance of permits; provides for review of plans and inspection of land disturbing activities; and provides procedures for enforcement of noncompliance. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.03 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter the definitions listed hereunder shall be construed as specified in this section. 
A.  "Applicant" is any person or group that applies for a permit to allow land disturbing activities. Applicant also means that person's agents, employees, and others acting under this person's or group's direction. The term "applicant" also refers to the permit holder or holders and the permit holder's agents, employees, and others acting under this person's or group's direction. 
B.  "Approval" shall mean the proposed work or completed work conforms to this Chapter in the opinion of the City. 
C.  "As-Graded" is the extent of surface conditions on completion of grading. 
D.  "Bedrock" is in-place solid rock. 
E.  "Bench" is a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 
F.  "Borrow" is earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site. 
G.  "City" is the administrative staff, or its agent, of the City of Wayzata. 
H.  "City Council" is the elected governing board of the City of Wayzata. 
I.  "Civil Engineer" is a professional engineer licensed by the Minnesota Board of Architecture, Engineering, Land Surveying, Landscape Architecture, Geoscience, and Interior Design to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
J.  "Civil Engineering" is the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind. 
K.  "Common Plan of Development of Sale" is contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, or on different schedules, but under one proposed plan including, but not limited to, mass site grading, utility installation, street construction and home or building construction. This item is broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or physical demarcation indicating that land disturbing activities may occur. 
L.  "Compaction" is the densification of a soil by removal of air, which requires mechanical energy. 
M.  "Discharge" is the release, conveyance, channeling, runoff, or drainage, of stormwater, including snowmelt and dewatering water, from a site. 
N.  "Earth Material" is any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof. 
O.  "Engineering Geologist" is a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology. 
P.  "Engineering Geology" is the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
Q.  "Erosion" is the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice. 
R.  "Erosion Control" refers to methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples include soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing. 
S.  "Excavation" is the mechanical removal of earth material. 
T.  "Fill" is a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
U.  "Final Stabilization" means that all soil disturbing activities on the site or common plan of development or sale have been completed, and that a uniform (evenly distributed, e.g., without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 80 percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed, and that all temporary erosion control devises are removed, including silt fence, temporary sedimentation basins, and temporary standpipes. Simply sowing grass seed and/or mulch is not considered final stabilization. Final stabilization of a "common plan of development or sale" includes completion of building or home construction along with final restoration of all yards and adjacent drainage ways. 
V.  "Geotechnical Engineer" is a professional engineer licensed by the Minnesota Board of Architecture, Engineering, Land Surveying, Landscape Architecture, Geoscience, and Interior Design to practice in the field of geotechnical engineering. 
W.  "Geotechnical Engineering" is the application of the principles of soils mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and/or testing of the construction thereof. 
X.  "Grade" is the vertical location of the ground surface. 
Y.  "Existing Grade" is the grade prior to grading or land disturbing activities. 
Z.  "Rough Grade" is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. 
AA.  "Finish Grade" is the final grade of the site, within 0.2 feet, that conforms to the approved plan. 
BB.  "Grading" is any excavating or filling or combination thereof. 
CC.  "Hydric Soils" are soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper layers. 
DD.  "Hydrophytic Vegetation" is macrophytic (large enough to be observed by the naked eye) plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. 
EE.  "Land Disturbance Activity" is any land change that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or lands within of the City of Wayzata's jurisdiction, including construction, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
FF.  "Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements" are the plan and requirements prepared by and available from the City Engineer implementing the provisions of this Chapter. 
GG.  "Permanent Controls" are long-term methods employed to prevent erosion and sedimentation. Examples of such protection are swales, ponds, sediment basins, turf reinforcement mats, storm sewer systems, and riprap. 
HH.  "Permanent Cover" means "final stabilization." Examples include grass, gravel, asphalt, and concrete. See also the definition of "final stabilization." 
II.  "Permit" is a written warrant or license granted for land disturbing activities. 
JJ.  "Sediment" is the product of an erosion process; solid material both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by water, wind, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below water level. 
KK.  "Sedimentation" is the process or action of depositing sediment. 
LL.  "Sediment Control" is the methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving a site. Examples of sediment control practices are silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent sedimentation basins. 
MM.  "Site" is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where a land disturbing activity is performed or permitted. 
NN.  "Slope" is an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
OO.  "Soil" is naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bedrock. 
PP.  "Stabilized" shall mean the exposed ground surface after it has been covered by perennial vegetation, sod, erosion control blanket, riprap, pavement or other material that prevents erosion. Simply sowing grass seed is not considered stabilization. 
QQ.  "Stormwater," as defined under Minn. R. 7077.0105, subpart 41b stormwater, "means precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and any other surface runoff and drainage." 
RR.  "Stormwater Pollution" prevention plan is a joint stormwater and erosion and sediment control plan that is a document containing the requirements of this Chapter and the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements, that when implemented will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and off-site nonpoint pollution. It involves both temporary and permanent controls. 
SS.  "Temporary Controls" are short-term methods employed to prevent erosion and sedimentation. Examples of such protection are silt fence, temporary sediment basins, check dams, straw, mulch, erosion control blankets, wood chips, and erosion netting. 
TT.  "Terrace" is a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
UU.  "Wetlands," as defined in Minn. R. 7050.0130, subpart F, are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Constructed wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are not waters of the state. Wetlands must have the following attributes: 
1.  A predominance of hydric soils; 
2.  Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and 
3.  Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.04 - General Conformance. 
The owner of a site or common plan of development or sale shall be responsible for maintaining any land disturbing activity in such a way as not to create a hazard to life and limb; or endanger the environment; or endanger property; or adversely affect the safety, use or stability of a property, public way or drainage channel; or deposit sediment on or into adjacent properties, right-of-ways, drainage systems or wetlands until final stabilization, as defined in section 409.03, has been achieved. 
Whenever the City determines that any land disturbing activity has become a hazard to life and limb; or endangers the environment; or endangers property; or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a property, public way or drainage channel; or deposits sediment on or into adjacent properties, right-of-ways, drainage systems or wetlands, the owner of the property upon which the land disturbance activity is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the City, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such land disturbing activity so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter and City Code. The City may inspect any property within the City of Wayzata for conformance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.05 - Land Disturbance Permit Required. 
No person shall do any land disturbing activity within the City of Wayzata without first having obtained a land disturbance permit from the City, except for the following: 
A.  A land disturbing activity which meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  The land disturbing activity is located in an isolated, self-contained area. 
2.  The land disturbing activity does not present a danger to private or public property. 
3.  The land disturbing activity does not infringe upon any wetland or ponding area or impede any drainage course. 
4.  The total area of disturbance is less than 5,000 square feet. 
(Ord. 718 [08-23-2011]) 
5.  The total volume of earth material disturbed, stockpiled, disposed of, or used as fill in connection with the land disturbing activity does not exceed 50 cubic yards. 
6.  The land disturbing activity is an excavation that is less than two feet in depth and does not create a cut slope greater than five feet in height, or is steeper than two horizontal to one vertical or is a fill that is less than two feet in depth and place on natural terrain with a slope flatter than three horizontal to one vertical, or is less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures. 
Types of activities which may meet these requirements include minor landscaping and the installation and maintenance of home gardens, fences, signs and mailboxes. 
B.  An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt the requirement for a permit for a land disturbing activity resulting from the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure. 
C.  Cemetery graves. 
D.  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations, laws or City Code. 
E.  Excavations for wells or tunnels or utilities controlled by other regulations, laws or City Code. 
F.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law or ordinance. This shall not exempt these types of activities from the special use permit requirements set forth by City Code. 
G.  Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or silvicultural (forestry) crops. This shall not exempt these types of activities from the other permit requirements set forth by City Code. 
H.  Exploratory excavations and borings under the direction of geotechnical engineers or engineering geologists. 
I.  Emergency work necessary to protect life, limb, or property. 
J.  City, county, state or federal agency projects whose plans and specifications meet the requirements of this Ordinance and are reviewed and approved by the City under a separate process. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of this Chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]; Ord. 718 [08-23-2011]) 
409.06 - Land Disturbance Permit Requirements. 
A.  Permits Required. Except as exempted in Section 409.05 of this Chapter, no person shall do any land disturbing activity without first obtaining a land disturbance permit from the City. A separate permit shall be required for each site or common plan of development or sale, and may cover both excavations and fills. Changes or deviation from previously reviewed plans shall require an amended permit, which must be applied for and approved before any work is performed. 
B.  When Permit May Be Applied For and Issued. A land disturbance permit may be applied for at any time. A land disturbance permit may not be issued until after the City Council has granted the applicant all other necessary approvals, including preliminary plat and site plan or equivalent approval, and all permit conditions have been completed to the satisfaction of the City. For individual isolated land disturbing activities, the City may grant a land disturbance permit without City Council approval of a preliminary plat, site plan, or equivalent approval. 
C.  Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the City for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
3.  Indicate the purpose of the proposed work. 
4.  Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications and other data as required in subsection (e) of this section. 
5.  State the valuation of the work. 
6.  Be signed by the applicant or authorized agent. 
7.  Give such other data and information as may be required by the City. 
D.  Plans and Specifications. Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by copies of the Land Disturbance Plan consisting of a grading plan, phasing plan, pond detail sheets, stormwater pollution prevention plan, standard detail sheets, specifications, and supporting data. The plans, specifications and reports shall be prepared and signed by a person registered by the Minnesota Board of Architecture, Engineering, Land Surveying, Landscape Architecture, and Interior Design unless specifically exempted by the City. 
E.  Information on Plans and In Specifications. Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this Chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the location of the work and the name and address of the owner and the person by whom they were prepared. As a minimum, the plans shall include the information set forth in this Chapter and the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements developed by the City. The Land Disturbance Plan shall consist of the following components. 
1.  Grading Plan. A grading plan shall be provided that clearly indicates the proposed land disturbing activities. Both existing and proposed topography shall be shown and have a maximum contour interval of two feet. Drainage patterns shall be clearly shown using arrows depicting direction of flow. Other information shall be shown as required by the City based on specific project characteristics. 
2.  Phasing Plan. A phasing plan shall be provided that clearly indicates the areas in the order they are to be disturbed and restored. The phasing plan shall consider minimization of area and duration of exposed soil and unstable conditions, minimization of the disturbance of natural soil cover and vegetation, erosion and sediment control measure installation, weather conditions and the schedule for temporary and permanent restoration. The area and duration of each phase shall be indicated on the plan. 
3.  Pond Detail Sheet. A pond detail sheet shall be provided for each constructed stormwater pond that shows detailed pond design including normal water level, high water level, aquatic bench, maintenance bench, outlet structures, emergency overflow locations and other project specific data required by the City. 
4.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The stormwater pollution prevention plan shall consist of three components, a temporary erosion and sediment control plan, a permanent erosion and sediment control plan, and a narrative. 
a)  A temporary erosion and sediment control plan shall be provided that indicates the location of perimeter controls, construction fence, temporary sedimentation basins, inlet protection, areas to be seeded, areas to be mulched or blanketed, location of construction waste control (dumpsters, chemical storage, concrete washout, portable restroom facilities, etc.) and all other required temporary erosion and sediment control measures. This plan shall also indicate staging of temporary erosion control measures. 
b)  A permanent erosion and sediment control plan shall be provided that indicates areas to be seeded and sodded, sediment ponds, storm sewer systems and all other required permanent erosion and sediment control measures. Permanent stormwater pollution controls including, but not limited to, ponds, vegetated buffers and structural measures shall be designed and constructed in accordance with other chapters of the City Code and requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction. 
c)  A narrative shall be provided that describes, at a minimum, the nature of construction activity, person(s) responsible for inspection and maintenance of site erosion and sediment control including contact information, project phasing, schedules, along with the timing, installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures and specifications necessary to carry out the project. 
5.  Standard Detail Sheet. A standard detail sheet shall be provided that consists of applicable construction details for approved erosion and sediment control measures as developed by the City. Other techniques may be used upon prior approval by the City with details provided by the designer. 
6.  Specifications. Specifications for land disturbing activities shall be provided as necessary to carry out the project in accordance with this Chapter and all other applicable ordinances, laws or agency requirements. 
F.  Alternate Materials and Methods of Construction. The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Chapter, provided any alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the City. The City may approve any such alternate, provided the City finds the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this Chapter and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation. The City shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. The details of any action granting approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the City. 
G.  Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this Chapter, the City may grant modifications for individual cases, provided the City shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this Chapter impractical and that the modification is in conformity with the intent and purpose of this Chapter. The details of any action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the City. 
H.  Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with any of the provisions of this Chapter or evidence that any material or construction does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter the City may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at no expense to the City. Test methods shall be as specified by this Chapter or by other recognized test standards. If there are no recognized and accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the City shall determine test procedures. 
I.  Geotechnical Engineering Report. The geotechnical engineering report, when required, shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, and opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading, including the stability of slopes. Recommendations included in the report and reviewed by the City shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. 
J.  Engineering Geology Report. The engineering geology report, when required, shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on proposed development, and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading. Recommendations included in the report and reviewed by the City shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. 
K.  Review and Issuance of Permit. The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the City. Such plans may be reviewed by other agencies to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the City finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this Chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees and security requirements for said permit have been provided, the City may issue a permit to the applicant. When the City issues the permit where plans are required, the City shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications "Approved." Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the City, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. The City may issue a provisional permit for a land disturbing activity before the entire plans and specifications have been submitted or reviewed, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this Chapter. The holder of such provisional permit shall proceed at his own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire project will be granted. The issuance of a land disturbance permit by the City does not exempt the applicant from the requirements and permitting authority of other agencies having jurisdiction over the work performed. 
L.  Retention of Plans. One set of reviewed plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the City for a period of not less than one year from date of completion of the work covered therein; and one set of reviewed plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
M.  Validity of Permit. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or of any other ordinance of the City. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Chapter shall be valid. The issuance of a permit based upon plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the City from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing land disturbing activities from being carried out thereunder when in violation of this Chapter or of any other ordinance of the City. 
N.  Expiration. Every permit issued by the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of more than 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which the permittee may commence work under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The City may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
O.  Suspension or Revocation. The City may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or is found to be in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.07 - Land Disturbance Permit Fees. 
A.  Generally. Fees shall be charged in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and shall be in the amounts set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the City Council by ordinance. 
B.  Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Said plan review fee shall be as established by the City Council by ordinance. 
C.  Land Disturbance Permit Fees. A fee for each land disturbance permit shall be paid to the City as established by City Council by ordinance. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.08 - Land Disturbance Permit Financial Security. 
A.  Generally. The City will require financial security in such form and amounts as deemed necessary to ensure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the reviewed plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate conditions posing a danger to public health, safety and welfare, adjacent property and the environment. The security shall be in the form of a surety bond, cash bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit. The financial security must be in place prior to any work. The amount of financial security required shall be equal to 11/2 times the estimated cost for erosion control, grading, and related items, including administrative costs, based on the work detailed in the plans and specifications. The City may require a portion of the security to be provided as a cash escrow based on the proposed work. 
B.  Action against Financial Security. The City may act against the financial security, if any of the following conditions exist. The City shall use funds from this security to finance any corrective or remedial work undertaken by the City or a contractor under contract with the City and to reimburse the City for all direct cost incurred in the process of remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time and legal fees. 
1.  The applicant ceases land disturbing activities and abandons the work site prior to the completion of the City approved plans and specifications. 
2.  The applicant fails to conform to any City approved plans and specifications, or related supplementary instructions including permit conditions of approval and corrective action notices. 
3.  Emergency action for circumstances that exists such that noncompliance with this Chapter poses an immediate danger to public health, safety and welfare, or the environment as determined by the City. The City will take every reasonable action possible to contact and direct the applicant to take any necessary action, prior to the City taking action. 
C.  Reduction of Financial Security. If requested by the applicant, the amount of the financial security may be reduced by the City. Said reduction will be based upon the extent to which the grading and restoration have been completed and shall consider the continued need for erosion control. At no time prior to final completion, as defined in section 409.16, shall the security be reduced to less than ten percent of the total original security amount. 
D.  Final Release of Financial Security. Any unspent amount of the financial security deposited with the City for faithful performance of the plans and specifications and any related remedial work will be released after the completion and inspection of all such measures and the establishment of final stabilization, as defined in section 409.03, for the permitted site or common plan of development or sale. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.09 - Amended Land Disturbance Permits. 
Any changes desired to be made to the land disturbance plan by the applicant following the issuance of a land disturbance permit shall be submitted to the City for review. No changes may be implemented by the applicant unless approved by the City. Any desired change to the land disturbance plan shall be supported by information showing the change desired, the reasons for the change, the effect the change would have upon buildings, structures, adjacent property, drainage facilities and patterns. The request shall be accompanied by geotechnical engineering and geology report as necessary. If the changes requested by the applicant are acceptable, the City will issue an amendment to the land disturbance permit. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.10 - Cuts. 
A.  Generally. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved geotechnical engineering and/or engineering geology report, cuts shall conform to the provisions of this section and the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements. In the absence of an approved geotechnical engineering report, these provisions may be waived by the City for minor cuts not intended to support structures. 
B.  Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, for a short term interim period, unless the owner furnishes a soils engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. Unless specifically approved, permanent slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.11 - Fills. 
A.  Generally. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved geotechnical engineering report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section and the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements. In absence of an approved geotechnical engineering report, these provisions may be waived for minor fills not intended to support structures. 
B.  Clearing Area to Be Filled. All timbers, logs, trees, brush and rubbish shall be removed from the site prior to placing the fill. No burning of the debris will be allowed unless a burning permit is issued by the City. 
C.  Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill and, where slopes are steeper than five to one and the height is greater than five feet, by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the geotechnical engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than five to one shall be at least ten feet wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or an approved drainage facility installed. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least ten feet wide but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and accepted by the geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist or both as a suitable foundation for fill. 
D.  Fill Material. Organic material shall not be permitted in building pad or roadway areas. Except as permitted by the City, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches shall be buried or placed in fills. Exception: The City may permit placement of larger rock when the geotechnical engineer properly devises a method of placement, continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply: 
1.  Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan. 
2.  Rock sizes greater than 12 inches in maximum dimension shall be ten feet or more below grade, measured vertically. 
3.  Rocks shall be placed so as to ensure filling of all voids with fines. 
E.  Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum 95 percent of maximum density as determined by the specified density method. In-place density shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D698-70. 
F.  Slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use or three horizontal to one vertical, whichever is less. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.12 - Setbacks. 
A.  Generally. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance with this section and the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary. Setback dimensions shall be shown on the land disturbance plan. 
B.  Top of Cut Slope. The top of cut slopes shall be made not nearer to a site boundary line than one-fifth of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of two feet and a maximum required setback of ten feet. The setback may need to be increased for any required drainage facility. 
C.  Toe of Fill Slope. The toe of fill slopes shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line than one-half the height of the slope with a minimum of two feet and a maximum required setback of 20 feet. Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is developed, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the City deems necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such land disturbance. These precautions may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Additional setbacks. 
2.  Provision for retaining walls. 
3.  Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion. 
4.  Provisions for the control of surface waters through additional temporary and permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
D.  Modification of Slope Location. The City may approve alternate setbacks. The City may require an investigation and recommendation by a qualified engineer or engineering geologist to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.13 - Drainage. 
A.  Generally. Drainage facilities shall be provided to control surface and subsurface waters to the satisfaction of the City. All drainage facilities shall conform to the provisions of this Chapter, the City of Wayzata standard details, construction plans and specifications, and the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements. 
B.  Discharge. Prior to discharging any surface water to any receiving water, discharge shall be treated for sediment and nutrients as required by ordinance, law, or other agency requirements and as approved by the City. Erosion of soil in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installing temporary and permanent erosion control measures as necessary. Building pads and swales shall have a minimum gradient of two percent toward approved drainage facilities. Surface water treatment shall be provided in accordance with this Chapter, other ordinances and the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.14 - Erosion and Sediment Control. 
A.  Generally. All sites with land disturbing activities shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion as set forth in this Chapter and the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements. 
B.  Erosion and Sediment Control. Temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed on all sites as necessary to prevent erosion and sedimentation from impacting any adjacent property, rights-of-way, drainage system, lake, pond, wetland, watercourse, natural resource or other protected area. 
C.  Implementation of Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. All erosion and sediment control measures will be operational prior to the start of any land disturbing activity as specified in the stormwater pollution prevention plan, construction plans and specifications, the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements, or as deemed necessary by the City based on actual site conditions. 
D.  Inspection. Inspection of the stormwater pollution prevention plan measures will be carried out as required by Section 409.15 or as required by the City approved land disturbance permit conditions of approval and the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements. 
E.  Maintenance. All erosion and sediment control measures will be maintained throughout the duration of the project. Deficiencies found through inspection of a site shall be repaired as necessary to bring the site into conformance with this Chapter, the plans and specifications, the City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements and as set forth in the land disturbance permit conditions of approval. 
At minimum, stormwater pollution prevention plan items shall be maintained as follows: 
1.  If a perimeter erosion control device is found to have sediment accumulation in excess of one-third of the total device height, the sediment shall be removed within 24 hours of discovery. 
2.  If an erosion control device is found to be nonfunctional, it shall be repaired or replaced within 24 hours of discovery. 
3.  Temporary sediment basins shall be maintained when sediment reaches one-half the outlet height or one-half the storage volume within 72 hours after discovery. 
4.  Additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed as directed by the City as found necessary to protect life and limb, the environment, properties or the stability of a property until final stabilization, as defined in section 409.03, has been achieved. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.15 - Inspection and Testing. 
A.  Generally. All land disturbing activities shall be subject to inspection by the City. Inspection of land disturbance operations and special testing shall be performed by the applicant as set forth in this Chapter, City of Wayzata Land Disturbance Plan and Implementation Requirements and as set forth in the land disturbance permit conditions of approval. 
B.  Inspector. The inspector acting on behalf of the applicant shall be a qualified person who shall demonstrate his competence, to the satisfaction of the City, for inspection of the particular type of land disturbing activity, testing procedure or operation requiring inspection. 
C.  Duties and Responsibilities. Duties and responsibilities of the inspector (For projects resulting in land disturbance equal to or greater than one acre). 
1.  The inspector shall observe the work assigned for conformance with the reviewed design drawings and specifications. 
2.  All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the contractor for correction, then, if uncorrected, to the proper design authority and to the City. 
3.  The inspector shall submit inspection reports stating whether the work or test requiring inspection was in conformance with the reviewed plans and specifications. The inspection reports shall be furnished to the City and other designated persons as required in the approved land disturbance plan. 
4.  Periodic inspection. Some inspections may be made on a periodic basis and satisfy the requirements of continuous inspection, provided this periodic scheduled inspection is performed as outlined in the land disturbance plans and specifications and approved by the City. 
5.  Stormwater pollution prevention plan items shall be inspected as required by this section, section 409.14, and as required by the land disturbance permit conditions of approval. At a minimum, these inspections shall be done weekly by the applicant and within 24 hours after every rainfall event five-tenths inches or greater in 24 hours. Inspection reports shall include, at a minimum, date and time of inspection, name of person conducting inspection, findings of inspection including any recommended corrective actions, corrective actions taken since previous inspection, and the date and amount of rainfall events of five-tenths inches or greater. 
D.  Grading Requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the designer who prepares the reviewed grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the geotechnical engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. The designer shall be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the site. The designer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor and the City. The designer also shall be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-graded grading plans upon completion of the work. The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the City a statement of compliance to said as-graded plan. 
Soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required as specified in Section 409.06. During grading all necessary reports, compaction data and geotechnical engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the designer and the City by the geotechnical engineer and the engineering geologist. The geotechnical engineer's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes and the design of buttress fills, where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist. The engineering geologist's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. 
The City shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants acting on behalf of the applicant. 
E.  Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this Chapter, the inspector, the designer, the geotechnical engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this Chapter or the reviewed plans and specifications, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the work and to the City. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. 
F.  Transfer of Responsibility for Approval. If the inspector, designer, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency of record is changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of his technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.16 - Completion of Work. 
A.  Generally. Work will be considered complete when the site or common plan of sale or development has undergone final stabilization, as defined in Section 409.03, is constructed to finish grade, as defined in Section 409.03; is in conformance with the approved plans and specifications; and is in conformance with all permit conditions of approval to the satisfaction of the City. 
B.  Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work the City will require the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto: 
1.  An as-graded grading plan prepared by the designer including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities. The designer shall state that to the best of his knowledge the work was done in accordance with the final reviewed grading plan. 
2.  A geotechnical-grading report, if required, prepared by the geotechnical engineer, including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the soils engineering investigation report. The soil engineer shall render a finding as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use. 
3.  A geologic grading report, if required, prepared by the engineering geologist, including a final description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. The geologic engineer shall render a finding as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geologic factors. 
4.  Any other reports or drawings as required by a permit's. 
C.  Notification of Completion. The permittee or his agent shall notify the City when the land disturbing operations are ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion-control measures, have been completed and final stabilization has occurred in accordance with this Chapter and the final reviewed land disturbance plan and the required reports have been submitted. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]) 
409.17 - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment in the county jail, or both, as specified by State Statute. Such penalty may be imposed in addition to suspension or revocation of the land disturbance permit. 
(Ord. 658 [2-22-2005]; Ord. 718 [08-23-2011]) 
CHAPTER 410 - STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL 

410.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Wayzata through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This Chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Chapter are: 
A.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants into the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user; 
B.  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MSR; and 
C.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.02 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following shall mean: 
A.  "Best Management Practices (BMPs)" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
B.  "Illegal Discharge" means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 410.06 of this Chapter. 
C.  "Illicit Connections" means an illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the City; or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
D.  "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit" means a permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 5 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
E.  "Non-Stormwater Discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
F.  "Person" means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
G.  "Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes, yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matters of any kind. 
H.  "Storm Drainage System" means publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
I.  "Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.03 - Applicability. 
This Chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the City. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.04 - Severability. 
The provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.05 - Illegal Disposal. 
No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, or keep or permit to be thrown, placed, left, maintained or kept, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the community, so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except in designated containers, recycling bags, or another lawfully established waste disposal facility. 
No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt, or other landscape debris into a water resource, buffer, street, road, alley, catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, flood control channel, canal, storm drain or any fabricated natural conveyance. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.06 - Illegal Discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
A.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this Chapter: discharges associated with firefighting activities, water line flushing, landscape and irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable ground water sources, foundation and footing drains, air conditioning condensation, individual car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges, street wash water, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
B.  Discharges specified in writing by the City as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
C.  Dye testing, as long as the City receives verbal notification prior to the time of the test. 
D.  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations and, provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.07 - Illicit Connections. 
A.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
B.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
C.  A person is considered to be in violation of this Chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or knowingly allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.08 - Suspension of MS4 Access. 
A.  Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The City may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
B.  Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this Chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City for reconsideration and a hearing on the matter. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.09 - Monitoring of Discharges. 
A.  Access to Facilities. 
1.  Duly authorized City employees bearing proper identification shall, at reasonable times, be permitted to enter upon properties served by the MS4 for the purpose of inspection, measurement, sampling and testing in connection with operation of the MS4. 
2.  The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this Chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Chapter. 
3.  If the City has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and a duly authorized City employee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the City may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.10 - Notification of Spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. 
    Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.11 - Notice of Violation. 
Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Chapter, the City may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
A.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
B.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
C.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
D.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
E.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
F.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.12 - Appeal of Notice and Violation. 
Any decision in the enforcement of this Chapter may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written petition with the City Manager within 30 days of the ruling. The petition shall specify in detail the matter, or matters, involved and every ground or basis on which objections are made. The petition shall show the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all objectors and their attorney at law or spokesman. The filing of a petition shall stay all proceedings unless the City Engineer shall file with the City Manager within 72 hours after the filing of a petition, a certificate stating that a stay would cause peril to life or property of specifying other good reason. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.13 - Enforcement Measures After Appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days of the decision of the City Council upholding the decision of the City, then representatives of the City shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the City or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.14 - Cost of Abatement of the Violation. 
Civil Damages-Any user violating any of the provisions of this section or who has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage or other impairment to the MS4 shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violation or discharge. The City Engineer may add to the user's charges and fees the cost assessed for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs is a violation of this section. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.15 - Injunctive Relief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Chapter, the City may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.16 - Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
410.17 - Penalty. 
Any person who is found to be in violation of any provision this Chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished accordingly, including the payment of all appropriate costs as prescribed in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 692 [12-1-2008]) 
PART V - MUNICIPAL LICENSES 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 501 - GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS 

501.01 - Licenses Required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all licenses issued by the City shall be governed by the provisions of this Chapter. No person shall conduct any business or activity for which a license is required under this Code without possessing a currently valid license for the business or activity. 
501.02 - Application Procedures. 
Every application for a license required under this Code shall be submitted to the City Manager on forms provided by the City. All such applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee for the license requested and all other charges relative thereto imposed by this Code. Once the City Manager is satisfied that all requirements of this Code have been met by an applicant, he shall present the application to the City Council for their action, or if the license requested does not require Council approval he shall issue the license. 
501.03 - License Fees. 
The fees for licenses issued under this Code shall be as established by resolution. Except as otherwise provided, license fees shall not be prorated for any portion of the calendar year, nor shall any license fee be refunded in whole or in part. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
501.04 - Expiration. 
Except as otherwise provided, all licenses issued under this Code shall be valid for one calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they are issued. All licenses issued for a portion of a calendar year also shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they are issued. 
501.05 - Renewal. 
All applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 60 days prior to expiration of the license. All such applications shall be submitted to the City Manager on forms provided by the City, and they shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee for the license requested and all other charges relative thereto imposed by this Code. 
501.06 - Transferability. 
Except as otherwise provided, no license issued under this Code may be transferred to any other person or business entity. All changes in the ownership of any business or activity licensed hereunder shall require a new application to the City. No license issued to a specific premises or location under this Code may be transferred to any other premises or location without prior approval of the City Council. 
501.07 - Inspection of Premises. 
Any City employee or authorized agent of the City having a duty to perform with reference to a license issued by the City may enter and inspect the premises of any such licensee at all reasonable times to enforce compliance with applicable provisions of this Code. No person shall interfere with or hinder any such employee or agent in the performance of his duties, and all appropriate books and records of the licensee shall be made available upon request to any such employee or agent. 
501.08 - Display of License. 
Each holder of a license issued under this Code shall display said license or other insignia given him as evidence of said license on the premises, vehicle or device to which the license relates. If the license is not so related, it shall be carried on the licensee's person whenever he is engaged in the licensed business or activity. 
501.09 - Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this Code for the violation of any law, ordinance or other regulation applicable to the licensed business or activity. Except where mandatory revocation is provided by law without notice or hearing or where suspension may be made without a hearing, the licensee shall be granted a public hearing before the Council upon the potential suspension or revocation with at least ten days prior written notice. Such a notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the charges against the licensee. No license shall be suspended for a greater period of time than 60 days. 
CHAPTER 502 - INTOXICATING LIQUOR 

502.01 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in Minn. Stats.  340A.101 as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this Chapter: 
A.  "Intoxicating Liquor" and "Liquor" shall mean ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight. 
B.  "On-Sale" shall mean the sale of liquor for consumption on the premises only. 
C.  "Restaurant" shall mean an establishment under the control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at tables to the general public. Restaurants shall include that portion of a greater establishment devoted to such purposes, as in the case of a hotel or motel. 
D.  "Sale," "Sell" and "Sold" shall mean all barters, exchanges, disposal or other manners or means of furnishing intoxicating liquor, including such furnishing in violation or evasion of law. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
E.  "Hotel" shall mean an establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which has: 
1.  A dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time; and 
2.  A minimum of ten guest rooms. 
(Ord. 769 [4-13-2017]) 
502.02 - License Required. 
No person may directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, sell or keep for sale, charge for possession, or otherwise dispose of, within the City any intoxicating liquor for on-sale purposes without first having been issued, and thereafter maintaining, an appropriate license to do so as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.03 - Types of Licenses. 
On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to bona fide restaurants and hotels, as defined herein. Following are the types of licenses which may be issued for this purpose: 
A.  "On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License", for the sale on the premises of all types and kind of intoxicating liquor. 
B.  "Sunday On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License," for the Sunday sale on the premises of all types and kind of intoxicating liquor, which license shall be limited to persons also holding a valid On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License and those establishments having a seating capacity of at least 30 persons. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]; Ord. 769 [4-13-2017]) 
502.04 - Number of Licenses. 
A maximum of seven On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses may be issued under this Chapter. The availability of these licenses for issuance in no way shall require or commit the City Council to issue any or all of the available licenses. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses for restaurants shall not count towards the maximum number of licenses that may be issued. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 618 [7-29-1999]; Ord. 647 [11-11-2003]; Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.05 - License Fees. 
The annual license fees shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. At the time of each original application or renewal for any of the licenses issued under this Chapter the total annual license fee therefor shall be paid in full by the applicant. Upon rejection or withdrawal of an application the license fee(s) submitted therefor (but not the fees for applicant's background investigation, including the Minimum Investigation Fee) shall be refunded in full to the applicant, except when rejection or withdrawal is based upon a willful misstatement of fact by the applicant. No part of any fee for an issued license shall be refunded nor shall any license fee be prorated except by specific Council action. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]; Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.06 - Bond Requirements-Repealed. 
(Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]; Repealed by Ord. 536 [2-20-1990]) 
502.07 - Application Procedures. 
An application form for the licenses issued under this Chapter shall be prepared and updated from time to time by the City Manager. In addition to any information which may be required by the Minnesota State Liquor Control Commissioner, such form shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  The name of the applicant and the type of license which the applicant is seeking. 
B.  Whether the applicant is a natural person, partnership, corporation or other form of organization. 
C.  If the applicant is a natural person, the requested personal information about the applicant and his background. 
D.  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners and the requested personal information about each partner and that partner's background. The financial interest of each partner shall be disclosed, and a managing partner shall be designated. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the original application form. 
E.  If the applicant is a corporation or other organization, the names and addresses of all officers and the proposed manager, and the requested personal and background information about each. The names, addresses and financial interest shall be disclosed for all corporate shareowners or equity owners who, together with direct relatives, control more than five percent of the assets of the corporation, and the requested personal and background information shall be furnished about each such person. True copies of the articles and by-laws shall be submitted with the original application form. 
F.  The amount of assets which the applicant has in the business, premises, fixtures, stock and operating capital shall be disclosed, together with proof of the source of such assets, such as accounting statements, financial statements and bank accounts. 
G.  The names and addresses of all persons, other than those listed above, who have any financial interest in the business, premises, fixtures, stock, equity or operating capital, together with the amount and nature of the interest and the terms for payment or other reimbursement thereof. This shall include, but not be limited to, all lessors, mortgagors, lenders, lien holders, trustors and persons who have co-signed notes or otherwise loaned, pledged or extended security to the applicant for any indebtedness. 
H.  The legal description of the premises to be licensed and plans of the site and all buildings thereon, showing all appropriate dimensions. 
I.  Proof of insurance as required under Section 502.13. 
J.  All other information deemed necessary or relevant by either the City Council or the City Manager. 
If the applicant is a natural person, the application form shall be executed by that person. If the applicant is a partnership, the application form shall be executed by the managing partner, and if a corporation or other organization by a corporate or organization officer. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.08 - Licensing Procedures. 
The following procedures shall govern the processing and issuance of all new licenses pursuant to this Chapter: 
A.  At the time of an original application the applicant shall pay a Minimum Investigation Fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council for each person listed on the application form, which shall include all natural persons, partners, managers, corporate officers and equity owners. This fee shall be paid when an application is filed with the City, and it shall not be subject to refund. If the expenses of any investigation are extraordinary and exceed the Minimum Investigation Fee, the applicant shall pay all reasonable additional expenses incurred by the City for such investigation. Failure to pay such additional expenses within a five-day period shall be cause for the City to discontinue processing of the application. At any time an additional investigation is required due to a change in ownership or control of a partnership, corporation or other organization, a licensee shall pay a Minimum Investigation Fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by Resolution of the City Council for each person involved in the change. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]) 
B.  All applications shall be processed by the City Manager for verification and investigation of the facts set forth therein. The Chief of Police shall investigate the background of all persons listed in the application form. Jointly or separately they shall submit a written report to the City Council on the results of their investigation. 
C.  Following receipt of the above report(s), the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the license application. Ten days' notice of this Hearing shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the City and by direct mailing to all property-owners within 350 feet of the subject property. At this Hearing, opportunity shall be given for any person to be heard for or against issuance of the requested license. 
D.  If a license is approved, the City Council may withhold its issuance until the applicant has qualified in all respects for the license. If the premises to be licensed are not complete at the time of approval, the Council may approve the license but withhold its issuance until the premises have been completed in accordance with all representations made by the applicant. In such a case, the Council may rescind its action approving the license if the applicant has not proceeded with reasonable dispatch to complete the subject premises, but such action may only be taken following ten days' notice to the applicant. 
E.  The issuance of any license hereunder is and shall remain at the sole and absolute discretion of the City Council. No applicant has a right to a license under this Chapter. 
F.  All licenses shall be and are issued subject to conformance with all provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable regulations, ordinances, laws and statutes. 
G.  Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to the applicant only. Each such license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application form and shall not be effective beyond the compact and contiguous space described therein. 
H.  No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place to place or from person to person without complying with all requirements of an original application, including the payment of all fees therefor. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]; Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.09 - Eligibility for License. 
The provisions of this Section shall govern an applicant's initial and continued eligibility for a license pursuant to this Chapter, and no license shall be issued to: 
A.  A natural person: 
1.  Who is not of good character and repute. 
2.  Who is under the age of 21. 
3.  Who is a manufacturer or wholesaler of intoxicating liquor, or who is employed by a manufacturer or wholesaler of intoxicating liquor. 
4.  Who has a direct or indirect financial interest in any other establishment within the City which has a license issued under this Chapter or under Chapter 503 or 504 of this Code. The word "interest," as used in this provision, shall mean a pecuniary interest of five percent or more in the ownership, management or profits of any such establishment. 
5.  Who has been convicted of a felony. 
6.  Who within the past five years has been convicted of a violation of any law, statute or ordinance regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor. 
7.  Who within the past five years has had any liquor license revoked for a willful violation of any law, statute or ordinance regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor. 
8.  Who within the past five years has violated any provision of Section 502.10 of this Chapter. 
9.  Who is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license under paragraphs 1, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 of this subsection. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]); Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
B.  A partnership which has a partner ineligible for a license under above Section 502.09.A. 
C.  A corporation or other organization which has an officer, shareowner or manager ineligible for a license under above Section 502.09.A. The term "shareowner" as used in this provision shall mean any person who, together with direct relatives, controls more than five percent of the assets of the corporation or other organization. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
D.  A restaurant or hotel located on property owned by a person ineligible for a license under above Section 502.09.A. 
(Ord. 769 [4-13-2017]) 
E.  A restaurant or hotel located on property upon which taxes, special assessments or other financial claims of the City are delinquent or unpaid. 
(Ord. 769 [4-13-2017]) 
F.  A restaurant or hotel which has a common entrance or exit with another business, except for a public lobby, shared parking or mall area. 
(Ord. 769 [4-13-2017]) 
G.  A restaurant which does not have a valid and current Food Establishment "A" License issued by the City. 
H.  A restaurant, as defined herein, which does not have a minimum market valuation totaling in the aggregate of more than $3,000.00 per seat, exclusive of land, kitchen equipment and personal property other than furniture and fixtures, as computed by the City Assessor. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]; Ord. 618 [7-29-1999]; Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.10 - License Restrictions. 
The following provisions shall govern the continued validity of a license issued pursuant to this Chapter and shall act as continuous restrictions upon any such license and operations under the license: 
A.  The licensee shall at all times comply with all provisions of this Chapter and with all other applicable laws, statutes and ordinances regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor, as the same shall be in effect at the time the license is issued and as the same shall exist from time to time thereafter. 
B.  The licensee at all times shall be responsible for the conduct of the licensee's business and for the sobriety and order on the premises. 
C.  All business and financial records of the licensee, including all financial reports and tax returns, shall be available for inspection by the City Manager or other properly designated representative of the City at all reasonable times. 
D.  Any change in management, ownership, partnership, corporate or organization officers, corporate or organization shareowners, partnership agreement, articles, corporate or other information required in Section 502.06 shall be submitted to the City Manager within 30 days of such change. 
E.  No sale of intoxicating liquor shall be made during those hours when such sale is prohibited by State Statute, and no licensee shall display intoxicating liquor to the general public during any such hours. 
F.  No licensee nor any person listed on the application form for a license shall make any contribution to the election campaign of any candidate or elected official of the City. 
G.  The licensee shall at all times maintain a valid and current Food Establishment "A" License issued by the City, and violation of this provision shall result in the immediate suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 735 [03-26-2013]) 
H.  The business of the licensee shall be conducted in such a manner that at least 50 percent of the gross sales of the business for any license year shall be for the serving of food. The business of a restaurant which is part of a greater operation, such as a hotel or motel, shall be conducted in such a manner that at least 50 percent of the gross sales of the total restaurant operation attributable to the serving of food, with 50 percent or less in restaurant sales attributable to intoxicating liquor sales for any license year. Said "50 percent" food, "50 percent" liquor sale ratio requirements shall apply to each quarter. Licensee shall be required to make annual reports showing the percentage of gross sales attributable to food service. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]; Ord. 735 [03-26-2013]) 
I.  All sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made in areas designed primarily for the service of food or that are directly a part of hotel services, including a hotel's services on licensed premises for banquets, family events, corporate events, meeting rooms, spa facilities, and hotel room service. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]; Ord. 769 [4-13-2017]) 
J.  No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold or served at retail on-sale, except that persons under age 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host or dishwashing services in restaurants. 
K.  The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by Minn. Stats.  340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]; Ord. 735 [03-26-2013]; Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.11 - Duration and Renewal of License. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall expire on April 30 of each year. If an application is made during a license year, such a license may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a prorated fee, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Application for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 45 days prior to expiration of the license, and it shall be made in such a form as provided by the City Manager, which shall contain some or all of the information listed in Section 502.07 that the City Manager deems relevant to evaluating the renewal request. With the application, the licensee shall file a statement by a certified public accountant showing the restaurant's total gross sales and total sales for the serving of food for the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of application. The licensee also shall submit the appropriate license fee(s) and an investigation fee as established by resolution, which shall be for investigation and verification of all information contained in the application form. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the discretion of the City Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]); Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.12 - Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this Chapter for the violation of any provision of this Chapter or for the violation of any other law, statute or ordinance regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor. However, no such action shall be taken without ten days' written notice to the licensee. No license shall be suspended for a greater period of time than 60 days. If a license is revoked, no portion of the license fee may be refunded. 
502.13 - Insurance. 
All persons holding a license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall maintain public liability insurance coverage and liquor liability insurance coverage compliant with Minn. Stats.  340A.409, Subd. 1, and with minimum bodily injury limits of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per occurrence and with minimum property damage limits of $50,000.00 per occurrence. Such policies shall provide that no payment of any claim by the insurance company will in any manner decrease the coverage provided for any other claim(s) brought against the insured or the insuring company. Such policies also shall provide that no cancellation for any cause shall be made by either the insured or the insuring company without 30 days' prior written notice to the City. Such policies shall be issued in the name of all partners if the licensee is a partnership and in the name of the corporation or other organization if the licensee is a corporation or other organization. Such policies shall be filed with the City Manager, shall be subject to approval of the City Manager as to form and content, and shall be issued by companies duly licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota. Operation of a business licensed under this Chapter without at all times having on file with the City proof of insurance as required in this Section shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
502.14 - Adoption of State Law by Reference. 
The provisions of Minn. Stats.  340A as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. Whenever there is an inconsistency between the provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A and the provisions of this Chapter, the more restrictive governs unless state expressly controls. 
(Ord. 500 [5-10-1988]; Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
CHAPTER 503 - WINE 

503.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Wine" shall mean the product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than one-half of one percent nor more than 24 percent alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. Wine does not include distilled spirits. 
B.  For the purposes of this Chapter the words defined in Section 502.01 of this Code shall have the meanings given them therein. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.02 - License Required. 
No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer to the extent authorized under a State license, licensed private clubs under Chapter 505, licensed on-sale intoxicating liquor establishments licensed under Chapter 502 and the municipal liquor dispensary may directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, sell or keep for sale, charge for possession, or otherwise dispose of, within the City any wine for on-sale purposes without first having been issued, and thereafter maintaining, an On-Sale Wine License as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.03 - License Fee. 
The annual license fees for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. At the time of each original application or renewal for any of the licenses issued under this Chapter the total annual license fee therefor shall be paid in full by the applicant. Upon rejection or withdrawal of an application the license fee(s) submitted therefor (but not the fees for the applicant's background investigation) shall be refunded in full to the applicant, except when rejection or withdrawal is based upon a willful misstatement of fact by the applicant. No part of any fee for an issued license shall be refunded, except as authorized by State Statute. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.04 - Application Procedures. 
Each original application for an On-Sale Wine License or application for the renewal of such a license shall state contain the information listed in Section 7 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors) and such other information as the City Council may require. Such an application shall be in the form prescribed by the State Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be filed with the City Manager. Any willful misstatement of fact by the applicant shall be cause for rejection of the application. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.05 - Insurance Required. 
Every applicant and license holder under this Chapter must comply with the insurance requirements of Section 13 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.06 - Licensing Procedures. 
Licensing procedures for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be the same as those for licenses issued under Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
No On-Sale Wine License shall become effective until it has been approved by the State Liquor Control Commissioner. Each such license shall be issued only to the applicant and only for the premises described in the application. No such license may be transferred to another person or location without prior City Council approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee shall be deemed a transfer of the license, and any such transfer without prior Council approval shall be cause for revocation of that license. 
The holder of an On-Sale Wine License, who is also licensed to sell On-Sale 3.2 percent malt liquors and whose gross receipts are at least 60 percent attributable to the sale of food, may sell "strong beer" (malt liquor greater than 3.2 percent alcohol by volume) at on-sale without an additional license. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 522 [2-21-1989]; Ord. 736 [3-26-2013]; Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.07 - Eligibility for a License. 
A license under this chapter may only be issued to a restaurant that has at least 25 seats. No On-Sale Wine License shall be issued to any person or entity ineligible for a license under state law or Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.08 - License Restrictions. 
Every license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors), and to all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, which shall act as continuous restrictions upon the licenses. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 442 [9-3-1985]; Ord. 522 [2-21-1989]; Ord. 736 [3-26-2013]); Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.09 - Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder in accordance with the provisions of Section 501.09 of this Code. 
503.10 - Duration and Renewal of License. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall expire on April 30 of each year. If an application is made during a license year, such a license may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a prorated fee, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Application for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 45 days prior to expiration of the license, and it shall be made in such a form as provided by the City Manager, which shall contain some or all of the information listed in Section 502.07 that the City Manager deems relevant to evaluating the renewal request. With the application, the licensee shall file a statement by a certified public accountant showing the restaurant's total gross sales and total sales for the serving of food for the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of application. The licensee also shall submit the appropriate license fee(s) and an investigation fee as established by resolution, which shall be for investigation and verification of all information contained in the application form. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the discretion of the City Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
503.11 - Adoption of State Law by Reference. 
The provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of wine are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. Whenever there is an inconsistency between the provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A and the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive governs unless state expressly controls. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
CHAPTER 504 - 3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR 

504.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "3.2 Percent Malt Liquor" shall mean any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
B.  "Bona Fide Club" shall mean any club organized for social or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, where the serving of liquor is incidental to and not a major purpose of the club. 
C.  "Original Package" shall mean the bottle or sealed container in which liquor is placed at the point of manufacture. 
D.  For the purposes of this Chapter, the words defined in Section 502.01 of this Code shall have the meanings given them therein. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.02 - License Required. 
No person shall directly or indirectly sell or keep for sale within the City 3.2 percent malt liquor without first having been issued an appropriate license to do so as provided herein. No license shall be required of a wholesaler or manufacturer for the sale to licensed dealers or for the delivery of not less than two gallons to customers directly at their homes. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.03 - Types of Licenses. 
3.2 percent Malt Liquor Licenses shall be of the following types: 
A.  "On-Sale" licenses, which shall be issued only to restaurants and bona fide clubs, and which shall permit the sale of such liquor for consumption on the premises only. 
B.  "Temporary On-Sale" licenses, which shall be issued only to nonprofit civic organizations for a period of one week or less. 
C.  "Off-sale" licenses permitted under Chapter 205 of this Code, which shall be issued to permit the sale at retail of such liquor in original packages for removal from and consumption off the premises only. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]; Ord. 767 [2-16-2017]) 
504.04 - License Fees. 
The annual license fees for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. At the time of each original application for a 3.2 percent Malt Liquor License or application for the renewal of such a license shall be paid in full by the applicant. Upon rejection or withdrawal of any such application the license fee submitted therefor (but not the fees for applicant's background investigation, including the Minimum Investigation Fee) shall be refunded in full, except when rejection or withdrawal is based upon a willful misstatement of fact by the applicant. No part of any fee for an issued license shall be refunded nor shall any license fee be prorated except by specific Council action. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]; Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.05 - Application Procedures. 
Each original application for a license issued under this Chapter or application for the renewal of such a license shall contain the information listed in Section 7 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors) and such other information as the City Council may require. Any willful misstatement of fact by the applicant shall be cause for rejection of the application. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.06 - Licensing Procedures. 
Licensing procedures for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be the same as those for licenses issued under Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
Each license issued under this Chapter shall be issued only to the applicant and only for the premises described in the application. No such license may be transferred to another person or location without prior City Council approval. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.07 - Eligibility for a License. 
No 3.2 percent Malt Liquor License shall be issued to any person or entity ineligible for a license under Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.08 - License Restrictions. 
Every license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors), and to all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, which shall act as continuous restrictions upon the licenses. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.09 - Insurance. 
Every applicant and license holder under this Chapter must comply with the insurance requirements of Section 13 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.10 - Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder in accordance with the provisions of Section 501.09 of this Code. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.11 - Duration and Renewal of License. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall expire on April 30 of each year. If an application is made during a license year, such a license may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a prorated fee, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Application for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 45 days prior to expiration of the license, and it shall be made in such a form as provided by the City Manager, which shall contain some of all of the information listed in Section 502.07 that the City Manager deems relevant to evaluating the renewal request. With the application, the licensee shall file a statement by a certified public accountant showing the restaurant's total gross sales and total sales for the serving of food for the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of application. The licensee also shall submit the appropriated license fee(s) and an investigation fee as established by resolution, which shall be for investigation and verification of all information contained in the application form. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the discretion of the City Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
504.12 - Adoption of State Law by Reference. 
The provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of wine are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. Whenever there is an inconsistency between the provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A and the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive governs unless state expressly controls. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
CHAPTER 505 - PRIVATE CLUB LIQUOR 

505.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Private Club" shall mean an incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state of Minnesota for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered veteran's organization, which: 
1.  Has more than 30 members; 
2.  Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members; 
3.  Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body. 
B.  For the purposes of this Chapter the words defined in Section 502.01 of this Code shall have the meanings given them therein. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.02 - License Required. 
No private club shall directly or indirectly sell or keep for sale within the City any intoxicating liquor for on-sale purposes without first having been issued an appropriate license to do so as provided herein. Each such license shall be issued for a period of one year and shall expire on April 30 of each year. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.03 - Types of Licenses. 
Private club liquor licenses shall be of the following types: 
A.  "On-Sale" licenses, which shall be issued only to private clubs, and which shall permit the sale of intoxicating liquor Monday through Saturday for consumption on the premises only. 
B.  "Sunday On-Sale" licenses, which shall be issued only to private clubs having a seating capacity of at least 30 persons, and which shall permit the sale of intoxicating liquor on Sunday for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.04 - License Fees. 
The annual license fees for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. At the time of each original application or renewal for any of the licenses issued under this Chapter the total annual license fee therefor shall be paid in full by the applicant. Upon rejection or withdrawal of an application the license fee(s) submitted therefor (but not the fees for the applicant's background investigation) shall be refunded in full to the applicant, except when rejection or withdrawal is based upon a willful misstatement of fact by the applicant. No part of any fee for an issued license shall be refunded, except as authorized by State Statute. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]); Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.05 - Application Procedures. 
Each original application for a license issued under this Chapter or application for the renewal of such a license shall contain the information listed in Section 7 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors) and such other information as the City Council may require. Such an application shall be in the form prescribed by the State Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be filed with the City Manager. Any willful misstatement of fact by the applicant shall be cause for rejection of the application. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.06 - Licensing Procedures. 
Licensing procedures for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be the same as those for licenses issued under Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.07 - License Restrictions. 
Each license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors), to all laws, ordinances and restrictions applicable thereto, and to the express restriction that only club members of the private club holding a license, and bona fide guests of such members, may be served or sold intoxicating liquor thereunder, which shall act as continuous restrictions upon any such license. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.08 - Insurance. 
Every applicant and license holder under this Chapter must comply with the insurance requirements of Section 13 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.09 - Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder in accordance with the provisions of Section 501.09 of this Code. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.10 - Duration and Renewal of License. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall expire on April 30 of each year. If an application is made during a license year, such a license may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a prorated fee, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Application for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 45 days prior to expiration of the license, and it shall be made in such a form as provided by the City Manager, which shall contain some or all of the information listed in Section 502.07 that the City Manager deems relevant to evaluating the renewal request. The licensee also shall submit the appropriate license fee(s) and an investigation fee as established by resolution, which shall be for investigation and verification of all information contained in the application form. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the discretion of the City Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
505.11 - Adoption of State Law by Reference. 
The provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of wine are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. Whenever there is an inconsistency between the provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A and the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive governs unless state expressly controls. 
(Ord. 743 [01-30-2014]) 
CHAPTER 506 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

506.01 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the words defined in Section 603.01 of this Code shall have the meanings given them therein. 
506.02 - License Required. 
A person wishing to operate a food establishment must first make an application to the City, pay any required fee, and receive approval from the City for operation of the food establishment, including any required plan review approval. No person shall operate a food establishment or engage in the business of operating a food establishment within the City without first having been issued an appropriate license therefor. All such licenses shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 501 and 603 of this Code. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
506.03 - Types of Licenses. 
A.  A license is required in order to operate any of the following types of "food establishment" and/or beverage service within the City during any calendar year when the primary purpose of such an operation is for the preparation and/or sale of any food article(s) for human consumption: 
1.  A Food Establishment "Class A" License: Supper club, sit-down restaurant, drive-in restaurant, take-out restaurant, or similar facility. 
2.  A Food Establishment "Class C" License: Grocery, meat market, bakery, deli, rental kitchen, limited food service, or similar facility. 
3.  A Food Establishment "Class E" License: A limited retail grocery or similar facility. 
4.  A Food Establishment "Class G" License: Prepackaged non-perishable food, non-perishable food, candy or coffee (no refrigeration needed). 
5.  An "Additional Facilities" License: More than one of any type or types of any operation listed within the above classes. 
6.  A "Food Vehicle" License. 
7.  A "School Kitchen" License. 
8.  A "Church Kitchen" License. 
9.  A "Seasonal Temporary Food Stand" License: A food and beverage service stand which is disassembled and moved from location to location, but which operates no more than 21 days annually at any one location. 
10.  A "Seasonal Permanent Food Stand" License: A food and beverage service which is a permanent stand or building, but which operates no more than 21 days annually. 
B.  A license is required in order to operate any of the following types of "food establishment" and/or beverage service within the City for no more than ten total days during any calendar year when the primary purpose of such an operation is for the preparation and/or sale of any food article(s) for human consumption: 
1.  A "Special Event Food Stand" License shall be required in order to operate a food and beverage service establishment within the City in conjunction with celebrations and special events. Each licensee shall provide proof of general liability insurance coverage with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00. The City of Wayzata must be listed as a "Certificate Holder" on the certificate. If the event is a community event, held in a City Park and/or held on City Property: The City of Wayzata must be listed as an "additional insured" on the policy and the policy must include coverage for the actual event location and the exact dates of the event. 
C.  A "Food Cart" Vendor License. The City Council may issue licenses for food cart vendors for the sale of specified food and beverage items from a non-motorized vehicle self-propelled by the operator on public sidewalks which shall be operated and conducted in accordance with the following conditions: 
1.  Each applicant shall file an application for a Food Cart Vendor License and will provide all information as deemed reasonable and necessary by the City Manager for proper review of the application. The applicant shall also remit the proper license fee as established in Section 506.04 herein. 
2.  Each food cart shall be separately licensed and may operate only at the location specified on the license. Applicants who held a license during the previous year are given priority provided their fully completed application materials and full fees are submitted by May 1 of the current license year. 
3.  All food cart vendor licenses shall expire on January first of each year and are subject to renewal year to year thereafter. 
4.  A food cart vendor license shall not be transferable from person to person or from place to place without the express permission of the City Council. 
5.  Food carts shall only be allowed at the Wayzata Depot, Klapprich Park, Mill Street or the Wayzata Beach. 
6.  No food cart shall have dimensions exceeding four feet in width, eight feet in length and eight feet in height. Each food cart shall be non-motorized and capable of being moved and kept under control by one person traveling on foot. 
7.  Each food cart shall meet National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) standards for food storage, preparation, and dispensing. Each licensee shall store the food cart at a licensed commissary to provide for proper cleaning and servicing of the cart. 
8.  Each cart shall carry adequate hand-washing facilities for the employees of the licensee. 
9.  All waste liquids, garbage, litter and refuse shall be kept in leak-proof, non-absorbent containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids and properly disposed of at a licensed commissary. No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse shall be dumped or drained into sidewalks, streets, gutters, drains, trash receptacles or any other place except at the permanent location. When leaving the sales area, the licensee shall pick up all litter resulting from his/her business and shall deposit the litter in a refuse container approved by the City. 
10.  No items of any kind, other than approved food and beverage items shall be sold or dispensed from food carts. 
11.  Each licensee shall prominently display his or her license upon the food cart. 
12.  Each licensee shall provide proof of liability insurance with minimum limits of $100,000.00 for individuals, $300,000.00 for any single incident and $10,000.00 for property damage. A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the city prior to the issuance of a license. The city shall be named as an additional insured. 
13.  No cart operator shall use lights or noisemakers to attract customers unless approved by the City Council. 
14.  No sidewalk cart shall operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on any day. 
15.  No food cart operator shall conduct his or her business in such a manner as to annoy other persons or become a nuisance or obstruct any street or public place within the city. 
16.  Any food cart operator who shall fail to submit fully completed license application materials and full fees by May 1 shall forfeit that location. The city shall set a date for a lottery, if necessary, to choose among multiple new applicants. 
17.  No application for a sidewalk food vendor license shall be approved until the City Health Inspector has approved all plans and specifications for the cart and the commissary. 
18.  The licensee shall hold the City of Wayzata, its officers, agents, and employees harmless from any and all liability and damages resulting from any activities undertaken pursuant to this license. 
(Ord. 598 [12-11-1997]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
506.04 - License Fees. 
The license fees and re-inspection fees charged for licenses issued under this Chapter are established by resolution of the City Council. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 431 [1-8-1985]; Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]; Ord. 598 [12-11-1997]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
506.05 - License Revocation and Late Fees. 
A.  Revocation of License. Licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements contained in the application for a license. 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements made in connection with the selling of food and/or beverage items. 
3.  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor. 
4.  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner so as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
5.  Any violation of this Chapter. 
Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by the City Manager in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. 
Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the last known address or at the address as set forth in the application at least seven days prior to the date set for the hearing, or shall be delivered by a law enforcement officer in the same manner as a summons at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
B.  Late Penalty. An additional charge added to the license fee when a person operates a business without first having made application and fee payment for the current year's license. 
C.  Penalty for Violation. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 598 [12-11-1997]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
506.06 - License Restrictions. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the licensee's continuing compliance with the provisions of Chapter 603 of this Code and with all other laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to the licensee's operation. 
506.07 - Regulating Hours for Nonconforming Use Drive-In Restaurant Windows. 
Drive-in restaurants and other food establishments which provide goods or services to patrons in automobiles shall close all drive-in windows and cease serving all patrons in automobiles except between the following hours: 
5:00 a.m. through 12:00 Midnight, seven days a week. 
(Ord. 413 [10-19-1982]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
506.08 - State Statutes Adopted. 
The City hereby adopts and incorporates by reference Minn. Stats.  157.15. 
(Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
CHAPTER 507 - HOTELS AND MOTELS 

507.01 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter the words and terms defined in Minn. Stats.  157.01, shall have the meanings given them therein. 
507.02 - Lodging Establishments Regulations Adopted. 
The City herein adopts and incorporates by reference the rules regulating lodging establishments adopted by the Minnesota Department of Health as Minn. R. 4625.0400 through Minn. R. 4625.2355, as amended. One copy of the regulations shall be marked "Wayzata-Official Copy" and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection and use by the public. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 630 [4-12-2001]) 
507.03 - License Required. 
No person shall operate or engage in the business of operating a hotel, motel, lodging house or boarding house within the City without first having been issued an appropriate license therefor. A person wishing to operate a lodging establishment must first make an application to the City, pay any required fee, and receive approval from the City for operation of the lodging establishment, including any required plan review approval. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
507.04 - License Fees. 
Fees are hereby adopted by reference and are as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
507.05 - Lodging State Statutes Adopted. 
The City hereby adopts and incorporates by reference Minn. Stats.  157.20. 
(Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
CHAPTER 508 - GASOLINE FILLING STATIONS AND WHOLESALE STORAGE FACILITIES 

508.01 - License Required. 
No person shall maintain or operate or engage in the business of maintaining or operating a gasoline filling station or a wholesale oil or gasoline storage facility within the City without first having been issued a license therefor. For the purposes of this Chapter a gasoline filling station and a wholesale oil or gasoline storage facility shall be defined as any place, building, pump or device maintained and used for the storage and/or sale of gasoline in a quantity of over 100 gallons capacity or for the storage and/or sale of oil in bulk quantity. 
508.02 - License Fee. 
The annual license fee which shall be charged for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be as established by resolution per location containing a gasoline filling station and/or a wholesale oil or gasoline storage facility. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
508.03 - Licensing Procedures. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 501 of this Code. In addition, the City Council may deny or revoke any such license when, in the judgment of the Council, the establishment or continued operation of the premises for which a license is requested would unduly increase fire hazards within the City or would otherwise be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
508.04 - License Restrictions. 
All wholesale oil or gasoline storage facilities shall be completely fenced with non-inflammable fencing and posts at least three feet in height. Any license issued under this Chapter also may be conditioned upon the licensee posting with the City a bond in the amount and form approved by the City Manager to indemnify and save the City harmless from and against any and all loss, damages or other liability resulting to the City through the existence, maintenance or operation of the licensed premises and access to said premises across public property. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 449 [1-7-1985]) 
CHAPTER 509 - CAR WASHES 

509.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Car Wash" shall mean any private business offering services to the public of washing and cleaning motor vehicles. 
B.  "Roadway" shall mean that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
509.02 - License Required. 
No person shall operate or engage in the business of operating a car wash within the City without first having been issued a license therefor. 
509.03 - License Fee. 
The annual license fee which shall be charged for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
509.04 - License Restrictions. 
Every license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the following provisions, which shall govern the issuance and continued validity of all such licenses: 
A.  Parking Restricted. No car wash shall cause automobiles to be parked or stored on any public street, nor shall any car wash allow automobiles waiting to be serviced to stand or occupy any roadway. The parking and storage of automobiles for any car wash shall occur only upon property under its control. 
B.  Hours of Operation. All car washes shall be operated during hours convenient to the public, and it shall be a condition of the license required herein that public convenience shall be maintained at all times. The City Council may establish, as a condition of any license granted hereunder, the hours of the day and the days of the week during which the licensee may be open for operation. 
C.  Maintenance. All car washes shall be maintained in a clean and presentable condition. 
CHAPTER 510 - AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION ESTABLISHMENTS 

510.01 - License Required. 
No person shall operate or engage in the business of operating a pool hall, billiard hall, bowling alley or shooting gallery within the City without first having been issued an appropriate license therefor. 
510.02 - License Fees. 
Fees are hereby adopted by reference and are as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
510.03 - Licensing Procedures. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 501 of this Code. In addition, the City Council may deny or revoke any such license when, in the judgment of the Council, the establishment or continued operation of the premises for which a license is requested would be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
510.04 - License Restrictions. 
Every license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the following provisions, which shall govern the issuance and continued validity of all such licenses: 
A.  Closing Hours. All premises licensed hereunder shall be closed to the public not later than 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and no such premises shall be open to the public on Sunday. 
B.  Minors. No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted in any premises licensed hereunder unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
CHAPTER 511 - GAMES OF SKILL AND JUKE BOXES 

511.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Game of Skill" shall mean any device played by manipulating special equipment by hand or mechanically and propelling balls, figures or numbers across a board or field into respective positions, the object of which is to secure a special number or numbers of high total score, or to place the figures or numbers in special positions, which game may be played at a price paid either directly or indirectly for such privilege, whether or not a prize is offered therefor. 
B.  "Juke Box" shall mean and include any device for producing, reproducing or playing musical selections which is operated by depositing a coin or token therein. This term also shall include any such device which is operated mechanically to render definite musical selections selected by an operator or others after the direct or indirect payment therefor. This term shall not include radios or phonographs playing records or musical recordings upon which the records or recordings are placed and removed by an operator and for the operation of which no payment is required either directly or indirectly. 
511.02 - License Required. 
No person shall keep, permit or maintain any game of skill or juke box on any premises under his control within the City, open to the public or any portion thereof, without first having been issued an appropriate license therefor. 
511.03 - License Fees. 
Fees are hereby adopted by reference and are established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
511.04 - Licensing Procedures. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 501 of this Code. In addition, the City Council may deny or revoke any such license when, in the judgment of the Council, the establishment or continued operation of the game of skill or juke box for which a license has been requested, or the operation of the premises itself, would be (is) detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
511.05 - License Restrictions. 
Every license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the following provisions, which shall govern the issuance and continued validity of all such licenses: 
A.  Minors. No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to play any game of skill licensed hereunder. In addition, no such license shall be issued for any game of skill to be located within 300 feet of any school building. 
B.  Gambling. No person shall use any game or device licensed hereunder as a gambling device, and all licenses issued hereunder shall prohibit persons from using any such game or device for gambling purposes. Upon conviction for the violation of any law, ordinance or other regulation relating to gambling involving any game or device licensed hereunder, said license immediately shall be revoked, without notice or hearing. 
CHAPTER 512 - TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

512.01 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Person" means one or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited partnership; a corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the State; or any other type of business organization. 
B.  "Self-Service Merchandising" means a method of displaying tobacco-related products so that they are accessible to the public without the intervention of an employee. 
C.  "Tobacco Product" means cigarettes, cheroots, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready, rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff, snuff flower, Cavendish, plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts, refuse scripts, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such a manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking in a pipe or other device. 
D.  "Cigar Only Tobacco Products" means cigars only and no other tobacco products. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
512.02 - License Required. 
No person shall directly, indirectly or by means of any mechanical device keep for sale or retail, sell at retail or otherwise dispose of any tobacco products within the City without first having been issued a license therefor. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
512.03 - Responsibility of Licensee. 
Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of its employees while on the licensed premises. Any sale or transfer of tobacco products by an employee to a person under 18 years of age shall be considered an act of the licensee for the purpose of imposing an administrative fine or license suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
512.04 - License Fee. 
No license shall be issued under this Chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this Chapter shall be established in the City's schedule of fees. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]; 2008 Recodification) 
512.05 - Licensing Procedures. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 501 of this Code. In addition, no license shall be issued: 
A.  To any person who has been the subject of a revocation of a previous license for the retail sale of tobacco products. 
B.  To any person for the sale of tobacco products at any place other than his established place of business. 
C.  For the sale of tobacco products at a movable place of business. 
D.  At more than one location. If any person maintains more than one location for the retail sale of tobacco products, then each location must be separately licensed. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
512.06 - Prohibited Acts. 
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to do the following: 
A.  Sell, give or furnish any tobacco products to any person under the age of 18 years. 
B.  Sell, give, furnish or dispense tobacco products by vending machine, unless the vending machine is electronically activated for each transaction by the licensee or a person in their employ, and the machine is in direct view of the person activating it. 
C.  Sell or offer for sale tobacco products by means of self-service merchandising. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
512.07 - Administrative Penalties. 
Each license issued hereunder shall be subject to administrative fines, suspension or revocation for violation of any provisions of this Chapter or the laws of the State of Minnesota. The City Manager or his designee shall proceed in the manner as prescribed herein and is authorized to take the following action: 
First (1st) Offense Within Two Years: $100.00 and/or one day license suspension. 
Second (2nd) Offense Within Two Years: $250.00 and/or two day license suspension. 
Third (3rd) Offense Within Two Years: $500.00 and/or three day license suspension. 
Four or More Offenses: $1,000.00 and/or license revocation. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
512.08 - Notice and Hearing. 
The licensee shall be notified in writing of the proposed action to be taken and the reasons therefor and shall be given ten days to request a hearing before the City Council for a determination of the action to be taken. If the licensee does not request a hearing within the ten days, then the City Manager shall make such order as he deems proper. If the licensee makes a request for a hearing then one shall be held before the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 501.09 of this Code. After considering all the evidence, the City Council shall make a determination concerning the action to be taken against the licensee. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
512.09 - Criminal Penalties. 
A.  It shall be a gross misdemeanor for anyone to sell tobacco products to a person under the age of 18 years. 
B.  It shall be a misdemeanor for anyone to furnish tobacco products to a person under the age of 18 years. 
C.  It shall be a petty misdemeanor for anyone under the age of 18 years to use, purchase, attempt to purchase or possess tobacco products. This provision shall not apply to a person under the age of 18 years who is employed in an establishment licensed to sell tobacco products who is selling or stocking them. 
D.  All other violations of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 590 [2-27-1997]) 
CHAPTER 513 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

513.01 - License Required. 
No person shall operate, manage or own any motor vehicle(s) carrying passengers for hire or other consideration within the City without first having been issued a license therefor. 
513.02 - License Fees. 
Fees are hereby adopted by reference and are as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
513.03 - Licensing Procedures. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 501 of this Code. In addition, all vehicles to be licensed hereunder must satisfactorily complete an annual safety inspection, conducted by a member of the Wayzata Police Department, before a license may be issued for any such vehicle. 
513.04 - License Restrictions. 
Every license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the following provisions, which shall govern the issuance and continued validity of all such licenses: 
A.  Insurance. All persons licensed hereunder shall maintain public liability insurance coverage with minimum bodily injury limits of $250,000.00 per person and $500,000.00 per occurrence and with minimum property damage limits of $100,000.00 per occurrence. Such policies shall be filed with the City Manager, shall be subject to approval of the City Manager as to form and content, and shall be issued by companies licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota. 
B.  Designated Routes. Any licensee hereunder operating motor vehicles over a designated route or routes shall make a definite number of round trips daily and shall file with the City Manager a schedule of all such trips. The City Council, in its discretion, may prescribe the number of round trips required of any such licensee. On any Wayzata to Minneapolis route, such a licensee shall make at least five round trips daily throughout the year. 
CHAPTER 514 - SHOWS, EXHIBITS AND RACES 

514.01 - License Required. 
No person shall exhibit, cause to be exhibited or assist in exhibiting any public show, caravan, carnival, circus, motion picture, theatrical or other performance or exhibition within the City for which pay or compensation of any kind is requested or received without first having been issued an appropriate license therefor. No person shall sponsor or promote a bicycle, foot or other similar race which takes place, in whole or in part, on City property or streets without first having been issued an appropriate license therefor. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 535 [2-20-1990]) 
514.02 - License Fees. 
All license fees shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 535 [2-20-1990]) 
514.03 - Licensing Procedures. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 501 of this Code. In addition, the City Council may deny or revoke any such license when, in the judgment of the City Council, the show, exhibit or race to be licensed would be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 535 [2-20-1990]) 
514.04 - Exception. 
This Chapter shall not be construed to prevent any person or organization within the City from presenting any public performance, show or exhibit for which pay or compensation is received for any religious, charitable or literary purpose. 
CHAPTER 515 - SOUND CARS AND EQUIPMENT 

515.01 - License Required. 
No person shall operate or engage in the business of operating any sound car, loud speaker or other sound equipment in any public place or on any street or highway within the City without first having been issued a license therefor. Said license shall specify the dates and hours during which the equipment may be used and the manner in which it is to be employed. 
515.02 - License Fee. 
The license fee which shall be charged for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
CHAPTER 516 - CHRISTMAS TREE SALES LOTS 

516.01 - License Required. 
No person shall give away, trade, barter, sell at wholesale or sell at retail any cut evergreen, fir, spruce or other tree of like kind for use as what generally is known as a "Christmas tree" upon any exterior, outdoor sales lot within the City without first having been issued a license therefor. Such a license shall expire on January 15 of the year following its issuance. 
516.02 - License Fee. 
The license fee which shall be charged for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
516.03 - Licensing Procedures. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 501 of this Code. In addition, the application for any such license shall include a site plan of the property upon which the sales lot would be located, showing all existing and proposed accessory structures and all off-street parking to be provided on the property or upon adjacent property. Such a license may be issued only in a C-2, C-3 or C-4 zoning district or for an existing nursery or garden store in a C-1 zoning district. 
516.04 - Escrow Deposit. 
The sum in the amount established by resolution of the City Council, in cash, cashier's check or certified check made payable to the City shall be deposited with the City at the time of an application for a license under this Chapter. Return of this deposit shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all provisions of this Chapter and upon the applicant's clearing and cleaning his site of all unsold trees and all other materials or debris relative to the sale thereof by January 15 of the year following issuance of the License. If the City Council determines that the site has not been adequately cleaned and cleared by said date, the licensee's escrow deposit shall be forfeited and the City shall clean and clear the site by contract or with City forces. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 449 [1-7-1985]) 
516.05 - License Restrictions. 
Every license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the following provisions, which shall govern the issuance and continued validity of all such licenses: 
A.  Adequate off-street parking, in the judgment of the City Council, shall be provided on the site or adjacent thereto. 
B.  At all times the site shall be kept in a clean and neat manner and free from all debris, as determined by the City Manager. 
C.  In the event the site is to be illuminated artificially, all such lighting shall be directed so as not to create a glare on the traveled portion of any public street or highway and so as not to shine upon any property used for residential purposes. All such lighting shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m. each evening. 
D.  No sale of any trees shall be permitted after 10:00 p.m. 
CHAPTER 517 - GAS FITTERS 

517.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Gas Burning Devices" shall mean and include: 
1.  Any device for the final conveyance of gas or a mixture of gas and air to the combustion zone of a boiler or furnace used in connection with a heating system; 
2.  A power burner in which gas or air or any combination thereof are supplied at pressures exceeding, for gas, the house line pressure, and for air, atmospheric pressure; and 
3.  An atmospheric burner (other than a gas range or a gas water heater) in which air at atmospheric pressure is injected into the burner by a jet of gas under pressure and whose input exceeds 50,000 BTUs per hour. 
B.  "Gas Burning Equipment" shall mean and include all gas burning devices as defined herein and all piping (other than supply piping from a meter to an appliance shut-off valve), blowers, control devices and accessories connected to such devices. 
517.02 - License Required. 
Except for duly licensed Journeymen Gas Fitters working under the immediate supervision and control of a licensee hereunder, no person shall install, alter or repair any gas piping for illumination or fuel gas or install, alter, repair or service any gas burning device or gas burning equipment within the City without first having been issued an appropriate license therefor. 
517.03 - Types of Licenses. 
A.  A Class A Gas Fitter's License shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in all activities for which a license is required under this Chapter. 
B.  A Class B Gas Fitter's License shall entitle the holder thereof to engage only in the installation, alteration and repair of gas piping for illumination or fuel gas, and it shall not entitle the holder thereof to install, alter, repair or service any gas burning devices or gas burning equipment. 
C.  A Journeyman Gas Fitter's License shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in all activities for which a license is required under this Chapter under the immediate supervision and control of a gas fitter licensed to perform such activities. 
517.04 - License Fees. 
Fees are hereby adopted by reference and are as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
517.05 - Examination Required. 
No license shall be issued under this Chapter unless the applicant shall be qualified therefor by examination, or if the applicant is a firm or corporation unless a member of that firm or an officer of that corporation shall be qualified therefor by examination. Such an examination may be waived if the applicant holds a comparable license issued by the City of Minneapolis. For a Journeyman Gas Fitter's License, such an examination also may be waived if the applicant holds a Journeyman Plumber's License issued by the State of Minnesota. 
517.06 - Surety Bond Required. 
All persons licensed under this Chapter shall maintain and file with the City a bond in the amount and form approved by the City Manager payable to the City and executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota. Said bond shall be drawn on a form furnished by the City and shall be conditioned to require that the licensee will in all respects well and faithfully perform all things undertaken by him for which a license is required hereunder, including the furnishing of materials and equipment, and it shall save the City, its property owners and residents harmless from all accidents and damages consequent thereto. All licensees also shall maintain and file with the City public liability insurance coverage with minimum bodily injury limits of $50,000.00 per person and $100,000.00 per occurrence and with minimum property damage limits of $300,000.00 per occurrence. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 449 [1-7-1985]) 
517.07 - Use of License by Another. 
No person holding a license issued under this Chapter shall allow his name to be used by any other person(s) for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do work for which a license is required hereunder, nor shall any licensee take out a permit for such work to be done by any other person(s) not under his immediate supervision and control. Upon a licensee's conviction for a violation of this Section, said license immediately shall be revoked, without notice or hearing. 
CHAPTER 518 - PLUMBERS 

518.01 - State License Required. 
No person shall engage in any work within the City for which a Plumbing Permit is required unless he holds a current Master Plumber's License issued by the State of Minnesota. 
518.02 - Surety Bond Required. 
Any person engaging in any work within the City for which a Plumbing Permit is required, before such work is commenced, shall execute and file with the City a bond in the amount and form approved by the City Manager payable to the City and executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota. Said bond shall be drawn on a form furnished by the City and shall be conditioned to require that the applicant will in all respects well and faithfully perform all things undertaken by him in the making of connections, repairs or work of any kind with the municipal water and sewer mains, private water and sewer lines, or any plumbing within the City, including the furnishing of materials and equipment, and it shall save the City, its property owners and residents harmless from all accidents and damages consequent thereto, or by reason of any work not approved by a City inspector and not promptly corrected or by reason of any opening in any street or other public property made by him or by any person in his employ for the purpose of installing service lines connecting with the municipal water or sewerage system. Said surety bond shall be renewed at least annually or, if desired, any properly licensed plumber may file said bond with the City on an annual basis at the first of each year. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 449 [1-7-1985]) 
518.03 - Use of License by Another. 
No person holding a Master Plumber's License issued by the State of Minnesota shall allow his name to be used by any other person(s) for the purpose of obtaining a Plumbing Permit, nor shall any such licensee take out a Plumbing Permit for work to be done by any other person(s) not under his immediate supervision and control. 
CHAPTER 519 - TREE REMOVAL AND TREATMENT 

519.01 - License Required. 
No person shall conduct as a business, the cutting, trimming, pruning, removal, spraying or other treatment of trees within the City without first having been issued a license therefor. 
519.02 - License Fee. 
The annual license fee which shall be charged for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be as established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
519.03 - Surety Bond Required. 
All persons licensed under this Chapter shall maintain and file with the City a bond in the amount and form approved by the City Manager payable to the City and executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota. Said bond shall be drawn on a form furnished by the City and shall be conditioned to require that the licensee will in all respects well and faithfully perform all things undertaken by him for which a license is required hereunder, and it shall save the City, its property owners and residents harmless from all accidents and damages consequent thereto. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 449 [1-7-1985]) 
519.04 - Required Insurance. 
All persons licensed under this Chapter shall maintain and file with the City public liability insurance coverage covering all operations of the licensee with minimum bodily injury limits of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per occurrence and with minimum property damage limits of $50,000.00 per occurrence. Said insurance shall include the City as an additional party insured and shall provide that the coverage may be cancelled only after ten days' written notice to the City. If a licensee's coverage is cancelled and not replaced with coverage meeting the requirements of this Section, said License immediately shall be suspended until said coverage is provided. All persons licensed under this Chapter also shall maintain and file with the City a Certificate of Worker's Compensation Insurance, as such coverage is required by State Statute. 
519.05 - Chemical Treatment Requirements. 
All persons licensed under this Chapter who propose to use chemical substances in any activity related to treatment or disease control of trees shall file with the City evidence that the licensee or the employee of the licensee administering the treatment has been certified by the Agronomy Division of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture as a "commercial pesticide applicator." Said certification shall include the knowledge of tree disease chemical treatment. 
CHAPTER 520 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 

520.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Peddler" shall mean any person with no fixed place of business who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and deliveries to purchasers. 
B.  "Solicitor" shall mean any person, charitable organization or fraternal society which goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street soliciting or requesting money, donations of money, property or financial assistance of any kind, or taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise or services, including books, periodicals, magazines or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery. 
C.  "Transient Merchant" shall mean any person, firm or corporation who engages temporarily in the business of selling and delivering goods, wares or merchandise within the City, and who, in furtherance of the purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, vacant lot, motor vehicle, trailer or railroad car. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.02 - License Required. 
No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or services within the City without first having been issued a license therefor. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.03 - Application and Issuance. 
A.  Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk on a form supplied by the City. The application shall state: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant and of all persons associated with him/her in his/her business; 
2.  The type of business for which the license is desired; 
3.  In the case of transient merchants, the place where the business is to be carried on; 
4.  The length of time for which the license is desired; 
5.  A general description of the thing(s) or service(s) to be sold; 
6.  The places of residence of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
7.  The name and address of the employer, principal or supplier of the applicant, together with credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship; 
8.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
B.  Upon receipt of each application, it shall be referred to the City Council which shall immediately institute the investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as it deems necessary for the protection of the public good and shall endorse the application as to the City Council's approval or disapproval within three weeks after its filing with the City Clerk. 
C.  If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business is found to be unsatisfactory, the City Council shall endorse on such application its disapproval and its reason(s) therefor and return the application to the City Clerk, who shall so notify the applicant. 
D.  If as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the City Council shall endorse on the application its approval and return the application to the City Manager, who shall deliver to the applicant his/her license. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.04 - Exemptions. 
The terms of this Chapter do not include the acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, nor to newspaper deliveries, nor to the acts of merchants or their employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business. This Chapter does not apply to any sale under court order, to any bona fide auction sale, nor to a sale at wholesale to a retail dealer. This Chapter does not apply to children, age 18 years or under, soliciting for school-sponsored activities or for charitable organizations, as defined in Section 520.05. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.05 - Religious and Charitable Organizations Exemption. 
If an applicant for a license hereunder is a religious or charitable organization recognized as such by the State's Attorney General, the City Clerk shall issue such applicant a license without approval by the City Council. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.06 - License Fees. 
The license fee charged to any individual shall be as established by City Council resolution per person per year. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]; 2008 Recodification.) 
520.07 - License Not Transferable. 
All licenses shall be nontransferable. No refunds shall be made on unused portions of licenses except by resolution of the City Council. Each peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall secure a separate license. 
In the case of a license issued to an organization under this Chapter, such license shall authorize any member of such organization or any duly authorized volunteer worker the right to solicit for the organization, provided that each such member or volunteer worker shall be required to wear on his or her person a plainly visible identification card, as provided in Section 520.08 herein. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.08 - Identification Card. 
Upon the granting of a license, the City Clerk shall issue to each individual employee, agent, representative or salesperson licensed, an identification card. Such card shall contain a photograph of such employee, agent, representative or salesperson, his/her name, age, address, a brief physical description, the name of the supplier for whom he/she is an employee, agent, representative or salesperson, and the trade or brand name of its goods or services being sold or promoted by him/her. On the identification card shall be printed the word "solicitor," "peddler" or "transient merchant," the year for which it is issued, and the number of the identification card which shall be registered with the City offices. Every solicitor licensed hereunder shall have his/her license and identification card upon his/her person at all times while engaged in solicitation, and shall exhibit the same in plain view on the front upper half of his/her body. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.09 - License to be Carried. 
All licenses shall be carried by the licensee or, in the case of transient merchants, conspicuously posted in his/her place of business, and the license shall be exhibited to any officer or citizen upon his/her request. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.10 - Practices Prohibited. 
No licensee hereunder shall make or cause to be made any loud or unusual noise(s) within the City, nor shall any such licensee by any means whatsoever call about him/her on the streets or sidewalks of the City any number of people or in any way interfere with the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians thereon. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.11 - Duration of License. 
Each license shall be valid only for the period specified therein and no license may extend beyond December 31 of the year in which granted. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.12 - Revocation. 
Any license may be revoked by the City Council for a violation of any provision of this Chapter pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 501.09 of the City Code. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
520.13 - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties therefor established by State Statute. 
(Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 453 [5-20-1986]) 
CHAPTER 521 - ANIMALS-REPEALED 

521.01 - License Required. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986]) 
521.02 - License Fees. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986]) 
521.03 - Licensing Procedures. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986]) 
521.04 - Tags Required. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986]) 
521.05 - Rabies Vaccinations. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986]) 
CHAPTER 522 - BINGO-REPEALED 

522.01 - Purpose. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.02 - Adoption of State Regulations. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.03 - Definitions. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.03 - License Required. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.04 - License Fee. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.05 - Licensing Procedures. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.06 - License Restrictions. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.07 - Bingo on Leased Premises. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.08 - Reports. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
522.09 - Inspection of Records. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
CHAPTER 523 - MASSAGE SERVICES 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 541 [8-15-1991]; Ord. 549 [11-27-1991]; Ord. 672 [6-20-2006]; Recreated by Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 

523.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Licensed Premises" shall mean the physical location and premises of a Massage Business licensed under this Chapter, where Massage Providers licensed under this Chapter are permitted to administer massage. 
B.  "Massage" shall mean any method of applying pressure on the superficial parts of the human body by manual manipulation, including the gliding, pressing, kneading, tapping & vibrating, addressing soft tissue structures (muscles, tendons, ligaments, connective tissues). 
C.  "Massage Business" shall mean any business, individual or group which offers massage. 
D.  "Massage Provider" shall mean any person who personally administers massage. 
E.  "Operate" shall mean to own, manage or conduct. 
F.  "Sanitary" shall mean free from pathogenic microorganisms. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.02 - License Required. 
A.  Massage Business. No person shall operate or engage in the business of operating a Massage Business within the City without a valid and current Massage Business license issued under this Chapter. Such license shall be issued for one contiguous premises only that meets the standards of Section 523.11 of this Chapter. 
B.  Massage Provider. No person shall engage in the business of personally providing a massage within the City without a valid and current Massage Provider license issued under this Chapter. A Massage Provider that works only for a licensed Massage Businesses under this Chapter shall not be required to hold a Massage Business license. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.03 - License Exceptions. 
The following persons are hereby expressly excluded from the requirements of this Chapter. 
A.  Persons duly licensed in the state of Minnesota to practice as a medical doctor, chiropractor, osteopath, nurse, or physical therapist provided the massage is administered in the regular course of a prescribed or authorized medical treatment and not provided as part of a separate and distinct Massage Business; 
B.  Beauty culturists and barbers licensed by the state of Minnesota who do not hold themselves out to give massages, other than customarily are given in the field and provided such is limited to the face, neck and scalp. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.04 - License Fees and Other Fees. 
Annual fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council for the following: 
A.  Massage Business License. 
B.  Massage Provider License. 
C.  Massage Background Check/Investigation Fee. 
D.  Massage Business Establishment Plan Review. (New establishment or remodeling of existing establishment) 
E.  Re-inspection Fees for Massage Businesses. (New establishment or remodeling of existing establishment) 
At the time of an application for any license or renewal under this Chapter, the applicant shall pay to the City the fees noted above. Fees paid for licenses, background checks, investigations, re-inspections and other City review shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.05 - Application Form-Massage Provider License. 
Every application for a Massage Provider License under this Chapter shall be filed with the City Manager on a form supplied by the City. This application shall provide the following information as well as any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager: 
A.  Applicant's full name (First, middle and last). 
B.  Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than his/her true name; if so, what was such name(s) and information concerning the dates and places where used. 
C.  Applicant's home address and telephone number. 
D.  Applicant's driver's license or state ID number. 
E.  Applicant's place and date of birth. 
F.  Applicant's home address(es) for the past ten years. 
G.  The kind, name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's business(es), employer(s) and occupation(s), if any, for the preceding five years. 
H.  The name of the licensed Massage Business in Wayzata that the applicant will be administering massages. 
I.  A description of any crime or other offense, including the time, place, date, and disposition, for which the applicant has been arrested. 
J.  Whether the applicant provides massage services; if so, where. 
K.  The applicant's training and experience in performing massage services, including where the applicant has previously held a massage license(s). 
L.  Whether the applicant previously has been denied a massage license by any jurisdiction; if so, the details of such denial. 
M.  Information evidencing the requirements of Section 523.08. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.06 - Application Form-Massage Business License. 
Every application for a Massage Business License under this Chapter shall be filed with the City Manager on a form supplied by the City. The application shall provide the following information as well as any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager: 
A.  The applicant contact, background and historical information required under Section 523.05 for Massage Providers. 
B.  If applicant is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other entity, then the applicant shall provide: 
1.  The information required in Section 523.05, subparagraphs A. through M. above, for each officer, director, partner, manager and/or other agent of the business entity. 
2.  A list of all parties who control or own an interest in excess of five percent in the business, the position held by each party, the interest held by each party, and all information concerning each of said person(s) as is required in Section 523.05, subparagraphs A. through M. above. 
3.  A true copy of the organizational and operating documents of the entity, including Articles, Bylaws, and Company Agreements. 
4.  Address, names, and telephone number of the property owner and property manager for the property upon which the Massage Business is located. 
C.  The names of those individuals who provide or will provide massage for the Massage Business. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.07 - Licensing Procedures. 
All applications for a license under this Chapter which have been filed with the City Manager shall also be referred to the Chief of Police and to such other persons as the City Manager deems appropriate for investigation and verification of the facts set forth therein. The Chief of Police and such other persons shall make a written report and recommendations to the City Council as to approval or denial of the requested license based on the background investigation, review of the application materials, and the criteria of this Chapter. The City Council then may consider approval of the license, denial of the license, or order additional investigation as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.08 - Eligibility for a License. 
A.  All Licenses. No license under this Chapter shall be issued to any person: 
1.  Who is a minor, as defined by State Statute. 
2.  Who is not a citizen of the United States, unless the person is a resident alien or holds a valid work permit. 
3.  Who has been arrested in connection with, charged with or convicted of prostitution or any other crime or offense involving moral turpitude or sexual misconduct. 
4.  Who has been arrested in connection with, charged with or convicted of any violation of this Chapter or any violation of a State Statute or local ordinance, including a violation occurring within a Massage Business licensed under this Chapter. 
5.  Who has falsified information or made a willful misstatement of fact on the license application form. 
B.  Massage Provider Licenses. To be eligible for a Massage Provider License, the Applicant must provide the following credentials: 
1.  Documentation showing that applicant is currently in good standing with a national or state recognized professional therapeutic massage organization with a written and enforceable code of ethics such as the American Massage Therapy Association, Associated Bodywork & Massage Professionals, or National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. 
2.  Original transcript documenting that applicant has a minimum of 500 class credit hours from a massage therapy school or program which is recognized by one of the following national or state professional therapeutic massage organizations: 
a.  MN Office of Higher Education. 
b.  Accrediting Bureau of Health Education Schools (ABHES). 
c.  Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges (ACCSC). 
d.  Accrediting Council for Continuing Education and Training (ACCET). 
e.  Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA). 
3.  Certification that applicant is covered by liability insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for personal liability in the practice of therapeutic massage. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.09 - License Restrictions and Obligations. 
Every license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the following provisions, which shall govern the issuance and continued validity of all such licenses. The violation of any of these provisions shall be cause for suspension and/or revocation of any such license, at the discretion of the City Council. 
A.  It shall be the continuing duty of every license holder under this Chapter to notify the City Manager in writing of any change in the information or facts required to be furnished in the licensee's application form. This duty shall continue throughout the entire period of the license and all renewals thereof. 
B.  No customers or patrons of a Massage Business shall be allowed to occupy any Licensed Premises after 9:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m. daily. 
C.  No person licensed hereunder shall violate any State Statute or local ordinance of the City, nor shall any such violation occur upon any premises licensed hereunder. Any conviction for prostitution or any other crime or offense involving moral turpitude or sexual misconduct shall result in the immediate revocation of any license issued under this Chapter. 
D.  No person licensed hereunder shall allow any alcoholic beverage, narcotic drug or controlled substance upon any premises licensed hereunder, as such terms are defined by State Statute and local ordinance. Facilities holding a valid liquor license shall not allow alcoholic beverages to be consumed in the Licensed Premises. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person in a Licensed Premises to place hands upon, or to touch with any part of the body, or to fondle in any manner, the anal or genital area of any other person, or breasts of any other person, whether or not the area is clothed. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person in a Licensed Premises to expose breasts, anal or genital area or any portion thereof to any other person, or to expose the female breasts, anal or genital area or any portion thereof of any other person. 
G.  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a Licensed Premises, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering the breasts, anal and genital area of the body. 
H.  No license shall be issued to an applicant who is under 18 years of age. 
I.  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a Massage Business knowingly to cause, allow, suffer, or permit in or about the Licensed Premises any agent, employee, independent contractor or any other person under his or her control or supervision to perform or allow such acts prohibited in any section of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.10 - Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this Chapter pursuant to Section 501.09 of the Wayzata City Code. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.11 - Construction and Maintenance of Licensed Premises. 
The Licensed Premises of a Massage Business must conform to the following standards: 
A.  All massage rooms and restrooms or bathrooms used in connection therewith shall be constructed of materials which are impervious to moisture, bacteria, mold or fungus growth. The floor-to-wall and wall-to-wall joints therein shall be constructed to provide a sanitary cove with a minimum radius of one inch. 
B.  All restrooms used in connection with massage facilities shall be provided with mechanical ventilation with two cfm per square foot of floor area, a minimum of 15 foot candles of illumination, a hand washing sink equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, sanitary towels and a soap dispenser. 
C.  Each massage establishment shall have a janitor's closet, which shall be provided for the storage of cleaning supplies. Such a closet shall have mechanical ventilation with two cfm per square foot of floor area and a minimum of ten foot candles of illumination. Each such closet shall include a mop sink. 
D.  Floors, walls and equipment in massage rooms and restrooms or bathrooms used in connection therewith shall be kept sanitary and in a state of good repair at all times. Linens and other materials shall be stored at least six inches off the floor. Sanitary towels, wash cloths, cleaning agents and toilet tissue shall be made available for each customer. 
E.  Hooks and/or hangers must be made available for use by patrons. 
F.  Doors on massage rooms shall not be locked or be capable of being locked. Locks, latches or other devices intended to secure a door so as to prevent its being opened by any person from either side thereof, with or without a key, shall not be present on any doors on massage rooms. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.12 - Submission of Massage Business Plans and Specifications. 
Plans and specifications for the proposed layout and arrangement, plumbing and construction schedules of the Licensed Premises, and the location, size and type of equipment and facilities proposed shall be filed by the owner with the City Building Official. This information must also be separately submitted to the City with a Massage Business Establishment Plan Review application and fees for review and approval by the City Health Officer. No Building Permit shall be issued for any such construction, remodeling or alteration until the plans and specifications also have the approval of the City Health Officer. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.13 - Inspection by City Officials. 
During any hours in which a Massage Business is open for business and/or providing massage services, the area where the service is being performed shall be open to inspection by City inspectors and police officers. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
523.14 - Locations Ineligible for a Massage Business License. 
No Massage Business may be located on property that is zoned residential under the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 777 [12-14-2017]) 
CHAPTER 524 - MICRO-PRODUCTION FACILITIES, ON-SALE TAPROOMS, AND ON-SALE TASTING ROOMS 

524.01 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in Minn. Stats.  340A.101 as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this Chapter: 
A.  "Micro-Brewery" means a facility that produces for sale, distribution, and consumption beer, ale, malt liquor, or other beverages made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and which possesses the appropriate Federal, State of Minnesota, and Municipal licenses. Taprooms for the consumption of on-site produced beer may be permitted on the premises. 
B.  "Taproom" means an area for the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of a brewery. A taproom may also include sale for off-premises consumption of malt liquor produced at the brewery location or adjacent taproom and owned by the brewery for off-premises consumption, packaged subject to Minn. Stats,  340A.301, Subd. 7(b), or its successor. 
C.  "Growler" means a specially designed 64 ounce beer container for exclusive off-sale of Micro-production Facility beer. A growler shall have the following packaging requirements: 
1.  Growlers shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper or plug. 
2.  At the time of sale, paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container and extended over the top of the closure, forming a seal. 
3.  The growler and/or band, strip or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer, and the container shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt liquor, and shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless labeled otherwise. 
D.  "Malt Liquor" means any beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
E.  "Brewer" means a person who manufactures malt liquor for sale. 
F.  "Micro-Production Facility" means a facility in which beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages are brewed, fermented, or distilled for distribution and consumption. Micro-production facilities include breweries, brewpubs, wineries, and distilleries. 
G.  "Tasting Room (Winery/Distillery)" means an area for the on-sale consumption of distilled spirits or wine produced on the premises of one winery or one distillery and in common ownership to the producer of the wine or distilled spirits. 
H.  "Distillery" means a facility that produces Ethyl Alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, rum, brandy, gin, or other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for non-industrial use. A distillery may include a tasting room. 
I.  "Winery" means a facility operated by the owner of a Minnesota farm and producing table, sparkling, or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice, other fruit bases, or honey with a majority of the ingredients grown or produced in Minnesota. A winery may include a tasting room. 
J.  "Brewpub" means a Brewery that operates a restaurant on the same premises as the Brewery, whose malt liquor production per calendar year may be limited by Minnesota State Statute. 
524.02 - License Required. 
No Micro-production Facility shall directly or indirectly make, sell or keep for sale within the City any beer, ale, malt liquor, or other beverages made from malt by fermentation, and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, wine, or distilled spirits for on-sale or off-sale purposes without first having been issued an appropriate license to do so as provided in this Chapter. Each such license shall be issued for a period of one year and shall expire on April 30 of each year. 
524.03 - License Types. 
A.  Micro-Brewery Taproom Liquor License ("Taproom License"). A Micro-brewery Taproom Liquor License may be issued only to the holder of a brewer's license issued by the state under Minn. Stats.  340A.301. The license authorizes the on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of one brewery location owned or rented by the brewer, subject to the requirements of this section, Section 502 of the Wayzata City Code, and Minn. Stats.  304A.301, Subd. 6. Total production of malt liquor shall not exceed 3,500 barrels annually. All provisions of this section and Section 502 of the Wayzata City Code that apply to an on-sale intoxicating liquor license apply to a Micro-brewery On-sale Malt Liquor License unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent with Minn. Stats.  340A.301, Subd. 6b. 
B.  Micro-Brewery Off-Sale Malt Liquor License ("Growler Sales"). A Micro-brewery Off-sale Malt Liquor License may be issued only to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety pursuant to Minn. Stats.  340A.301, Subd. 6, clause (c), (i), or (j). The license authorizes the brewer to sell, at off-sale, malt liquor that has been produced and packaged by the brewer at its licensed premises in 64 ounce containers commonly known as "Growlers." The total production of malt liquor for off-sale shall not exceed 500 barrels annually, and the total production of on-sale and off-sale by the Micro-brewery Off-sale Malt Liquor License cannot exceed 3,500 barrels per year. The license is subject to the requirements of this section, Section 502 of the Wayzata City Code, and Minn. Stats.  340A.301, Subd. 6d. 
C.  Brewpub Malt Liquor License ("Brewpub"). A Brewpub Malt Liquor License may be issued only to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety pursuant to Minn. Stats.  340A.301 and a City-issued on-sale intoxicating liquor license for a restaurant operation. All provisions of this section and Section 502 of the Wayzata City Code that apply to an on-sale intoxicating liquor license apply to a Micro-brewery On-sale Malt Liquor License unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent with Minn. Stats.  340A.301. 
D.  Micro-Winery Liquor License ("Micro-Winery"). A Micro-winery Liquor License may be issued only to the holder of a farm winery license issued by the state under Minn. Stats.  340A.315. The license authorizes the production of table, sparkling, or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice, other fruit bases or honey with a majority of the ingredients grown or produced in Minnesota. The license also authorizes the use of a Tasting Room area for consumption of samples. Total production of wine shall not exceed 50,000 gallons annually. All provisions of this section and Section 502 of the Wayzata City Code that apply to an on-sale intoxicating liquor license apply to a Micro-winery Liquor License unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent with Minn. Stats.  340A.315. 
E.  Micro-Distillery Liquor License ("Micro-Distillery"). A Micro-distillery Liquor License may be issued only to the holder of a Micro-distiller's license issued by the state under Minn. Stats.  340A.301. The license authorizes the production of distilled spirits produced on the premises of one distillery location owned or rented by the distiller licensee, subject to the requirements of this section, Section 502 of the Wayzata City Code, and Minn. Stats.  304A.301. The license also authorizes the use of a Tasting Room area for consumption of samples of distilled spirits manufactured on its premises. The sample size cannot exceed 15 milliliters per variety per person and no more than 45 milliliters may be sampled by any person on any day. Total production of distilled spirits shall not exceed 40,000 proof gallons annually. All provisions of this section and Section 502 of the Wayzata City Code that apply to an on-sale intoxicating liquor license apply to a Micro-distillery Liquor License unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent with Minn. Stats.  340A.301, Subd 6c. 
524.04 - Number of Licenses. 
The following number of licenses may be issued by the City, although there is no obligation on the City to issue any prescribed minimum amount: 
Number of Licenses Micro-brewery Off-sale Malt Liquor License Four Micro-brewery Taproom Liquor License Two Brewpub Malt Liquor License Two Micro-winery Liquor License Two Micro-distillery Liquor License Two  
524.05 - License Fees. 
The annual license fees for licenses issued under this Chapter shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. At the time of each original application or renewal for any of the licenses issued under this Chapter the total annual license fee therefore shall be paid in full by the applicant. Upon rejection or withdrawal of an application the license fee(s) submitted therefor (but not the fees for applicant's background investigation) shall be refunded in full to the applicant, except when rejection or withdrawal is based upon a willful misstatement of fact by the applicant. No part of any fee for an issued license shall be refunded, except as authorized by State Statute. 
524.06 - Application Procedure. 
The application and licensing procedures established in Chapter 502 of the Wayzata City Code apply to brewers who apply for the license categories established in this Chapter. 
524.07 - License Restrictions. 
Each license issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors), to all laws, ordinances and restrictions applicable thereto, which shall act as continuous restrictions upon any such license. 
524.08 - Insurance. 
Every applicant and license holder under this Chapter must comply with the insurance requirements of Section 13 of Chapter 502 (Intoxicating Liquors). 
524.09 - Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder in accordance with the provisions of Section 501.09 of this Code. 
524.10 - Duration and Renewal of License. 
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall expire on April 30 of each year. If an application is made during a license year, such a license may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a prorated fee, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Application for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 45 days prior to expiration of the license, and it shall be made in such a form as provided by the City Manager, which shall contain some or all of the information listed in Section 502.07 that the City Manager deems relevant to evaluating the renewal request. The licensee also shall submit the appropriate license fee(s) and an investigation fee as established by resolution, which shall be for investigation and verification of all information contained in the application form. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the discretion of the City Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed. 
524.11 - Adoption of State Law by Reference. 
The provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the manufacture, retail sale, distribution, and consumption of alcoholic beverages are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. Whenever there is an inconsistency between the provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A and the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive governs unless state expressly controls. 
(Ord. 747 [09-25-2014]) 
PART VI - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 601 - HEALTH OFFICER 

601.01 - General Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer of the City to enforce all laws of the State and all provisions of this Code relating to sanitary regulations and to cause all nuisances to be abated with reasonable promptness. The term "Health Officer" as used in this Chapter shall mean and include any duly authorized representative of said Officer. 
601.02 - Examination for Disease. 
The Health Officer shall visit and examine or cause to be visited and examined all sick persons who shall be reported to him as laboring or reported to be laboring under any epidemic, infectious or communicable disease, and he shall cause any person having such a disease to be quarantined or removed to a hospital or other safe and proper place. 
601.03 - Posting of Premises. 
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to cause a notice written or printed in large letters to be placed upon or near any house in which a person is suspected to lie sick with any epidemic, infectious or communicable disease. Said notice shall state the disease and an order forbidding any person or persons except medical attendants and surgical advisors from going to or leaving the premises. No person shall deface, obstruct or take down any such sign, notice or order posted by authority of the Health Officer. 
601.04 - Preventing Disease. 
The Health Officer may take such measures as he may deem necessary to prevent the spread of any epidemic, infectious or communicable disease. He shall have the right and power to cause any house or premises to be cleaned, disinfected or closed to visitors and to prevent persons from resorting thereto. He may by an order cause any nuisance to be abated or any offensive or noxious substance to be removed from any premises, and he may prescribe the time and method of so doing. 
601.05 - Compliance with Order. 
Upon notice from the Health Officer, the owner or occupant of any building or grounds shall at once remove any health nuisance or offensive or noxious substance from said building or grounds or from any street or alley adjoining thereto. Upon a failure to do so the Health Officer shall notify the City Manager to that effect, and the City Manager may have such forbidden matter removed, keeping an accurate account of the cost of the removal to be assessed against said premises. 
601.06 - Written Permits. 
No person shall appear upon the streets or public places coming from any house or building within or without the City limits in which there is a case of epidemic, infectious or communicable disease without a written permit from the Health Officer. No person shall knowingly bring to the City any person with an epidemic, infectious or communicable disease nor aid or abet any such person in so entering, except under direction of the Health Officer. 
601.07 - Obstruction of Duties. 
No person shall interfere with, resist, neglect or refuse to obey any orders, directions or instructions of the Health Officer, or any person authorized to act for him, and no person shall act in violation of or in disobedience to any provision of this Chapter. 
CHAPTER 602 - HEALTH NUISANCES 

602.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Garbage" shall mean that waste material, animal or vegetable, resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of edible foodstuffs. 
B.  "Ashes" shall mean that residue of matter remaining after the burning or oxidation of combustible material. 
C.  "Rubbish" shall mean that waste material, other than body waste, garbage and ashes, normally resulting from the operation and maintenance of a household or business establishment, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, glass, wood, metal, wearing apparel, building materials and other like matter. 
D.  "Debris" shall mean unused or unwanted personal property, such as household appliances, furniture and rubber tires, and natural waste, such as yard clippings and tree trimmings. 
602.02 - General Prohibition. 
No person shall deposit or maintain, or cause or permit another person to deposit or maintain, any garbage, ashes, rubbish, dead animals, manure or other offensive or noxious substance upon any public or private property within the City, other than in a trash receptacle intended for refuse collection. 
602.03 - Debris. 
No person shall deposit or maintain, or cause or permit another person to deposit or maintain, upon any public or private property within the City any accumulation of debris in excess of two cubic yards in volume. 
602.04 - Owner's Duty. 
The owner or other person in control of any private property within the City, whether occupied or vacant, shall at all times be responsible for the condition of said premises. 
602.05 - Summary Abatement. 
Whenever any health nuisance shall be found on any premises contrary to any laws of the State or this Code, the City Manager and/or Health Officer are hereby authorized, in the discretion of either of the officers, to cause the same to be summarily abated, in such manner as either of said officers shall direct. 
602.06 - Notice of Nuisance. 
In all cases where nuisances shall be found in any building or upon any premises or other place, 24 hours' notice may be given in writing, signed by the Mayor, City Manager, Health Officer or any police officer, to the owner or occupant of said building or premises, where he is known or can be found, to abate or remove the nuisance within reasonable time, to be stated in such notice. In case of neglect or refusal of any person upon whom such notice shall be served to abate or remove said nuisance, in accordance with such notice, such person shall be chargeable with the expenses which may be incurred in the abatement or removal thereof, to be collected by special assessment under Minn. Stats.  145.22 and 145.23, in addition to any fine or penalty applicable thereto. 
602.07 - Police Duty. 
It shall be the duty of all police officers to report to the City Manager and/or City Council the existence of any nuisance whatsoever. When any person or persons shall neglect or refuse to abate any nuisance, after having been notified as above provided, it shall be the duty of the Police Department forthwith to abate the same as they deem proper or as the City Manager and/or City Council may direct. 
CHAPTER 603 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

603.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Adulterated Food" shall mean any food which consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, decayed or decomposed substance; which consists in whole or in part of the product of a deceased animal which has died by accident, disease or other than by slaughter; which is contained in an immediate package composed of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or which bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance which may be injurious to health, provided that if a safe tolerance or standard has been established by lawful regulation for said substance such food shall not be considered adulterated food if said substance is not in excess of the tolerance or standard. 
B.  "Approved" shall mean acceptable to the Health Authority in conformance with appropriate standards and good public health practice. 
C.  "Bakery Food Vehicle" shall mean any food vehicle used to transport bakery goods about the streets of the City for the purpose of selling the goods from door to door. 
D.  "Clean" shall mean free from physical, chemical and microbial substance discernible by ordinary sight or touch, ultra-violet light, artificial light and the safranin-O dye test, and free from insects, vermin and debris. 
E.  "Employee" shall mean any person who renders a personal service, with or without compensation, within a food establishment. 
F.  "Food" shall mean any raw, cooked or processed substance, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use in whole or in part for human consumption. The term "food" shall further include, but not be limited to, ice and water. 
G.  "Food Contact Surface" shall mean any surface of equipment or utensils with which food normally comes into contact, any surface with which food may come into contact, except by spill, and any surface which drains back onto a surface in contact with food. 
H.  "Food Establishment" shall mean any building, room, stand, enclosure, vehicle, space, area or other place wherein food is stored, prepared, manufactured, processed, wrapped, canned, packed, bottled, transported, distributed, sold or offered for sale or served in any way with or without charge, except for private homes. 
I.  "Food Vehicle" shall mean any food establishment consisting of a mobile vehicle which hauls any food for the purpose of delivery or sale, including vehicles used for catering purposes. 
J.  "Health Authority" shall mean the Health Officer of the City, the City Sanitarian, and any duly authorized representative of either of said officials. 
K.  "Home Prepared Food" shall mean any food which has been processed or prepared in a private home not licensed under this Code. 
L.  "Special Event Food Stand" shall mean a food establishment operating for a period of no more than ten total days in any calendar year, including but not limited to a fair, carnival, circus, church supper or public exhibition. 
M.  "Misbranding" shall mean the use of any written, printed or graphic matter upon or accompanying products or containers of food which violates any applicable local, state or federal labeling requirements. 
N.  "Perishable Food" shall mean food such as apples, bananas, oranges, grapefruit, lettuce, carrots, beans, radishes, onions, potatoes and similar foods which will decompose in the absence of refrigeration. The enumeration herein of specific items shall be for purposes of illustration only and it shall not be deemed to be a limitation upon the meaning of the term so illustrated. 
O.  "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee or association, and with respect to acts prohibited or required herein it shall include employees and licensees. 
P.  "Pre-Packaged Food" shall mean clean, unadulterated, wholesome food packaged in a substantial, clean container or wrapper. 
Q.  "Readily Perishable Food" shall mean any perishable food consisting in whole or in part of milk, milk products, eggs, meat, fish, poultry or any other food capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of micro-organisms which can cause food infection or food intoxication. 
R.  "Safe Water" shall mean water which is not adulterated and which is free from pathogens and coliform organisms. 
S.  "Single-Service Utensils" shall mean all utensils which are meant to be used only once and then discarded. 
T.  "Smooth" shall mean having an even surface free of cracks, chips, open seams, rust, corrosion, breaks, pits, checks and ridges. In addition, with reference to equipment and utensil surfaces, "smooth" shall mean a surface which in the case of stainless steel, nickel alloy or other corrosion-resistant metal has at least a No. 4 mill finish, which in the case of cast and forged steel and cast nickel alloy has a roughness not exceeding American Standard No. 125, and which in the case of other non-corrosion-resistant alloys is at least as smooth as commercial grade rolled steel and is free of loose scale. 
U.  "Utensil" shall mean any kitchenware, tableware, dishes, glassware, cutlery, pots, pans, containers, implements or other equipment with which food comes into contact during storage, cooking, preparation, display or serving. 
V.  "Wholesome" shall mean sound, healthful, clean, unadulterated, and in all ways fit for human consumption. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
603.02 - Food Code. 
A.  Food Code Adopted. The City herein adopts and incorporates by reference the Food Code adopted by the Minnesota Department of Health and set forth in Minn. Rules Ch. 4626, as amended. A copy of the regulations, together with any applicable amendments, shall be marked "Wayzata - Official Copy" and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection and use by the public. 
B.  Permit Required. A permit is required to install, modify or replace food and beverage equipment regulated in the Food Code except vending machines. Payment of fees specified in the fee schedule must be paid before the permit is issued. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 630 [4-12-2001]) 
603.03 - Inspection of Food Establishments; State Statutes Adopted. 
The Health Authority shall inspect every food establishment within the City as frequently as is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with Minn. Stats.  157.20 (which the City hereby adopts and incorporates by reference) and other provisions of this Chapter. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
603.04 - Inspection Procedures. 
A.  Posting. Each inspection report shall be posted by the Health Authority upon an inside wall of the food establishment, not in a public area, and said report shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the Health Authority. The posting of an inspection report in this manner shall constitute service of an official notification of the inspection. The Health Authority may, in lieu of posting the report, deliver it to a licensee or his authorized agent. A second copy of the report shall be maintained in the permanent records of the City. 
B.  Access to Premises and Records. Upon request of the Health Authority, any person operating a food establishment shall permit the Authority access to all parts of the establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection, and he shall exhibit and allow the copying of any records necessary to ascertain food sources. 
C.  Removal and Correction of Violations. All licensees, owners and operators of food establishments having a report posted in said establishment giving notification of one or more violations of this Chapter shall correct or remove each such violation in a reasonable length of time, as determined by the Health Authority. The length of time allowed for the correction or removal of each such violation shall be noted in the inspection report. The failure to remove or correct each such violation within the time period allowed in the inspection report shall constitute a separate violation of this Chapter. 
603.05 - Interference with the Health Authority. 
No person shall interfere with or hinder the Health Authority in the performance of his duties under this Chapter. 
603.06 - Embargo, Examination, Condemnation and Tagging. 
Samples of food may be embargoed and examined by the Health Authority as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. Equipment and utensils which do not meet the requirements of this Chapter may be embargoed, provided that such equipment and utensils shall be released from the embargo if they are altered to conform herewith. The Health Authority may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food which is unwholesome or adulterated, unfit for human consumption, or otherwise prohibited by this Chapter or state or federal law. The Health Authority may condemn and cause to be removed any equipment, clothing or utensils found in any food establishment, the use of which would not comply with this Chapter or which are being used in violation of this Chapter. The Health Authority also may condemn and cause to be removed any equipment, clothing or utensils which by reason of dirt, filth, extraneous matter, insects, corrosion, open seams or chipped or cracked surfaces is unfit for use. The Health Authority may place a tag to indicate an embargo or condemnation upon any such food, equipment, utensils or clothing. No person shall remove such a tag, except under the direction of the Health Authority. 
603.07 - Transport or Sale of Unhealthful Food. 
No person shall transport within or into the City, sell or offer for sale, or hold in attempt to sell any food which is not wholesome or which is adulterated. 
603.08 - Enforcement Procedures. 
The Health Authority shall have the following authority within the City to enforce the provisions of this Chapter: 
A.  Construction Plan Review. All persons who hereafter construct, extensively remodel or convert buildings or facilities for use as food establishments shall conform and comply in their construction, erection or alteration with the requirements of this Chapter. Plans and specifications for the construction, remodeling or alteration shall show the layout, arrangement, plumbing and construction materials of work areas and the location, size and type of equipment and facilities proposed, and they shall be filed for review with the Health Authority. The City shall not issue a Building Permit for any such construction, remodeling or alteration until said plans and specifications have the approval of the Health Authority. 
B.  Revocation of License. The license of any food establishment licensed under this Code may be revoked in the manner provided herein for repeated or uncorrected violations of this Chapter. 
C.  Temporary Suspension of License. The Health Authority, with the approval of the City Council, shall immediately suspend the license of any food establishment for the violation of any terms of this Chapter if such violations constitute an imminent public health hazard. Upon notification by the Health Authority of a temporary suspension of license, by the posting of his report at the time of an inspection, the licensee shall forthwith cease operation. The licensee may appeal a temporary suspension in writing to the City Council. Upon notification in writing by the licensee to the Health Authority that all violations have been corrected for which the temporary suspension was invoked, the Health Authority shall re-inspect the food establishment within a reasonable length of time. If all violations constituting the grounds for the temporary suspension have been corrected, the Health Authority shall forthwith terminate the suspension. The Health Authority and the City Council shall not suspend a license if the violation or violations which constitute an imminent public health hazard can be eliminated or removed by embargo or condemnation as provided in this Chapter. 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
CHAPTER 604 - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS 

604.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Swimming Pool" shall mean any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving, relaxation or recreational bathing. 
B.  "Private Residential Swimming Pool" shall mean any swimming pool located on private property under the control of a homeowner, the use of which is limited to swimming or bathing by members of the homeowner's family or their invited guests. 
C.  "Public Swimming Pool" shall mean any swimming pool, other than a private residential swimming pool, intended to be used collectively by numbers of persons for swimming or bathing, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. 
604.02 - Public Swimming Pool Regulations Adopted. 
The City herein adopts and incorporates by reference the rules establishing operation and maintenance, design, installation, and construction standards for public pools and facilities related to them adopted by the Minnesota Department of Health as Minn. R. Parts 4717.0150 through 4717.3975, as amended. A copy of the regulations, together with any applicable amendments, shall be marked "Wayzata - Official Copy" and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection and use by the public. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 630 [4-12-2001]; 1-1-09 Code; Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
604.03 - License Approval Required. 
A person wishing to operate a public swimming pool must first make an application to the City, pay the required fee, and receive approval from the City for operation of the public swimming pool and any plan review approval as well as receive approval from the Minnesota Department of Health. 
(Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
604.04 - State Statutes Adopted. 
The City hereby adopts and incorporates by reference Minn. Stats.  144.1222 (except subdivisions 1 and 1a) and  157.20. 
(Ord. 701 [11-10-2009]) 
CHAPTER 605 - REFUSE COLLECTION 

605.01 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this Chapter, the words "garbage," "ashes" and "rubbish" shall have the meanings given them in Section 602.01 of this Code. 
B.  "Refuse" shall mean mixtures, in any proportions, of garbage, ashes and rubbish. The term shall be generic when used to refer to community wastes. 
C.  "Community Wastes" shall mean the garbage, rubbish and ashes of the City. 
D.  "Family Dwelling Unit" shall mean a residential area designed as a single housekeeping or household unit. 
605.02 - Collection by the City. 
All refuse accumulated in the residential areas of the City shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the City, its agents, contractors or subcontractors. 
A.  This Section shall not prohibit the disposal of garbage by any device which grinds and deposits the garbage in a sanitary sewer or in an approved sewage disposal system. 
B.  This Section shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse, or owners of property upon which refuse has accumulated, from personally or by contract collecting, conveying and disposing of the refuse, provided such producers or owners comply with all provisions of this Chapter and with all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
C.  This Section shall not prohibit collectors of refuse from outside of the City from hauling such refuse over City streets, provided such collectors comply with all provisions of this Chapter and with all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
D.  This Section shall not prohibit individuals from engaging in the business of collecting refuse in the City, provided such individuals comply with all provisions of this Chapter and with all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
605.03 - Supervision of Collection. 
All refuse accumulated by the City shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of under the supervision of the City Manager. The City Manager shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, the type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal of refuse as he shall find necessary, and to change and modify the same, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. Any person aggrieved by a regulation of or a fee charged by the City Manager shall have the right of appeal to the City Council, which shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any such regulation or fee. 
605.03A - Certification of Refuse Collection Charges in Arrears. 
Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Stats.  443.015, unpaid refuse charges under this Chapter that are in arrears, as well as any authorized and permitted penalties, may be certified to the county auditor and shall be collected and remitted to the City in the same manner as assessments for local improvements. In addition, the City shall also have the right to bring a civil action or take other legal action to collect the unpaid refuse charges. 
(Ord. 673 [10-4-2006]) 
605.04 - Precollection Practices. 
A.  Containers Required. All refuse accumulated on any premises shall be placed and maintained in refuse containers. Such containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of said premises. 
B.  Duty to Maintain in a Sanitary Condition. Each refuse container shall be maintained in good condition, and such containers shall be made of metal, equipped with suitable handles and tight fitting covers, shall be commercial canisters designed for mechanical dumping, or shall be approved refuse bags. Garbage containers shall be water proof and shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. Any container which does not conform to the provisions of this Section or which may have sharp or ragged edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced. The City Manager shall have the authority to deny collection service for a failure to comply with this requirement. 
C.  Capacity of Containers. Refuse containers shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons and a weight with refuse inside of not more than 50 pounds, except for commercial canisters designed for mechanical dumping. 
D.  Points of Collection. Refuse containers shall be placed for collection in one place at ground level on a property, accessible from the side of the street or alley from which collection is made. Commercial canisters designed for mechanical dumping shall be placed where accessible for dumping directly into the collection vehicle. 
605.05 - Preparation of Refuse. 
A.  Garbage. Before being placed in refuse containers for collection, all garbage shall have all free liquids drained from it, and it shall be properly wrapped. 
B.  Rubbish and Ashes. All rubbish and ashes also shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. Ashes shall be quenched, and no hot embers or ashes shall be collected. Rubbish such as tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar material shall be cut to a length not to exceed three feet and shall be securely tied in bundles not more than two feet in diameter before being deposited for collection. 
C.  Explosive Refuse. Highly flammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection, but shall be disposed of as directed by the City Manager at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
D.  Contagious Disease Refuse. The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from homes or places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be performed under the supervision and direction of the Health Officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection. 
605.06 - Collection Practices. 
A.  Frequency of Residential Collection. Refuse accumulated on residential premises within the City shall be collected and disposed of by the City at least once each week. The frequency of City collection may be altered from time to time by the City Council, but in no case shall it be less than once each week. 
B.  Quantity of Residential Collection. Single family dwelling units within the City shall be allowed as many 30-gallon containers as is necessary for household refuse to be collected and disposed of on the schedule determined by the City Council. Multiple family dwelling units within the City shall be allowed the equivalent of two 30-gallon containers per unit for refuse to be collected and disposed of by the City on a schedule determined by the City Council. 
C.  Frequency of Non-Residential Collection. Refuse accumulated on commercial and institutional premises within the City shall be collected and disposed of at least once each week, and collection as often as once each business day may be required by the City Manager if deemed necessary to protect the public health. 
605.07 - Collection by Actual Producers and Outside Collectors. 
A.  Requirements for Vehicles. The actual producers of refuse or the owners of property upon which refuse is accumulated who desire personally to collect and dispose of such refuse, persons who desire to dispose of waste material not collected by the City, and collectors of refuse from outside of the City who desire to haul over the streets of the City, each shall use a vehicle operated and maintained so as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled therefrom. 
B.  Regulations. The City Manager shall have the authority to make such reasonable regulations concerning collection and disposal of refuse the hauling of refuse over City streets by outside collectors as he shall find necessary, subject to the right of appeal as set forth in Section 604.03. 
605.08 - Scattering of Refuse. 
No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the City any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the City. 
CHAPTER 606 - RECYCLING 

606.01 - Recycling for Multi-Family Dwellings. 
Owners of multi-family dwellings containing more than eight dwelling units must provide recycling collection services to all residents of the dwelling. The recycling collection services provided under this Section must meet the requirements of applicable county ordinances. 
(Ord. 545 [9-26-1991]) 
PART VII - MUNICIPAL REGULATION 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 701 - GENERAL NUISANCES 

701.01 - General Nuisances Prohibited. 
Whoever by his act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally creates, maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public shall be deemed to have committed a general public nuisance, which shall be a violation of this Chapter. 
CHAPTER 702 - ANIMALS 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

702.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
A.  "Animal Control Officer." The person designated or his or her authorized representative, designated as such by the City Manager or Chief of Police to perform duties described by this chapter. 
B.  "Animal Hospital." A place for treatment, hospitalization, surgery, care and boarding of animals and birds, which place is operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
C.  "At Large." Off of the property of the owner and not under the restraint of the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family. 
D.  "Fierce, Dangerous, Vicious." Any animal, including, but not limited to, a dog, wolf or wolf hybrid, which attacks another dog or domestic animal outside the owners premises, or which bites a person or attacks a person causing bodily harm, or which is alleged to have committed any of the foregoing. 
E.  "Kennel." A premises where three or more dogs over six months of age are kept or where the business of raising, selling, boarding, breeding, showing, treating or grooming dogs is conducted, except that this term does not include animal hospitals. 
F.  "License Cancellation." The cancellation of a dog license by the city based upon violation of any section of this chapter by an owner of a licensed dog. 
G.  "Owner." Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of an animal within the city. 
H.  "Premises." Any building, structure, shelter or land wherein animals are kept or confined. This does not include private residence. 
I.  "Public Nuisance Animal or Animals." Any animal which: 
1.  Does any of the following three or more times in any 12-month period: 
a)  Is found at large. 
b)  Damages the property of anyone other that its owner. 
c)  Disturbs or annoys person or persons residing in the vicinity by loud and frequent barking, howling, yelping or other such noises if such noise occurs for repeated intervals of at least three minutes with less than one minute of silence intervals and is audible off the owner's or caretaker's premises. 
d)  Molests passer by or passing vehicles. 
2.  Is fierce, dangerous, or vicious. 
3.  Attacks other domestic animals or protected wildlife. 
4.  Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, welfare. 
5.  Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or surroundings, which conditions are not corrected by the owner within two business days after written notice. 
J.  "Under Restraint." Controlled: 
1.  By a fence, leash or owner's command within the confines of the owner's property. 
2.  By a leash not exceeding six feet in length while outside of the owner's property and under the control and direction of the owner or a member of the immediate family, so as to be effectively restrained. 
3.  Within a vehicle being driven or parked on a public street. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.02 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police together with the Animal Control Officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to transport or cause to be transported to the City Pound any animal kept within the city contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The Animal Control Officer is authorized to issue citations and sign complaints against any person for violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.03 - Animal Control Officer. 
The Animal Control Officer and any police officer shall have the right to enter upon any premise at all reasonable times for the purpose of discharging the duties imposed upon them by this chapter where there is a reasonable belief that a violation of this chapter has been committed. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.04 - State Statutes Adopted. 
The provisions of Minn. Stats.  35.67 through 35.69, as amended from time to time, dealing with procedures to be followed on the discovery of rabies in the city, and Minn. Stats.  347.50 through 347.55, as they may be amended from time to time, dealing with regulation of dangerous dogs, are hereby adopted by reference, except those provisions which by their nature have no application, and are made a part of this code as if set out in full. One copy of the statutes shall be marked as the official copy and filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.05 - Exemption for Police Dogs. 
The Wayzata Police Department and any dog owned or used by it shall be exempt from the requirements and prohibitions of this chapter, except for the provisions relating to licensing and treatment of the dogs. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.07 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.08 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.09 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.10 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.11 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.12 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.13 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.14 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.15 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.16 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.17 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.18 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.19 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
LICENSES 

702.20 - License Required. 
A.  No person shall own, harbor, keep or have custody of a dog over six months of age within the city, unless a current license for the dog has been obtained and the tag affixed as herein provided. 
B.  License shall be issued on an annual basis and shall be made for the whole or unexpired portion of the year ending on December 31 next following the first effective day of the license. 
C.  The license fee for each dog shall be established by City Council. 
D.  If a license is obtained while the dog is impounded by the city, there shall be added to the regular license fee a late-license fee as set by City Council resolution. Additionally, any license purchased after March 1 of the year following expiration shall be charged a late fee as set by City Council resolution. 
E.  All licenses shall be issued by the City Manager or Police Department personnel and applications therefor shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota, showing that the dog is vaccinated against rabies for the duration of the applied for license. 
F.  Applications for a license under this chapter shall be made on such forms provided by the city. The city shall publish a notice regarding renewal of licenses at least one time before December 31 of each year. 
G.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager or the City Manager's designee to keep the following records: 
1.  Records of the licensing, impoundment and disposition of all animals impounded by the city. 
2.  Records of all reported dog bite cases and investigations for a period of three years. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.21 - License Tags. 
A.  The City Manager or Police Department personnel shall provide and furnish for each licensed dog a metallic tag upon which there shall be stamped or engraved the register number of the dog, the word "Wayzata" and the year when licensed. The City Manager or Police Department personnel shall keep a registry of the dogs so licensed and the registry shall contain the owner's name, address, birth date, phone number (work and home), description of the dog and the number of the license. 
B.  If a license tag is lost or stolen, the owner may obtain a new tag by surrendering the receipt for the first tag or by other proof which shows the dog is currently licensed. A replacement fee as set by City Council resolution shall be charged the dog owner. 
C.  Every owner shall place and keep around the neck of the dog a collar on which the license tag is securely affixed. 
D.  No person shall counterfeit any such license tag or use a counterfeit tag. A license tag is not transferable. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.22 - License Cancellation. 
A.  The City Manager may cancel the license of any dog which the City Manager determines to be a public nuisance animal, as defined by this chapter. 
B.  Upon such determination, the City Manager shall immediately notify the owner by personal delivery or by certified mail, addressed to the owner's last known address, that the dog is determined to be a public nuisance animal and the reasons therefore. The notice shall further advise the owner that the cancellation of the license shall be effective ten days following receipt of the notice. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the owner of any dog whose license has been cancelled and is subsequently impounded by the city, shall pay an additional impound fee as set by City Council resolution prior to release of the dog. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, have in his or her custody or keep on his or her premises a dog whose license has been cancelled pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.23 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.24 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.25 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.26 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.27 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.28 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.29 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.30 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.31 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.32 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.33 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.34 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
RESTRICTIONS 

702.35 - Rabies Vaccination of Cats. 
No person shall own, harbor, keep or have custody of a cat over six months of age within the city, unless the cat has a current rabies vaccination. Every owner of a cat shall maintain a certificate of the vaccination and shall, upon request, display it to the Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer. Records of all citations issued for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.36 - Kennels. 
A.  No person shall own, harbor, keep or have custody of three or more dogs over six months old on their property without first having secured a kennel license as required herein. 
B.  A kennel license shall be issued on an annual basis and shall be made for the whole or unexpired portion of the year ending on December 31 next following the effective date of the license. 
C.  The kennel license fees shall be established by the City Council. 
D.  If the license is obtained after a dog or dogs from the kennels have been impounded then there shall be a penalty fee added to the regular license fee equal to the regular license amount. This fee shall be paid in addition to any dog licensing, impounding or boarding fees which shall be required prior to release of the dog. 
E.  No kennel license or renewal shall be issued except upon action of the City Council following review of the kennel license application by the Chief of Police. As a condition of obtaining and holding a kennel license, all kennel license holders must comply with the relevant portions of Section 702.43-702.45 of this Chapter. 
F.  Persons granted a kennel license shall be issued a certificate which must be conspicuously displayed at the kennel location. Failure to display the certificate shall constitute prima facie evidence that the license has not been secured. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.37 - Violations; Impoundment. 
A.  1.  No owner shall permit an animal to be at large within the city. 
2.  An owner shall keep the animal under restraint at all times. 
3.  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to impound any fierce, dangerous or vicious dog endangering the safety of the general public or animal life. 
4.  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to impound any animal found at large, or any dog found without a license. 
5.  Dogs are permitted in city parks if they are controlled at all times by a leash or by their owner's command. Dogs are permitted at public beaches only during hours when the beach is closed for swimming, and only if they are controlled at all times by a leash or by their owner's command. No other animal shall be permitted to run at large at any time in any city park or public beach. At no time are public nuisance animals, wild animals, and fierce, dangerous, or vicious animals, including dogs, permitted in any city park or public beach. 
6.  Any female dog when in season shall be confined indoors or in a secure enclosure in such manner that she will not be in contact, except for intentional breeding purposes, with another dog, nor create a nuisance by attracting other animals. 
7.  The owner of any fierce, dangerous or vicious dog shall confine the animal within a building or secure enclosure at all times. The dog shall not be removed from the building or secure structure unless securely muzzled and on a leash. 
8.  No person shall keep, own, harbor or otherwise possess in the city an animal which is a public nuisance animal as defined in this chapter nor animals other than common domestic animals. The Animal Control Officer or Police Officer may impound any animal(s) which he or she has reason to believe is in violation of this subdivision if the owner is not present at the premises and the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer feels it is the only way to reasonably abate the nuisance. 
9.  No owner shall permit his or her animal to damage or foul any lawn, garden or property of another person. An owner shall have the responsibility of cleaning up any feces of the animal and disposing of same in a sanitary manner. 
B.  1.  Running at Large. Any unlicensed animal running at large is hereby declared a public nuisance animal. Any Animal Control Officer or police officer may impound any animal found unlicensed or any animal found running at large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner of animal, if known. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall not enter the property of the owner of an animal found running at large or the owner of an unlicensed animal unless the officer has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided for herein, to search for and seize the animal. In case the owner is unknown, the officer shall post notice at the city office that if the animal is not claimed within the time specified in subdivision B.3 of this Section, it will be sold or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, it shall be unlawful to kill, destroy, or otherwise cause injury to any animal running at large. 
2.  Biting Animals. Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall be confined in the city pound for a period of not less than ten days, at the expense of the owner. The animal may be released at the end of the time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and by the payment of all costs by the owner. However, if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon receipt of notice of need for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily and immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the owner's choosing, not outside of the county in which this city is located, and provide immediate proof of confinement in the manner as may be required, the owner may do so. If, however, the animal has been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner may confine the animal to the owner's property. 
3.  Reclaiming. All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least five regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as defined in this chapter, in which case it shall be kept for seven regular business days or the times specified, and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal in which case it shall be kept for ten regular business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners as provided by this Section. In case the owner shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise provided for in this code or established from time to time by resolution of the City Council: 
a)  Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release permit as established by the City Council. 
b)  Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or any part of day while animal is in the pound. 
c)  If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee as established by the City Council and valid certificate of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is required. 
4.  Unclaimed Animals. At the expiration of the times established in subdivision B.3 of this Section, if the animal has not been reclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this Section, the officer appointed to enforce this Section may let any person claim the animal by complying with all provisions in this Section, or the officer may sell the animal to the University of Minnesota, or cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and shall properly dispose of the remains thereof. Any money collected under this Section shall be payable to the City. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.38 - Animal Pound. 
A.  The City Council may provide for a city animal pound, either within or outside the limits of the city. 
B.  Any animals impounded by the city shall be kept for at least five business days unless sooner reclaimed by the owner thereof. The owner of any impounded animal may reclaim the same by exhibiting to the keeper of the pound a license duly issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and shall take possession of the animal, by paying the impounding fees as set by the City Council plus the cost of the keep of the animal in the pound and any other penalties due and payable. 
C.  Upon receiving an animal for impound, the pound keeper shall immediately check the animal for identification and promptly notify the owner of the location of the animal by the most expedient means. 
D.  Any animals not reclaimed within five business days after being impounded may be disposed of by the Pound Keeper, provided that the animal has not bitten or been suspected of biting any person. Disposal shall be in a humane manner as provided for in Minn. Stats.  35.71, as it may be amended from time to time. In no event shall the pound keeper dispose of any animal without prior written approval of the Police Department. 
E.  The Pound Keeper shall keep an accurate account of all animals received at the pound and of all animals killed, released or disposed of therefrom, and shall make a monthly accounting thereof to the City Manager or Chief of Police. 
F.  The city, upon the impounding of any animal, shall without delay notify the owner personally or through the United States Mail, addressed to the owner's last known address; but if the owner be unknown, then the city shall post a written notice at the City Hall. The notice shall describe the animal, state where it is impounded, and that it can be redeemed within five business days after impounding by payment of the required fee as duly set by the Council from time to time plus the cost of boarding for each day the animal has been confined in the pound, together with the payment for all dogs, if no current license has been issued. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.39 - Animal Bites. 
A.  Whenever any person owning, possessing or harboring any animal within the city shall learn that the animal has bitten any human being, the person shall immediately notify the Chief of Police. 
B.  Whenever the Chief of Police learns that any person has been bitten by an animal in the city, the Chief of Police shall ascertain the identity of the animal and the person owning, possessing or harboring it. The Chief of Police shall order and direct the transport of the animal to the city pound or at the owner's request and expense may transport the animal to the owner's veterinarian for impoundment pursuant to this Section. Provided that, if the animal is a dog and the dog is currently licensed and vaccinated against rabies infection, the Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer may permit the dog to be impounded upon the premises of its owner provided that it is kept apart from members of the general public during the impoundment period. If, under the circumstances, the dog is not currently licensed the Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer may permit the owner of the dog to immediately obtain a license therefor paying all fees required including late licensing fees. The impoundment fee for any animal that is impounded in the city pound a second time for biting a human being shall be double the regular impoundment fee. The Chief of Police shall order and direct the transport of such animal to the city pound. Any animal which is impounded under this ordinance shall be kept continuously confined for a period of ten days after the day of the bite. 
C.  Upon completion of the ten-day confinement period the owner shall provide the Chief of Police a certificate issued by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota, showing that the animal has been examined and the animal currently does not show signs of being infected with rabies. The period of confinement for the animal shall be terminated only upon the express authorization of the Chief of Police after receipt of the certificate. Unless the certificate is received within five business days after the completion of the confinement period, it shall be presumed that the animal is infected with rabies and the animal shall be disposed of as a dangerous animal pursuant to Section 702.40. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to release an animal from confinement under this Section prior to receiving express authorization from the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.40 - Destruction of Dangerous Animals. 
A.  The City Manager or the City Manager's designee is authorized to order the destruction or disposition of any animal which he or she determines to be fierce, dangerous or vicious as defined in this chapter. The City Manager, after having been advised of the existence of such an animal, shall proceed in the manner prescribed by this Section. 
B.  The owner of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal shall be notified in writing as to the dates, times, places and reasons for the determination, and shall be given ten days to request a hearing before the City Manager for a determination as to the dangerous nature of the animal. If the owner does not request a hearing within ten days of the notice, the City Manager shall make such order as he or she deems proper. He or she may order the animal control officer to take the animal into custody for destruction in which case the owner shall immediately make the animal available to the Animal Control Officer. 
C.  If the owner requests a hearing for determination as to the nature of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the City Manager at a date not more than three weeks after demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control Officer and the Police Department shall be admissible for consideration without further foundation. After considering all evidence, the City Manager shall make a determination as to whether or not the animal is found to be fierce, dangerous or vicious dangerous and the City Manager shall make such order as the City Manager deems proper. If the City Manager orders the Animal Control Officer to take the animal into custody for destruction, the owner shall immediately make the animal available to the animal control officer. 
D.  A fierce, dangerous or vicious animal running at large shall be apprehended by the Animal Control Officer and impounded for at least five business days. If the animal has not been claimed it shall be destroyed at the end of the five business day period. If the animal is claimed, upon payment of kennel fees, it may be released to the person paying the fees and the City Manager shall proceed as in subdivision b. above. The City Manager shall not release such animal if it is alleged animal has bitten or attacked a human being. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.41 - Trapping. 
A.  For the purpose of this Section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
"Trap." Any mechanical device, snare, artificial light, net, bird line, ferret, hawk, vehicle or contrivance used to trap, catch, snare, kill or otherwise restrain the free movement of any animals, wildlife or birds; and the term "trapping" means the setting, laying or otherwise using a trap to catch, trap, snare, kill or otherwise restrain the free movement of animals, wildlife or birds. 
B.  All trapping within the city is prohibited except: 
1.  When the owner of the property has expressly consented to allow trapping thereon. 
2.  Upon the issuance by the Chief of Police of a permit therefore after a showing that such trapping is necessary to eliminate a nuisance. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply: 
1.  To governmental officers who may in the course of their duties be required to use a trap to catch, trap, snare, kill or otherwise restrain the free movement of any animal, wildlife or birds for humane or other authorized purposes. 
2.  To teachers for school programs or to scientists intending to identify animals, wildlife or birds and then return them to their natural environment. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.42 - Wild, Vicious Animals. 
No persons shall keep or allow to be kept anywhere in the city any animal of a ferocious or vicious character, habit or disposition, or any animal which is wild by nature, including, but not limited to wolves, wolf hybrids and cougars. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.43 - Animal Quarters, Dog Kennels. 
This Section shall apply to all kennels, and kennel owners shall be responsible for complying with this Section. 
A.  Housing facilities shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated and have ample light, either natural or artificial. 
B.  Dogs kept outside shall be provided with access to shelter to protect them from the sun, rain and snow together with adequate bedding when temperature falls below 50 degrees Fahrenheit. 
C.  If dogs are confined by chains, the chains shall be so attached that they cannot become entangled with the chains of other dogs or any other objects. Chains shall be of a size commonly used for the size of dogs involved and shall be attached to the dog by means of a well-fitted collar. The chains shall be at least three times the length of the dog as measured from the tip of his nose to the base of his or her tail. 
D.  Enclosure shall be of sufficient size to allow each dog to turn around fully and to stand, sit and lie in a comfortable normal position. The floors of the enclosure shall be constructed so as to prevent injury to the dog's legs and feet. 
E.  The temperature for indoor housing facilities shall not be allowed to fall below 50 degrees Fahrenheit for dogs not accustomed to lower temperatures. 
F.  Disposal facilities shall be provided to minimize vermin, infestation, odors and disease hazards. 
G.  Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to protect food supplies against contamination and deterioration. 
H.  The premises, cages, enclosures and all housing facilities shall be clean and disinfected as often as is necessary to maintain clean and sanitary conditions at all times. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.44 - Care, Treatment of Dogs in Kennels. 
A.  Dogs shall be fed at least once a day, with clean wholesome food, sufficient to meet the normal nutritional requirements for dog's age, size and condition. 
B.  Clean potable water shall be made available to all dogs at least twice daily for periods of not less than one hour. 
C.  All feeding and water receptacles shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. 
D.  Dogs housed in the same primary enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups. Puppies shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with adult dogs, other than their mothers. 
E.  Any dog exhibiting a vicious disposition shall be housed separately. 
F.  Females in season shall not be confined in the same enclosure with males, except for breeding purposes. 
G.  Dogs affected with any clinical evidence of infectious, contagious or communicable disease shall be separated from other dogs in such a manner as to minimize the chance of further infection by other dogs. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.45 - Authorization of Inspection. 
A.  Periodic inspection will be made by the Animal Control Officer of all kennels licensed under these regulations, in addition to the inspection required prior to obtaining a license or permit. 
B.  The Animal Control Officer may enter upon the premises of any dog kennel licensed hereunder during normal business hours for the purpose of inspection for compliance with the provision of the law and this regulation. Any violation of these regulations not corrected within ten days after notice will be grounds for revocation of license. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.46 - Dog Houses. 
A.  Every owner of any dog which is kept outdoors or, in an unheated enclosure shall provide the dog with shelter and bedding as prescribed in this Section as a minimum. 
B.  Each dog shelter shall include a moisture proof and windproof structure of suitable size to accommodate the dog and to allow retention of body heat, made of durable material with a solid floor raised at least two inches from the ground with the entrance covered by a flexible windproof material or self-closing swinging door. The 'structure shall be provided with sufficient quantity of suitable bedding material consisting of hay, straw, cedar shavings, blankets or the equivalent to provide insulation and protection against cold, dampness and promote retention of body heat. 
C.  Shade from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June to September inclusive shall be provided by owner or by person in charge or control. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.47 - Veterinary Hospitals. 
All health standards in this chapter shall apply to veterinary hospitals or similar facilities and such hospital or facility shall be open for inspection at any time by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.48 - Reports by Pound Keeper. 
The Pound Keeper shall account for and pay over to the city each month all money received by him or her pursuant to this chapter. The Pound Keeper shall also give an accurate written report for each month to the Police Department showing all fees collected, all sales made, all animals impounded, the duration of the impoundment and the disposition of any animal. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.49 - Treatment of Animals. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person inhumanely, unnecessarily, cruelly or wantonly to beat, injure or otherwise abuse any animal within the city. 
(Ord. 669 [4-4-2006]) 
702.50 - Abandonment. 
It is unlawful for any person to abandon a dog/cat or other animal within the city. 
(Ord. 669 [04-04-2006]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986], Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 669 [04-04-2006]) 
CHAPTER 703 - TREATMENT AND HARBORING OF ANIMALS-REPEALED 

703.01 - Treatment. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986]) 
703.02 - Harboring. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986]) 
703.03 - Leghold Animal Traps. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 451 [4-1-1986]) 
CHAPTER 704 - FIREARMS AND ASSAULT WEAPONS 

704.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Firearm" shall mean any weapon from which is propelled any missile, projectile or bullet by means of explosives, gas or compressed air, springs or elastic material. 
B.  "Assault Weapon" shall mean and include any of the following objects: dagger, dirk or stiletto; sabre or sword; spear or lance; switchblade knife, spring blade knife or any other knife with a blade which can be opened by gravity or by a flick of the wrist; blackjack, sand club, sap, pipe club, bludgeon, mace or nightstick; chain club or chains assembled or used as an assault weapon; artificial knuckles or other objects designed to be worn over the fist or knuckles; throwing devices with cutting or pointed edges; Japanese nightstick, nut cracker, nanchaku, chaka, flail, karate stick or morning star; slingshot. 
C.  "Public Place" shall mean any area, building or structure which is open and accessible to the public. 
704.02 - Possession of Firearms. 
No person within the City shall carry in a public place, or have in his possession, custody or control in a public place, or transport in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle a firearm of any type whatsoever unless said firearm is unloaded and broken apart or carried in a case in such a manner that it cannot be fired, discharged or exploded or is unloaded and carried in the locked trunk of a motor vehicle. 
704.03 - Discharge of Firearms. 
No person shall shoot or discharge a firearm in any public place or on any private property within the City, whether loaded with powder, blank cartridges or any other explosive, bullet, pellet or shot. However, in special circumstances, following the written application therefor, the City Council may issue a written permit to a specific individual to allow the use of a firearm on private property within the City. 
704.04 - Possession of Assault Weapons. 
No person within the City shall carry in a public place, or have in his possession, custody or control in a public place, or transport in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle an assault weapon of any kind whatsoever unless said assault weapon is carried in a locked case or container in such a manner that it cannot easily be used or is carried in the locked trunk of a motor vehicle. 
704.05 - Sale of Assault Weapons. 
No person shall sell or transfer any assault weapon to any minor as defined by State Statute unless at the time of the sale or transfer said minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian and such parent or guardian gives express written consent to the proposed sale or transfer. 
704.06 - Confiscation. 
Any firearm or assault weapon duly adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to have been worn, carried, possessed, transported, used or handled in violation of this Chapter or any State Statute, ordinance or other regulation may be confiscated and disposed of in an appropriate manner by the Chief of Police. 
704.07 - Exception. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the firing of a firearm or the use of an assault weapon when done in lawful defense of person, property or family or when done in necessary defense or enforcement of the law. 
CHAPTER 705 - AIRGUNS AND SLINGSHOTS 

705.01 - Minors Restricted. 
No minor under 16 years of age shall carry or discharge any airgun, air rifle or slingshot within the City. 
705.02 - Obligation of Parents. 
No parent, guardian or other adult person having care and custody of a minor under 16 years of age shall knowingly permit the minor to carry or discharge any airgun, air rifle or slingshot within the City. 
CHAPTER 706 - SNOWMOBILES 

706.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Snowmobile" shall mean a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow, ice or natural terrain and steered by wheels, skis or runners. 
B.  "Operate" shall mean to control the operation of a snowmobile. 
C.  "Operator" shall mean a person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile. 
D.  "Safety or 'Dead Man' Throttle" shall mean a device which causes the motor of a snowmobile to be disengaged from the driving track when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle. 
706.02 - Restrictions on Operation. 
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to operate a snowmobile under the following circumstances: 
A.  In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons. 
B.  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner, so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or the property of any other person. 
C.  Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
D.  If the operator is less than 14 years of age, while operating on public streets or property. 
E.  On the private property of another person without that person's specific consent. 
F.  Without a red flag or pennant at least one square foot in size mounted on an antenna at least five feet in height, if operated upon a public street. 
G.  While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or drugs. 
H.  On any public property, other than public streets, unless specifically posted. 
706.03 - Required Equipment. 
All snowmobiles operated within the City shall have the following equipment: 
A.  Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for the operation thereof. No person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass or similar device on any such vehicle. 
B.  Adequate brakes, as defined in Minn. Stats.  169.67, and at least one headlight and one taillight. 
C.  A safety or "dead man" throttle in operating condition. 
CHAPTER 707 - AIR POLLUTION 

707.01 - Adoption of State Regulations. 
The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's "Air Pollution Control Regulations and Ambient Air Quality Standards" (APC 1-15), as adopted pursuant to Section 116.07, Minnesota Statutes 1967, and as filed with the State Commissioner of Administration on July 7, 1969, hereby are adopted by reference. Three copies of these Regulations shall be kept on file in the City Hall for use and examination by the public. 
707.02 - Open Burning Prohibited. 
No person shall cause, permit or allow the open burning of refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, grass, weeds, timber, buildings or any other combustible material except as provided herein. "Open burning" shall mean all outdoor burning other than that in approved incineration equipment or that for the preparation of food, such as in outdoor fireplaces or grills. 
707.03 - Incineration Equipment. 
No person shall own or operate any equipment for the incineration of refuse which does not meet standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, except that any person presently owning such equipment may provide for the hauling away and off-site disposal of their refuse. In addition to the requirements of the Pollution Control Agency, all such incineration equipment shall be required to have auxiliary combustion facilities. The provisions of this Section shall be held specifically to apply to, but not be limited to, all equipment for the burning of commercial or institutional refuse and all equipment for the common burning of refuse in multiple dwellings of four units or more. 
707.04 - Burning Permits. 
Any person desiring to burn in non-conformance with the above regulations shall first obtain permission for such burning from the City Manager and the Fire Marshal. Such permission shall be granted only in cases when, in these officials' opinion, such burning is in the best interest of the general public. 
CHAPTER 708 - UNNECESSARY NOISES 

708.01 - Declaration of Policy. 
It is found and declared that: 
A.  The making, creation or maintenance of loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual or unnatural in their time, place or use affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the City; and 
B.  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the City and its inhabitants. 
708.02 - General Restrictions. 
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the City. It also shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person who is the owner or lessee of any real property within the City to allow any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, upon said property or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the City. 
708.03 - Prohibited Noises. 
The following acts specifically are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
A.  Horns and Signaling Devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the City, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such device; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; and the use of any such device when traffic is for any reason delayed. 
B.  Electronic Sound Systems and Audio Equipment. 
1.  No person shall use or operate any electronic sound system or audio equipment including, but not limited to any compact disc player, cassette tape player, AM-FM radio, citizen band radio, paging system or any other device designed to produce or reproduce audio sound; in such an unreasonably loud manner that it disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of others or interferes with the right of another to use peacefully his/her property or public property without disturbance. 
2.  It shall be presumed that a violation of this Section has occurred when any electronic sound system or audio equipment is operated in a manner in which it is plainly audible, at a distance of 50 feet or more. When sound violating this Section is produced by an electronic sound system or audio equipment that is located in or on a vehicle, the owner of the vehicle is guilty of the violation; provided that, if the vehicle's owner is not present, the person in charge of the vehicle at the time of the violation is guilty of the violation. 
3.  This Section shall not apply to sound produced by the following: 
a)  Amplifying equipment or device(s) used in connection with activities for which a permit has been granted or in connection with activities of any organized school, church or other event or activities (i.e. fireworks) open to the public; 
b)  Anti-theft devices; 
c)  Church bells, chimes or carillons, school bells or emergency civil defense warning signals; and 
d)  Authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicles required by law to be equipped with sound devices. 
C.  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
D.  Construction or Repair of Buildings. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, in which case the City Manager may grant a permit for such work for a period of not to exceed three days. 
E.  Other Construction. Any construction activity other than that specified in subsection d above, including but not limited to highway construction, piling, grading and excavation, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, in which case the City Manager may grant a permit for such work for a period of not to exceed three days. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 476 [5-5-1987]) 
CHAPTER 709 - STORAGE, CUSTODY, AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ABANDONED VEHICLES 

709.01 - Purpose. 
The presence, accumulation or improper storage of abandoned motor vehicles on real property is hereby found to create an unsightly condition tending to reduce the value of real property, to invite plundering, to create fire and safety hazards and to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors. The accumulation and outside storage of such motor vehicles is further found to promote blight and deterioration in the community; to violate the zoning regulations of the City in many instances, particularly where such motor vehicles are maintained in required setback areas of residential property. It is further found that such abandoned motor vehicles are often in the nature of rubbish, litter and unsightly debris in violation of the health and sanitation laws. A purpose of this Chapter is to declare that the accumulation and storage of such motor vehicles on real property constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated as such, which remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy provided in this or other ordinances of the City or by State law. A further purpose of this Chapter is to establish a means by which the City can remove abandoned vehicles by providing a means for accomplishing towing, storage and disposition of such vehicles through a contractual arrangement with a person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
709.02 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
A.  "Abandoned Vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle, as herein defined, which is determined by the City Manager or his/her designee to be an "inoperative vehicle" as herein defined, or as a "junk vehicle," as herein defined, or to which the last registered owner of record has relinquished dominion and control or which does not have attached to it current license plates or tabs as required by State law, and which is not stored or screened as hereafter required. A motor vehicle, shall be presumed abandoned if: 
1.  It has remained illegally on Real Property for a period of more than seven successive days, or more than four hours on that property when it is properly posted; or 
2.  On private property for a period of time, as determined under Minn. Stats.  168B.04, Subd. 4, without the consent of the person in control of the property; and 
3.  Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. 
A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in Minnesota Statutes, is not considered an abandoned vehicle. 
Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards that are defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with state law, or that are licensed and maintained in accordance with this Code and zoning regulations, are not considered abandoned vehicles. 
A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ or court order is in effect. 
B.  "Impound" means to take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. 
C.  "Impound Lot" means an impound lot operated by or contracting with the City pursuant to this Chapter of the City Code. 
D.  "Impound Lot Operator" or "Operator" means a person who engages in impounding or storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. "Operator" includes an operator of a impound lot, regardless of whether tow truck service is provided. 
E.  "Inoperative Vehicle" means any motor vehicle which cannot be driven or propelled under its own power in its existing condition or which cannot be driven or propelled under its own power in a safe manner because of its wrecked, junked or partially dismantled condition. 
F.  "Junk Vehicle" means a vehicle that: 
1.  is extensively damaged, with the damage including such things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train or transmission; or 
2.  is apparently inoperable; or 
3.  does not have a valid, current registration plate; or 
4.  has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it. 
G.  "Motor Vehicle(s)" means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, wagons and snowmobiles. 
H.  "Real Property" means any land within the City which is not a public street, highway or right-of-way. 
I.  "Net Proceeds" means the sales price less any costs of handling, storing or sale of said vehicle. 
J.  "Official Garage" means a towing operator other than a City employee who has entered into a contract with the City to provide towing and storage services to the City or a City-owned garage. 
K.  "Vital Component Parts" means those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things as the motor, drive train and wheels. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
709.03 - Open Storage of Abandoned Vehicles Prohibited. 
No person shall store or leave or permit the storing or leaving of any abandoned vehicle upon any real property, including private property, within the City for a period of seven successive days, unless such vehicle is completely enclosed in a building or fully screened and placed completely in the rear yard or side yard of said property and so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and the public right-of-way or unless such vehicle is stored on private property in connection with a duly licensed business or commercial enterprise operated and conducted pursuant to law when such storing of vehicles is necessary to the operation of the business or commercial enterprise. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
709.04 - Violations. 
The storage of vehicles in violation of Section 709.03 of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
709.05 - Notice to Remove. 
A.  Letter. Whenever the City Manager or his/her designees ascertain that an abandoned vehicle is present on real property within the City, he/she shall first serve a written notice upon the property owner and registered owner of the vehicle, if known. The written notice shall also be served upon any responsible party known to the City Manager or his/her designee and may be served upon any party known to have caused the misdemeanor. 
B.  Notice on Vehicle. Whenever the City Manager or his/her designee ascertain that an abandoned vehicle is present on real property within the City for a period of greater than seven days from the issuance of the first notice, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause a notice to be placed upon such abandoned vehicle using substantially the following words: 
Notice to the owner and all persons interested in the attached motor vehicle and to the owner or person(s) in lawful possession or control of this land: 
"This vehicle (setting forth a brief description), located at (setting forth a brief description of the real estate sufficient for identification), is improperly stored, and its present storage will be in violation of Section 709.03 of the City Code on (setting forth a date seven successive days from the date of this notice) unless such vehicle is removed and stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and the public right-of-way and placed completely in the rear yard or side yard of the property pursuant to Chapter 709. Failure to remove and store said vehicle is a misdemeanor. In addition, this vehicle will be removed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 709 of the City Code." 
C.  Size of Notice on Vehicle. The notice set forth in Section 709.05.b. of this Chapter shall not be less than eight inches by ten inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements. 
D.  Notice Mailed to Vehicle and Property Owners. In addition to the notice placed on the vehicle, the City shall, within two working days of the notice placed on the vehicle, give notice by mail to the registered owner, if any, and to the owner or persons in lawful possession of the real property upon which the vehicle is located. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
709.06 - Abatement, Removal and Disposition. 
A.  Abatement and Removal by City. If the registered owner of any motor vehicle which is in violation of this Chapter or if the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property upon which such vehicle is located shall fail, neglect, or refuse to remove or house such vehicle in accordance with the notice, the motor vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and the City Manager or his/her designee may take into custody, impound and dispose of such vehicle. The removal and disposal of said vehicle shall be made in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Chapter. The notice provisions of Section 709.07 shall apply once the vehicle is taken into custody. 
B.  Notice of Taking and Sale of Abandoned Vehicles. When an abandoned vehicle is taken into custody, the City shall give notice of the taking within ten days. The notice shall: 
1.  Set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned vehicle if the information can be reasonably obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held; 
2.  Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the abandoned vehicle under state law and Section 709.06.B. of the City Code; and 
3.  State that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time allowed under state law and Section 709.06.B. of the City Code shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to a disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents pursuant to state law and Section 709.06.B. of the City Code. 
The notice regarding abandoned vehicles shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in the City's legal newspaper. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy. 
C.  Reclaiming Abandoned Vehicles; Sale After 15 Days. An abandoned vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale 15 days after notice to the owner. The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned vehicle shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the City and impound lot operator upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 successive days after the date of the notice to the owner. 
D.  Sales Receipt for Purchase of Abandoned Vehicles. If an abandoned vehicle and contents taken into custody by the City is not reclaimed properly, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Pursuant to state law, before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title it must receive a motor vehicle safety check. 
E.  Unsold Abandoned Vehicles. Abandoned vehicles not sold by the City shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
709.07 - Sale and Proceeds. 
From the proceeds of a sale under this Chapter of the City Code and state law by the City or the public impound lot of an abandoned vehicle, the City shall reimburse itself of the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this Chapter of the City Code and state law. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 successive days and then shall be deposited in a designated City fund to cover the costs of notices and other expenses mandated by this Chapter of the City Code and state law. If remedial action is not taken within the time specified, the City may charge all costs incurred against the real estate to the extent allowed under State law as a special assessment to be collected in the same manner as taxes. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
709.08 - Implied Consent to Sell. 
A registered owner who fails to claim the impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under Minn. Stats.  168B.051 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to the disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
709.09 - Authority to Contract for Towing Services. 
A.  Contract. The City may enter into a contract on behalf of the City with any person, firm or corporation who will obtain or provide adequate facilities to handle the tows and the storage of vehicles requested by the City. Such contract shall set forth the fees, which fees shall not be exceeded in any case involving the tow or storage requested by the City. 
B.  Certificate of Insurance. Every towing operator to whom a contract is awarded for towing and storage shall, upon the execution of such contract, file with the City Manager a certificate of insurance approved by the City. 
C.  Statements. The towing operator who has entered into a contract pursuant to this Chapter shall forward to the City Manager a copy of each bill or statement prepared for each owner of a vehicle towed or stored at the request of the City. 
D.  Exclusion. Nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to prohibit, limit or restrict the use or operation of towing equipment or storage facilities by the City, County or School District. 
(Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 615 [5-27-1999]) 
CHAPTER 710 - MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES 

710.01. - Purpose. 
The Wayzata City Council has determined the preservation of trees growing on public and private property are necessary to maintain the general welfare of the public and is set forth more fully in Section 710.13 of this Chapter, and Section 801.36 of the Zoning Ordinance. In order to maintain and enhance the quantity and quality of trees growing within the City, this Chapter is adopted to regulate the maintenance and removal of trees within the City of Wayzata by: (1) Defining the duties and responsibilities of the City Forester as the agent enforcing regulations relating to the planning, maintenance and removal of trees within the City of Wayzata; (2) Providing for the issuing of permits and/or licenses for any maintenance and/or removal of trees within the City of Wayzata; (3) Providing for the pruning and removal of trees on private property that endanger public safety; (4) Providing for standards and specifications of all policy concerning trees on public property; and (5) Providing for standards and specifications for care protection policy concerning trees within project construction limits. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.02. - Duties and Qualifications of the Forester. 
A.  Duties. The Forester, as appointed by the City Manager, for the purposes of this Chapter shall identify diseased and hazardous trees that threaten the health and safety of the public and coordinate all activities of the City relating to the control and prevention of tree pathogens. It shall further be the duty of the Forester and the City Manager and/or his/her designee to identify and describe Significant Trees in any proposed subdivision or development project and to assist planners, developers, and architects in the development of a tree preservation plan for each construction development project. 
B.  Qualifications of the Forester. The qualifications of the Forester shall be, as a minimum, those qualifications prescribed for certified arborists by the International Society of Arboriculture, or such other appropriate qualifications as determined by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.03. - Pathogen Control Program. 
It is the intent of the City to conduct a program of plant pest control pursuant to the authority granted by Minn. Stat. 18.022. This Chapter provides full power and authority over all trees, plants and shrubs located within the street rights-of-way, parks and public places of the City; and to trees located on private property that constitute a hazard or threat as described herein; and trees that fall under the tree protection policy as described in Section 710.17 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.04. - Nuisances Declared. 
The following things hereby are declared to be public nuisances whenever they may be found within the City: 
A.  Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus (as defined by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture) or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles known by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture to transmit the disease. 
B.  Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed or sprayed with an effective Dutch Elm insecticide, or disposed of in a manner prescribed by the Commissioner of Agriculture. 
C.  Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Oak Wilt disease fungus, as defined by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture. 
D.  Any infected oak tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other oak material unless all bark material is removed and disposed of in a manner prescribed by the Commissioner of Agriculture. 
E.  Any ash tree at risk of infestation of the Emerald Ash Borer (EAB) as determined by the City Forester after considering Minnesota Department of Agriculture guidance. 
F.  Any living or standing tree or shrub or part thereof infected to any degree by any organism to be controlled as set forth and described by the Commissioner of Agriculture. 
G.  Any dead, dying, decaying or living tree, shrub or parts thereof that interferes with the public use of any public thoroughfare or right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in this Section to remain on any property owned or controlled by him within the City. Such a nuisance shall be abated in the manner prescribed by this Chapter. Abatement shall be at the discretion of the City Forester in accordance with all State Law and City Code. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.05. - Inspection and Investigation. 
The City Forester shall inspect all premises and places within the City as often as practicable to determine whether any nuisances as described in this Chapter exist thereon. The Forester shall investigate all reported incidents of diseased trees within the City. The Forester or duly authorized representative(s) may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned under this Chapter. Except for cases of emergencies or the imminent threat of personal or property damage, the City shall notify the property owner at least five days prior to the inspection through certified mail to the address listed on the Hennepin County tax records. The inspection may occur after five days even if the certified letter is undeliverable or returned. The City Forester may, upon finding conditions indicating disease infestation is suspected and unconfirmed by a field diagnosis, immediately send appropriate specimens or samples to the Commissioner of Agriculture for analysis or take such other steps for diagnosis as may be recommended by the Commissioner. Except as provided in Section 710.08, or in the case of a positive field diagnosis, no action to remove infected trees or wood shall be taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.06. - Abatement of Nuisances. 
In abating the nuisances defined in Section 710.05, the Forester shall cause the infected tree or wood to be sprayed, removed, burned or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible spread of the disease. Such abatement shall be carried out in accordance with current technical and expert opinions and plans as may be designated by the Commissioner of Agriculture. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.07. - Abatement Procedure. 
Whenever the Forester finds with reasonable certainty that an infestation defined in this Chapter exists in any tree or wood on any public or private property within the City, he shall proceed to abate said nuisance as follows: 
A.  If the Forester finds that the danger of infestation of other trees is not imminent the Forester shall notify in writing the person(s) owning or controlling the property upon which the nuisance is located that the nuisance must be abated within 21 days from the date of the mailing. If no action to abate the nuisance is taken within this period the Forester then shall make a written report of findings to the City Council. The Council shall take action to abate the nuisance, and it may proceed to recover the costs of such abatement as provided in Section 710.09. 
B.  If the Forester finds that the danger of infestation of other trees is imminent the Forester shall notify in writing the person(s) owning or controlling the property upon which the nuisance is located that the nuisance must be abated within seven days from the date of the mailing, and shall report findings to the City Manager. If no action to abate the nuisance is taken within this period the Forester then shall make a written report of actions to the City Council, which may proceed to recover the costs of such abatement as provided in Section 710.09. 
C.  If the Forester finds that the danger of infestation of other trees is imminent the Forester shall notify in writing all persons owning or controlling property upon which is located trees in danger of becoming infested. Within this notice the Forester shall state that action, if any, which should be taken to protect the trees in danger of becoming infested and the period within which such action must be taken. If no such action is taken within this period the Forester then shall take appropriate action to protect these trees as an emergency measure and shall make a written report of this action to the City Council, which may proceed to recover the costs of such action as provided in Section 710.09. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.08. - Special Assessment Procedure. 
Upon receipt of a report from the Forester required by Section 710.08, subsections a. through c., the City Council may pass a resolution to provide for recovering the costs of abatement of a nuisance and/or for recovering the costs of protecting threatened trees by a special assessment procedure. Before such a resolution may be approved, the City Manager shall notify all affected property owners by mail that such a procedure is under consideration prior to the meeting thereon. This notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the abatement action proposed to be taken or already taken, the estimated or actual cost of such abatement and the proposed basis of assessing such cost. At this meeting all affected property owners shall have the right to be heard with reference to the proposed assessments and assessment procedure. The Council thereafter by resolution may approve such special assessments for the purposes specified herein. 
The Forester shall keep a record of all abatement activities and all abatement costs for which special assessments are to be made or may be made, stating the description of the properties involved and the amounts chargeable to each property. On or before October 10th of each year the City Manager shall list the total unpaid charges for such abatement activities against each separate property to which they are attributable under this Chapter. The City Council then may spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special assessment for certification to the Hennepin County Auditor and for collection the following year along with current taxes. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.9. - Transporting Diseased Wood. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport within the City any diseased wood without first having obtained a permit therefore from the Forester. The Forester may grant such a permit only when the purposes of this Chapter will be served thereby. The transporting of diseased wood out of the City shall be governed by current State Statutes related to transportation of infected material. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.10. - Interference Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Forester or duly authorized representative(s) while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.11. - License Required. 
No person shall conduct as a business, the cutting, trimming, pruning, removal, spraying or other treatment of trees within the City without first having been issued a license therefore. Refer to Chapter 519, Section .01 of the City Code. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.12. - Intentional or Deliberate Damage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to intentionally damage, destroy or adversely alter any living tree, deciduous or coniferous, on private land within the limits of the City of Wayzata in violation of this Section. Minn. Stat. 561.04 strictly prohibits intentional damage to trees on public property in any form and provides that whoever willfully and without lawful authority injures any tree, timber or shrub on City property is liable for treble the amount of damages which may be assessed therefore. The City Forester and other City Staff shall not make any claims related to the structural integrity of any tree, and any assessments made related to a tree may not be relied upon by the property owner. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.13. - Violation. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of the City Code including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this Section. The term "misdemeanor" shall be as defined in Minn. Stat. 609.02, Subd. 3. 
It shall also be a misdemeanor for any person to attempt to commit a misdemeanor or to cause, aid, assist, counsel or advise another to commit misdemeanor. Any person who commits a misdemeanor, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties therefore established by State Statute. Unless expressly provided otherwise, each act in violation of the City Code, including this Chapter, shall constitute a separate offense, and each and every day that such a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
710.14. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of the City Code, including this Chapter are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of the City Code, including this Chapter, shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the City Code, including this Chapter. 
(Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 574 [2-21-1995]; Ord. 588 [2-27-1997]; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 614 [5-27-1999]; Ord. xxxx [xx-xx-2016]) 
CHAPTER 711 - CURFEW 

711.01 - Minors 14 and Younger. 
No minor under 14 years of age or younger shall be on or present upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, public building or place open to the public, place of amusement, entertainment, or other place of business, vacant lot or other unsupervised place within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 530 [9-5-1989]) 
711.02 - Minors 15-17. 
No minor under the age of 18 years and over the age of 14 years shall be on or present upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, public building or place open to the public, place of amusement, entertainment, or other place of business, vacant lot or other unsupervised place within the City between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 530 [9-5-1989]) 
711.03 - Obligation of Parents. 
No parent, guardian or other adult person having care, custody or control of a minor under the age of 18 years shall allow or permit such minor to violate the provisions of Sections 711.01 or 711.02. 
711.04 - Obligation of Proprietors. 
No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business, shall permit any minor under the age of 18 years of age to enter or remain in such place contrary to the provisions of Sections 711.01 and 711.02, and he/she shall immediately order such person to leave, and if such person refuses to leave the premises or area, said proprietor shall immediately notify the police. 
711.05 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply when such minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having care and custody of the minor or when such minor is going to or coming from his authorized place of employment. 
CHAPTER 712 - SHOPLIFTING 

712.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Merchant" shall mean any person who owns or has in his possession or subject to his control personal property with authority to sell the same in the regular course of business at retail or wholesale. 
B.  "Value" shall mean the price at which an article (or articles) taken is (are) held for sale, whether at retail or wholesale, by a merchant. 
712.02 - Shoplifting Prohibited. 
Whoever does the following act commits the petty misdemeanor of shoplifting and shall be subject to the applicable penalties therefor: 
Takes or is apprehended in the act of taking any article with a value of less than $50.00, without paying therefor, from the possession of a merchant in his place of business or in any premises under his control with the intent wrongfully to deprive said merchant of his property or the use and benefit thereof or to appropriate the same to the use of the taker or any other person. 
CHAPTER 713 - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

713.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Controlled Substance" shall mean a drug, substance, or immediate precursor in Schedules I through V of Minn. Stats.  152.02. This term shall not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco. 
B.  "Deliver" shall mean to sell, offer for sale, barter, exchange, administer, dispense, give away, distribute or supply in any other manner. The term "deliver" as herein defined shall include the attempt to perform such acts as well as the actual commission thereof. 
C.  "Patient" shall mean the individual for whom a controlled substance is prescribed or to whom a controlled substance is administered, or the owner or agent of the owner of any animal for which a controlled substance is prescribed or to which a controlled substance is administered. 
D.  "Practitioner" shall mean a person licensed by law to prescribe and administer any of the controlled substances defined above. 
E.  "Pharmacist" shall mean a person duly licensed and registered with the Minnesota State Board of Pharmacy as a registered pharmacist. 
F.  "Prescription" shall mean a written or oral order by a practitioner to a pharmacist for a controlled substance for a particular patient, which specifies the date of its issue, the name and address of such practitioner, the name and address of the patient (and, if the controlled substance is prescribed for an animal, the species of such animal), the name and quantity of the controlled substance prescribed, the directions for use of such substance, and in the case of a written order, the signature of such practitioner. An oral order by a practitioner for a controlled substance shall be promptly reduced to writing by the pharmacist. 
G.  "Manufacturer" shall mean a person other than a pharmacist who prepares controlled substances in dosage forms by mixing, compounding, encapsulating, entableting, or other process. 
H.  "Wholesaler" shall mean a person engaged in the business of distributing controlled substances to persons included in any of the classes named in Section 713.03. 
I.  "Warehouseman" shall mean a person who stores controlled substances for others and who has no control over the disposition of such controlled substances except for the purpose of storage. 
713.02 - Prohibited Acts. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter or by State law, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Manufacture, sell, give away, barter, deliver, exchange or distribute a controlled substance; 
2.  Possess with intent to manufacture, sell, give away, barter, deliver, exchange or distribute a controlled substance; 
3.  Possess a controlled substance, except when such possession is one for one's own use and is authorized by law. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to procure, attempt to procure, possess or have in his control a controlled substance by any of the following means: 
1.  Fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge; 
2.  Using a false name, or giving a false address or false credit; 
3.  Concealing a material fact; 
4.  Forging or altering a prescription; 
5.  Making a false statement in any prescription, order, report or record relative to a controlled substance; 
6.  Making, issuing or uttering any false or forged prescription; 
7.  Falsely assuming the title of, or falsely representing any person to be, a manufacturer, wholesaler, warehouseman, pharmacist, physician, doctor of osteopathy licensed to practice medicine, dentist, podiatrist, veterinarian or other authorized person for the purpose of obtaining a controlled substance. 
713.03 - Exceptions. 
Section 713.02 of this Chapter shall not apply to the following in the ordinary course of their trade, business or profession: 
A.  Practitioners; 
B.  Pharmacists; 
C.  Manufacturers; 
D.  Pharmacists as manufacturers; 
E.  Wholesalers; 
F.  Warehousemen; 
G.  Persons engaged in transporting controlled substances as an agent or employee of a practitioner, pharmacist, manufacturer, warehouseman, wholesaler or common carrier; 
H.  Public officers or public employees engaged in the performance of official duties requiring possession or control of controlled substances, or persons aiding such officers or employees in the performance of their duties; 
I.  Any patient as herein defined with respect to procuring, possession and use of a controlled substance in accordance with terms of a prescription and prescribed treatment; 
J.  Persons who procure, possess or use such controlled substances for the purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing, and not for sale; 
K.  Lawfully licensed and registered hospitals or bona fide institutions wherein sick or injured persons are cared for and treated, or bona fide hospitals for the treatment of animals. 
713.04 - Use of Original Containers and Labels. 
All patients having possession of any controlled substance, by lawful prescription of a practitioner, while said substance is lawfully in that person's possession, shall keep said substance in the original container in which it was delivered until used in accordance with such prescription and shall not remove the pharmacist's original label identifying the prescription from its original container. 
713.05 - Inhaling, Breathing, Drinking of Certain Substances. 
No person shall inhale, breathe or drink or be or become intoxicated by reason of inhaling, breathing or drinking any substance commonly known as glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage, dope, solvents, lacquer, drugs, fingernail polish and lacquer, nail polish remover or thinners for any of these substances; nor any substance containing tuluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethel ketone, trichoroathane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl callosolve acetate, cyclo-hexanone, ketones, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether or chlorinated hydrocarbons; or any other similar ingredient which releases toxic vapors for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, excitement, confusion, dizziness, paralysis or irrational behavior or in any manner changes, distorts or disturbs balance and coordination or the audio, visual or mental processes. 
713.06 - Purchase, Sale or Possession of Glue. 
No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of this Chapter, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession or receive possession of any glue containing the intoxicating substances defined in Section 713.05. Retail establishments selling glue containing the intoxicating substances defined in Section 713.05 shall not sell such glue from a self-service display. 
713.07 - Confiscation and Disposition of Controlled Substances. 
Any controlled substance or glue found in the possession of any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be confiscated and forfeited to the Chief of Police, who shall make proper and timely disposition of all such substances. 
CHAPTER 714 - LIQUOR AND BEER 

714.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Intoxicating Liquor" shall mean ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt beverages with an alcoholic content in excess of 3.2 percent by weight. 
B.  "Non-Intoxicating Malt Liquor" shall mean any potable malt beverage with an alcoholic content in excess of 0.5 percent by volume and not more than 3.2 percent by weight. 
714.02 - Consumption. 
Except in such places as may be authorized by the City Council, no person shall drink or consume intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor (beer) while in a public park, on a public street or in any other public place, including private parking lots open to the public, or on any other private property without the consent of the owner, lessee or other lawful possessor of said property. 
714.03 - Possession. 
Except in such places as may be authorized by the City Council, no person shall have in his possession, while in a public park, on a public street or in any other public place, including private parking lots open to the public, or on any other private property without the consent of the owner, lessee or other lawful possession of said property, any bottle or receptacle containing intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor (beer) which has been opened, which has a broken seal or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
CHAPTER 715 - LOITERING 

715.01 - Acts Constituting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or any group of two or more persons to fail or refuse to vacate or leave any premises after being requested or ordered to do so for cause by the lawful possessor thereof or by any law enforcement agent or official. 
(Ord. 403 [10-20-1981]) 
715.02 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter the following words have the following definitions or meanings: 
A.  "Premises" is defined as any publicly or privately owned land, including, but not limited to, any sidewalk, boulevard, street, highway, alley, thoroughfare, park, playground or parking area; and any building, or any part of any building, whether publicly or privately owned, located in the City of Wayzata. 
B.  "Cause" is defined as any behavior, act or course of conduct on the part of any person which may or does result in a disturbance of the peace, including, but not limited to, the following: The racing of the motor of any motor vehicle; the making or production of any unnecessary noise by shouting or by any other means or mechanisms; any improper use of a flash or spot light; the consuming or displaying of any beer or intoxicating or non-intoxicating liquor or wine in or about any premises where such consuming or displaying is prohibited; the defacement, destruction, or otherwise damaging of any premises; the strewing, scattering, littering, throwing, disposing, or depositing of any refuse, garbage or rubbish on or onto any premises except into receptacles provided for such purposes; the discharge of any fireworks, caps, pistols, firearms, or any other device or mechanism designed to create noise; the use of profane, abusive, indecent or threatening language; inciting to or committing assault or battery; soliciting for any illegal or immoral purposes; any unexplained lingering in or about any premises; any obstruction of traffic, either pedestrian or vehicular; or any behavior, act or course of conduct which may otherwise be forbidden by law. 
(Ord. 403 [10-20-1981]) 
715.03 - Exceptions. 
Section 715.01 shall not apply to any person on such premises who may be the owner or tenant of any part thereof or who is there with the permission of said owner or tenant, nor shall it include any person present thereon because of any emergency nor any law enforcement or other governmental official who may be present thereon as part of his official duty. 
(Ord. 403 [10-20-1981]) 
CHAPTER 716 - GAMBLING 

716.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of lawful gambling within the City. 
(Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]; Ord. 579 [12-5-1995]) 
716.02 - Definitions. 
The words and terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings given them by Minn. Stats.  349.12 (1984). 
A.  "Eligible Organization" shall mean any fraternal, religious, veterans or other non-profit organization which has been in existence for at least three years and which has at least 15 active members. 
(Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
716.03 - Prohibition. 
No lawful gambling shall be conducted within the City unless specifically authorized by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]) 
716.04 - Permitted Gambling. 
The following forms of lawful gambling are hereby permitted in accordance with Minn. Stats. Ch. 349, and Minnesota Rules, as such statutes and rules may be amended from time to time: 
A.  Bingo may be conducted by an organization if it has obtained a license to conduct bingo from the Minnesota Charitable Gambling Control Board and conducts such bingo in compliance with Minn. Stats.  349.214, Subd. 1 (1984). 
B.  Bingo may be conducted by an eligible organization without a license if such conduct is exempt from licensing in accordance with Minn. Stats.  349.214, Subd. 1 (1984). 
C.  Raffles may be conducted by an eligible organization in accordance with rules of the Minnesota Charitable Gambling Control Board, provided that no such organization shall conduct more than four raffles per year. 
(Ord. 443 [9-3-1985]) 
D.  1.  The sale of pull tabs may be conducted by an organization if it has obtained a license to conduct the sale of pull tabs from the Minnesota Charitable Gambling Control Board and conducts such sale in compliance with Minn. Stats. Ch. 349 and Minn. R. 1987, Section 7860.0010 to 7860.0310 and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
2.  Only one organization may conduct the sale of pull tabs and only at one location as approved by the City Council. 
3.  An organization licensed by the Minnesota Charitable Gambling Control Board to conduct the sale of pull tabs shall file with the City Manager a duplicate copy of monthly reports required by Minnesota Rules, 1987, 7860.0120. 
(Ord. 507 [6-7-1988]) 
E.  An organization may apply for an Exempt permit to conduct a one-day pull tab occasion not more than once per calendar year subject to approval by the City Council and in compliance with Minn. Stats. Ch. 349 and Minnesota Rules. The organization shall file with the City Manager a duplicate copy of reports required by Minnesota Rules. [This Section 716.04.E. expires on 1-10-1996.] 
(Ord. 579 [12-5-1995]) 
F.  Paddlewheel activity may be conducted by an eligible organization using a portable-type paddlewheel, without a table, awarding merchandise for prizes in accordance with Minn. Stats. Ch. 349 and Minnesota Rules. 
(Ord. 586 [11-13-1996]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 436 [3-5-1985]; Ord. 443 [9-3-1985]; Ord. 507 [6-7-1988]; Ord. 579 [12-5-1995]; Ord. 586 [11-13-1996]) 
CHAPTER 717 - SANCTIONS FOR THE DISTRIBUTION OF HARMFUL MATERIALS TO MINORS 

717.01 - Purpose. 
The City Council of the City of Wayzata declares the purpose and intent of this Chapter to be as follows: 
A.  There exists an urgent need to prevent commercial exposure of minors to sexually provocative photographic, visual, audio, written, printed or published materials as hereafter defined and which are hereby declared to be harmful to minors. 
B.  It is in the best interest of the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of this City and state, and especially of minors within the City and state, that commercial dissemination of such sexually provocative materials deemed harmful to minors be restricted to persons over the age of 17 years; or if available to minors, that the availability of such materials be restricted to sources within the minor's home or established and recognized schools, religious institutions, museums, medical clinics and physicians, hospitals, public libraries, or government sponsored institutions. 
(Ord. 452 [5-6-1986]) 
717.02 - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this Section, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
A.  "Minor" means any person under the age of 18 years; 
B.  "Nudity" means the display of human genitals, pubic areas, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the areola, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible state of arousal. 
C.  "Sexual Conduct" includes any of the following depicted sexual conduct: 
1.  Any act of sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, including genital-genital, anti-genital, or oral-genital intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being and an animal. 
2.  Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on the part of one so clothed. 
3.  Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any explicit, close-up representation of human genital organ. 
4.  Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual simulation or gratification. 
5.  An act of sexual assault where physical violence or drugs are employed to overcome the will of or achieve the consent of a person to an act of sexual conduct and the effects or results of the violence of drugs are shown. 
D.  "Sexual Excitement" means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
E.  "Harmful to Minors" means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement, when it: 
1.  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful, or morbid interest of minors in sex; and 
2.  Is patently offensive to contemporary standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable sexual material for minors; and 
3.  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
F.  "Knowingly" means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry or both as to: 
1.  The character and content of any material which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and 
2.  The age of the minor, provided however that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor. 
(Ord. 452 [5-6-1986]) 
717.03 - Access Restrictions on Materials Harmful to Minors. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary consideration to a minor: 
1.  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video tape, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement and which is harmful to minors. 
2.  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in clause A.1, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of nudity, sexual excitement, or sexual conduct and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for a monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly admit a minor for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited, a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement and which is harmful to minors. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person commercially and knowingly to exhibit, display, sell, offer to sell, give away, circulate, distribute, or attempt to distribute any material which is harmful to minors in its content in any place where minors are or may be present or allowed to be present and where minors are able to view such material unless each item of such material is at all times kept in a sealed wrapper. 
1.  It is also unlawful for any person commercially and knowingly to exhibit, display, sell, offer to sell, give away, circulate, distribute, or attempt to distribute any material whose cover, covers, or packaging, standing alone, is harmful to minors, in any place where minors are or may be present or allowed to be present and where minors are able to view such material unless each item of such materials is block from view by an opaque cover. The requirement of an opaque cover shall be deemed satisfied concerning such material if those portions of the cover, covers, to packaging containing such material harmful to minors are blocked from view by an opaque cover. 
2.  The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to distribution or attempt to distribute the exhibition, display, sale, offer of sale, circulation, giving away of material harmful to minors where such material is sold, exhibited, displayed, offered for sale, given away, circulated, distributed, or attempted to be distributed under circumstances where minors are not present, not allowed to be present, or are not able to view such material or the cover, covers, or packaging of such material. Any business may comply with the requirements of this clause by physically segregating such material in a manner so as to physically prohibit the access to and view of the material by minors, by prominently posting warnings at the entrance(s) to such restricted area, e.g. "Adults Only- You Must Be 18 to Enter," and by enforcing said restriction. 
(Ord. 452 [5-6-1986]) 
CHAPTER 717(A) - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS 

717(A).01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to prescribe location and operational requirements for adult establishments to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to prevent lower property values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight, criminal activity and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(A).02 - Findings. 
Studies conducted by the Minnesota Attorney General, the American Planning Association, and cities such as Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona, Los Angeles, California; and Seattle, Washington have studied the impacts that adult establishments have in those communities. These studies have concluded that adult establishments have adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods. These impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight, and potential health risks. Based on these studies and findings, the City Council concludes: 
A.  Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set forth above. 
B.  The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult establishments are governed by geographic, licensing and health requirements. 
C.  It is not the intent of the City Council to prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the City. 
D.  Minn. Stats.  462.357 allows the City to adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
E.  The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the City adopting regulations governing adult establishments. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(A).03 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Section, the following terms have the meanings given them. 
A.  "Adult Cabaret" means a business that provides dancing or other live entertainment, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display or depiction of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomic Areas, or the presentation, display or depiction of matter that seeks to evoke, arouse or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desires. 
B.  "Adult Establishment" means a business where Sexually Oriented Materials are sold, bartered, distributed, leased or furnished and which meet any of the following criteria: 
1.  A business where Sexually Oriented Materials are provided for use, consumption, enjoyment or entertainment on the business premises. 
2.  A business that is a distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the description or display of Specified Sexual Activities. 
3.  A business that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the description or display of Specified Anatomical Areas. 
4.  An Adult Cabaret, as defined above. 
5.  A business providing Sexually Oriented Materials only for off-site use, consumption, enjoyment or entertainment if the portion of the business used for such purpose exceeds ten percent of the retail floor area of the business or 500 square feet, whichever is less, or such purpose comprises more than 20 percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation. 
6.  An establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of Specified Anatomical Areas. 
7.  A conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if the service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas. 
8.  A health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas. 
9.  A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to Specified Sexually Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas. 
10.  A massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas. 
11.  An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in Specified Sexual Activities or display Specified Anatomical Areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
12.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas. 
13.  A business which has a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation. 
14.  A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas. 
15.  A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas. 
16.  A business offering sado-masochistic, dungeon or "S&M" experiences meant to sexually arouse an individual. 
C.  "Sexually Oriented Materials" means visual, printed or aural materials, objects or devises that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of Specified Anatomical Areas or Specified Sexual Activities. 
D.  "Specified Anatomical Areas" means: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediate above the top of the areola; and 
2.  Human man genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
E.  "Specified Sexual Activities" means: 
1.  Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relationship; anilingus; buggery; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio; necrophilia; pederasty; pedophilia; piquerism; sapphism; or zooerastia. 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation. 
4.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. 
5.  Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, who are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged in the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or other physical restraint of any person. 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually orientated contact with an animal or human being. 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(A).04 - Location of Adult Establishments. 
Adult establishments may be located only as allowed in Section 801.35 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wayzata. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(A).05 - Operation of Adult Establishments. 
Both the owner of an Adult Establishment and the manager of the business shall be responsible for the conduct of their employees and for compliance with this Section. No owner or manager of an Adult Establishment shall employ a person under the age of 18. No owner, manager or employee of an Adult Establishment shall have been convicted of violating this Section three or more times within 24 months. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(A).06 - Restrictions and Regulations on Adult Establishments. 
An Adult Establishment is subject to the following restrictions and regulations: 
A.  No owner, manager or employee shall allow any Sexually-Oriented Materials or entertainment to be visible or perceivable in any manner, including aurally, at any time from outside the business. 
B.  No owner, manager or employee of an Adult Establishment shall have been convicted of a sex crime or other crimes, as identified in Minn. Stats.  609.293 through 609.352, 609.746 through 609.749, 609.79, 518B.01, or related statutes dealing with sexual assault, sexual conduct, harassment, obscenity or domestic abuse. 
C.  The business owner, manager or employee shall ensure that no person under the age of 18 enters the business. 
D.  No owner, manager, or employee shall allow any person under the age of 18 to have access to Sexually Oriented Materials, whether by sight, purchase, touch or any other means. 
E.  No owner, manager or employee shall sell or display for sale any Sexually-Oriented Materials, except in original unopened packages. 
F.  Each business shall display a sign on its main entrance door which reads: "This business sells sexually orientated materials or entertainment. Persons under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering." The sign shall be a minimum of two inches high. 
G.  No business may have a license under Part V of the City Code relating to liquor, beer and wine licensing, and no alcoholic beverages may be consumed in the business. 
H.  No business shall be open except between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(A).07 - Adult Cabarets Restrictions and Regulations. 
A.  Any Adult Cabaret operating in the City must comply with the following conditions: 
1.  An owner, operator or manager of an Adult Cabaret may not allow any dancer or other live entertainer to display Specified Anatomical Areas or to display or perform Specified Sexual Activities on the premises of the Adult Cabaret. 
2.  A dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron or any other person may not display Specified Anatomical Areas in an Adult Cabaret. 
3.  The owner, operator or manager of an Adult Cabaret must provide the following information to the City concerning any person who dances or performs live entertainment at the Adult Cabaret: The person's name, home address, home telephone number, date of birth, and any aliases. 
4.  A dancer or live entertainer, or performer may not be under 18 years of age. 
5.  Dancing or live entertainment must occur on a platform intended for that purpose and that is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
6.  A dancer or performer may not perform a dance or live entertainment closer than ten feet from a patron. 
7.  A dancer or performer may not fondle or caress any patron and no patron may fondle or caress any dancer or performer. 
8.  A patron may not pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer. 
9.  A dancer or performer may not solicit or accept any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(A).08 - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person violating a provision of this Chapter is subject to the penalties established in Chapter 104 of this Code. A fine or sentence imposed does not affect the right of the City to suspend or revoke the license of the licensee as the Council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
CHAPTER 717(B) - PREMISES CONDUCIVE TO HIGH-RISK SEXUAL CONDUCT 

717(B).01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to prescribe regulations governing commercial premises, buildings and structures that are conducive, by virtue of design and use, to high-risk sexual conduct which can result in the spread of sexually transmitted diseases to persons frequenting such premises, building and structures. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(B).02 - Findings. 
The City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to regulate commercial premises, buildings and structures that are conducive to the spread of communicable disease of danger to persons in order to further the substantial interest of public health: 
A.  The experience of other cities establishes that certain commercial premises, building and structures, or parts thereof, by reason of the design and use of such premises, buildings or structures are conducive to the spread of communicable disease of danger to persons frequenting such premises, buildings or structures, as well as the general public, and the risk of spreading infectious and contagious diseases can be minimized by regulating such commercial premises, buildings and structures. 
B.  The experience of other cities where such commercial premises, buildings and structures are present indicates that the risk of spreading the sexually transmittable disease of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is increased by the presence of such premises, buildings and structures, because of the design or use of such premises, buildings and structures, or parts thereof can facilitate high-risk sexual conduct. 
C.  Medical publications of the Center for Disease of the United States Department of Health and Human Services indicate that the risk factors for obtaining or spreading AIDS are associated with high-risk sexual conduct. 
D.  Certain commercial premises, buildings and structures, or parts thereof, by reason of their design and use, are conducive to high-risk sexual conduct and hence the spread of communicable diseases, and the risk of spreading infectious and contagious diseases can be minimized by regulating these commercial premises, buildings and structures. 
E.  The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the City adopting regulations governing commercial premises, buildings and structures conducive to high-risk sexual conduct. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(B).03 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms have the meanings given them: 
A.  "Booths, Stalls, or Partitioned Portions of a Room or Individual Room" means enclosures specifically offered to persons for a fee or as an incident to performing high-risk sexual conduct, or enclosures which are part of a business operated on the premises which offers movies or other entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure, including enclosures wherein movies or other entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but does not include enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed by the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, and which are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any persons other than employees. 
B.  "Doors, Curtains or Portal Partitions" means such full, complete, non-transparent closure devices through which one cannot see or view activity taking place within the enclosure. 
C.  "Hazardous Site" means any commercial premises, building or structure, or any part thereof, which is a site of high-risk sexual conduct, as defined herein. 
D.  "High-Risk Sexual Conduct" means: 
1.  Fellatio; 
2.  Cunnilingus; 
3.  Anal intercourse; or 
4.  Vaginal intercourse; 
with persons who engage in sexual acts in exchange for money. 
E.  "Open to an Adjacent Public Room so That the Areas Inside is Visible to Persons in the Adjacent Public Room" means either the absence of any entire "door, curtain or portal partition" or a door or other device which is made of clear, transparent materials such as glass, plexiglass or other similar materials meeting building code and safety standard, which permits the activity inside the enclosure to be entirely viewed or seen by persons outside the enclosure. 
F.  "Public Health Official" means an agent or employee of the City, county or state charged with the enforcement of the state or local health laws. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(B).04 - Use of Building, Structure, Premises or Facilities for High Risk Sexual Conduct. 
A.  A commercial building, structure, premises or part thereof, or facilities therein may not be constructed, used, designed or operated in the City for the purpose of engaging in, or permitting persons to engage in, sexual activities which include high-risk sexual conduct. 
B.  It is unlawful to own, operate, manage, rent, lease or exercise control of a commercial building, structure, premises or portion or part thereof in the City, that contains: 
1.  Partitions between subdivisions of a room portion or part of a building, structure or premises having an aperture which is designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity, including but not limited to vaginal intercourse and intercourse, or fellatio, between persons on either side of the partition. 
2.  "Booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual room" as defined herein which have "doors, curtains or portal partitions" as defined herein unless the booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual room have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room as defined herein. Booths, stalls or portioned portions of a room or individual room that are so open to an adjacent public room must be lighted in a manner that the persons in the area used for viewing motion picture or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting need not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the motion picture or other offered entertainment. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(B).05 - Exceptions. 
The regulations set forth in this Chapter do not apply to premises, buildings or structures that are lawfully operating or licenses as hotels, motels, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhomes or boarding houses which are subject to other general health and sanitation requirements under state and local law. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(B).06 - Health Enforcement Powers. 
In exercising powers conferred by this or any other Section of this Code relating to communicable disease, the Public Health Official is to be guided by the most recent instructions, opinions and guidelines of the Center for Disease Control in the United States Department of Health and Human Services that relate to the spread of infectious diseases. In order to ascertain the source of infection and reduce its spread, the Public Health Official, and persons under the Public Health Official's direction and control, may inspect or cause to be inspected, and to issue orders regarding any commercial building, structure or premises, or any part thereof, that may be a site of high-risk sexual conduct. If the Public Health Official determines that a hazardous site as defined herein exists, the Public Health Official will declare it to be a public health hazard and public health nuisance and will: 
A.  Notify the manager, owner or tenant of the hazardous site that the Public Health Official has reasonable belief that the premises, building or structure is a hazardous site as defined herein. 
B.  Issue two written warnings at least ten days apart to the manager, owner or tenant of the premises stating that specific reasons for the Public Health Official's opinion that the premises, building or structure is a hazardous site, as defined herein. 
C.  Once such notices and warnings have been issued, the Public Health Official must proceed as follows: 
1.  After the manager, owner or tenant of the premises has been notified in writing as to the basis of the Public Health Official's determination, the manager, owner or tenant will have ten days from the date of the last warning to request a hearing before the Public Health Official or the Public Health Official's appointee for the determination as to the existence of the hazardous site. If the manager, owner or tenant of the premises does not request a hearing within ten days of the date of the last warning notice, the Public Health Official will then cause the premises to be posted with a warning advising the public that the premises has been declared a hazardous site and the Public Health Official will cause orders to be issued to the manager, owner or tenant of the premises constituting the hazardous site to take specified corrective measures to prevent high-risk sexual conduct from taking place within the premises. 
2.  If the Manager, owner or tenant of the premises requests a public hearing, the hearing will be held before the Public Health Official or the Public Health Official's appointee at a date not more than 30 days after demand for a hearing. After considering all evidence, the Public Health Official or the Public Health Official's appointee will make a determination as to whether the premises constitute a hazardous site, as defined herein, and issue a decision based upon all hearing evidence presented. The Public Health Official will then issue orders to the manager, owner or tenant of the premises to take corrective measures to prevent high-risk sexual conduct from taking place within the premises and cause the premises to be posted with a warning advising the public that the premises have been declared a hazardous site. 
3.  If, within 30 days after issuance of the orders to the manager, owner or tenant of the hazardous site, the Public Health Official determines that such corrective measures have not been undertaken, the Public Health Official: 
a)  May order the abatement of the hazardous site as a public nuisance, which may be enforced by mandatory or prohibitory injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
b)  May secure a court order for the closure of the premises constituting the hazardous site until the premises, building or structure is in compliance with all provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(B).07 - Criminal Penalties. 
A person violating any provision of this Section or any person who removes, destroys or defaces warnings posted on premises by the Public Health Official pursuant to this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
717(B).08 - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person violating a provision of this Chapter is subject to the penalties established in City Code Chapter 104. A fine or sentence imposed does not affect the right of the City to suspend or revoke the license of the licensee as the Council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 638 [5-15-2002]) 
CHAPTER 718 - FIRE, BURGLARY AND SAFETY ALARM REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

718.01 - Purpose and Scope. 
This Chapter provides for regulation in the use of fire, burglary, and safety alarms, establishes users' fees and establishes a system of administration. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public safety services of the City from misuse of public safety alarms and to provide for the maximum possible service to public safety alarm users. 
(Ord. 551 [1-22-1992]) 
718.02 - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  "Public Safety Personnel." City employees or employees duly authorized to maintain and enforce public safety. 
B.  "Alarm User." The person in control of any building, structure, or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
C.  "Alarm System." Any alarm installation designed to be used for the prevention or detection of burglary, robbery or fire on the premises which contain an alarm installation. Automobile alarm devices shall not be considered an alarm system under this Chapter. 
D.  "False Alarm." An alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety personnel when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist, and which false alarm is caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the alarm system's owner or lessees or his employees or agents. False alarms do not include alarms caused by climatic conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or owner. 
(Ord. 551 [1-22-1992]) 
718.03 - User Fee. 
Once a public safety alarm system reports more than three false alarms to the City in a single calendar year and the alarm user has received timely notice of each violation, the alarm user shall be charged a user fee as fixed and determined by City resolution. 
Any alarm user required by the City to pay a user fee as the result of a false alarm may make a written appeal of the false alarm charge to the Chief of Police within ten days of notice from the City of the false alarm charge. Following review and determination by the Chief of Police such decision may be appealed to the City Manager who will have the authority to make a final determination as to whether the appellant is to be charged with a fee for a false alarm. 
(Ord. 551 [1-22-1992]) 
718.04 - Payment of Fees. 
Payment of user fees must be paid to the City within 30 days from the date of notice by the City to the alarm user. Failure to pay the fee within 30 days' notice will cause the alarm user to be considered delinquent and subject to a penalty of a full ten percent of the fee. 
All delinquent charges against the respective properties served may be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes in the following year. In addition, the City shall also have the right to bring a civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid fees. 
(Ord. 551 [1-22-1992]) 
718.05 - Alarm Report. 
When an alarm user has incurred five false alarms or more within one calendar year, the alarm user shall submit within ten days after being charged with the fifth false alarm, written verification to the Chief of Police that appropriate actions are being taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. It is unlawful for any person to fail to submit the written verification required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 551 [1-22-1992]) 
718.06 - Confidentiality. 
All information submitted in compliance with this Chapter shall be held in confidence and shall be deemed a confidential record exempt from discovery to the extent permitted by law. 
Subject to requirements of confidentiality, the Chief of Police may develop and maintain statistics for the purpose of ongoing alarm systems evaluation. 
(Ord. 551 [1-22-1992]) 
CHAPTER 719 - SKATEBOARDS 

719.01 - Skateboards. 
A.  No person shall ride a skateboard anywhere in the City without complying with the terms of this Chapter. A skateboard shall be defined as a wheeled, self-propelled device designed to transport a rider in a standing position, which device is not otherwise secured to a rider's feet or shoes. 
B.  Any person who participates or engages in the use of skateboards upon the streets and sidewalks which are not specified below as prohibited must observe the same rules of the road as required of bicycles pursuant to Minn. Stats.  169.22. The rules relating to pedestrians crossing streets shall apply to persons crossing a street on a skateboard. No person crossing a street on a skateboard shall travel too fast for safety under the conditions existing. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard upon Lake Street or upon any of the sidewalks adjacent to Lake Street from Superior Boulevard to Ferndale Road. It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard anywhere in the City in a manner that endangers or is likely to endanger any property or any person. 
D.  Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor punishable by up to a $100.00 fine. In addition, a person apprehended by a police officer violating this Chapter does by their use of the public streets and sidewalks consent to the impoundment of their skateboard used to commit the violation for a period of one day upon the first offense, three days upon the second offense, and 30 days upon any subsequent offense. After the first impoundment, the repeat offender will be charged $25.00 for the recovery of the skateboard. 
(Ord. 554 [7-1-1992]) 
CHAPTER 720 - NUISANCE 

720.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Abandoned Building." Abandoned building shall mean any manufactured home, building or portion of a building which has stood with an incomplete exterior shell for longer than three years or any building or portion thereof which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Unsecured; or 
2.  Boarded; or 
3.  Having multiple exterior Wayzata Property Maintenance Code or Building Code violations. 
B.  "Abatement Deadline." Abatement deadline shall mean the date before which the nuisance must be abated as specified in a written order. 
C.  "Dangerous Structure." Dangerous structure shall mean any structure which is potentially dangerous to persons or property including, but not limited to: 
1.  A structure which is in danger of partial or complete collapse; or 
2.  A structure which has any exterior parts such as chimneys, eaves, porches, siding, railings, or trim which are loose or in danger of falling; or 
3.  A structure which has any parts such as porches, stairs, ramps, rails, balconies, floors or roofs which are accessible and which are either collapsed, in danger of collapsing, or not able to carry their designed weight. 
D.  "Enforcement Officer." Enforcement Officer shall mean the City Manager or his/her designee. 
E.  "Extermination." Extermination shall mean the eradication of rodents and other vermin by any or all approved methods such as poisoning, fumigation or trapping. 
F.  "Hazardous Waste." Hazardous waste shall mean any waste material so defined by Minn. Stats.  116.06, Subd. 13 or described or listed as hazardous waste in Minn. Rules Chapter 7045, known as Minnesota Pollution Control and Hazardous Waste Division Hazardous Waste Rules. 
G.  "Interested Party." Interested party shall mean any owner of record, occupying tenant or lien holder of record. 
H.  "Last Known Address." Last known address shall mean the address shown on the records of the Hennepin County Department of Property Taxation or a more recent address known to the Enforcement Officer. In the case of parties not listed in these records, the last known address shall be that address obtained by the Officer after a reasonable search. 
I.  "Mail." Service by mail shall mean by depositing the item with the United States Postal Service addressed to the intended recipient at his or her last known address with first class postage prepaid thereon. 
J.  "Noxious Substances." Noxious substances shall mean substances, solid or fluid, which are offensive, detrimental to health, hurtful or dangerous. Noxious substances shall include but not be limited to any dead animal, or portion thereof, putrid carcass, decayed animal matter, green hides, or any putrid, spoiled, foul or stinking beef, pork, fish, offal, hides, skins, fat, grease, liquors, human or animal excrement or manure. 
K.  "Owner." Owner shall mean those shown to be owner or owners on the records of the Hennepin County Department of Property Taxation. 
L.  "Personal Service." Personal service shall mean service by personally handing a copy to the intended recipient or by leaving a copy at the intended recipient's residence or place of business with a person of suitable age and discretion. 
M.  "Privy." Privy shall be any type of non-flush fixture for the receipt and storage of human waste including fixed units with vaults as well as portable units. 
N.  "Property." Property shall mean any parcel of land whether vacant or not, whether any structure thereon is occupied or not, or whether submerged or not. 
O.  "Refuse." All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned, unlicensed, inoperable motor vehicles and recreational equipment and market and industrial solid waste. 
P.  "Responsible Party." A responsible party shall be any one or more of the following: 
1.  Agent; 
2.  Assignee or collector of rents; 
3.  Holder of a contract for deed; 
4.  A mortgagee or vendee in possession; 
5.  Receiver or executor or trustee; 
6.  Lessee; 
7.  Other person, firm, or corporation exercising apparent control over a property. 
Q.  "Unoccupied." An unoccupied building is a building which is not being used for a legal occupancy or a building which has been ordered vacated by the City. 
R.  "Unsecured." Unsecured shall mean open to entry by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders. 
S.  "Weeds." Weeds shall mean useless and troublesome plants commonly known as weeds including noxious weeds such as cocklebur, burdock, tumble mustard, wild mustard, wild oats, Canadian thistle, oxeye daisy, quack grass, Frenchweed and Russian thistle. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]; Ord. 684 [6-4-2008]) 
720.02 - Nuisance. 
A nuisance shall mean any act, substance, matter, emission or thing which creates a dangerous or unhealthy condition or which threatens the public peace, health, safety or sanitary condition of the City or which is offensive or has a blighting influence on the community and which is found upon, in, being discharged or flowing from any street, alley, highway, railroad right-of-way, vehicle, railroad car, water, excavation, building, erection, lot, grounds or other property located within the City of Wayzata. Nuisances shall include, but not be limited to those set forth in this Section. 
A.  Refuse, Noxious Substances, Hazardous Wastes. Refuse, noxious substances, hazardous wastes laying, pooled, accumulated, piled, left, deposited, buried or discharged upon, in, being discharged or flowing from any property, structure or vehicle; except for: 
1.  Refuse deposited at places designated and provided for that purpose by the Wayzata City Code; 
2.  Refuse stored in accordance with provisions of the Wayzata City Code or vehicle parts stored in an enclosed structure; 
3.  Compost piles established and maintained in accordance with the regulations of the Department of Inspections. 
B.  Weeds. Grass or weeds which have grown upon any property to a height of ten or more inches or which have gone or are about to go to seed. 
C.  Vermin Harborage. Conditions which in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer are conducive to the harborage or breeding of vermin including materials stored less than 12 inches off the ground. 
D.  Vermin Infestations. Infestations of vermin such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes, bats, grackles, starlings, pigeons, bees, wasps, cockroaches or flies. 
E.  Sanitary Structures. Structures for sanitation such as privies, vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks, cesspools, drain fields which have failed or do not function properly or which are overflowing, leaking or emanating odors. Septic tanks, cesspools or cisterns which are abandoned or no longer in use unless they are emptied and filled with clean fill. Any vault, cesspool or septic tank which does not meet the following criteria: 
1.  The bottom and sides are cemented to make impervious to water; 
2.  The bottom is at least six feet below grade; 
3.  Proper ventilation pipes and covers are provided; 
4.  It is located at least 20 feet from any house, residence, building or public street; 
5.  It is cleaned at least once a year; and 
6.  The property served is located such that connection to the public sewer is impractical. 
F.  Unsecured Unoccupied Buildings. Unoccupied buildings or unoccupied portions of buildings which are unsecure. 
G.  Hazards. Any thing or condition on the property which in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer may contribute to injury of any person present on the property. Hazards which shall include, but not be limited to dangerous structures, abandoned buildings, open holes, open foundations, open wells, dangerous trees or limbs, abandoned refrigerators or trapping devices. 
H.  Fire Hazards. Any thing or condition on the property which in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer creates a fire hazard or which is a violation of the Fire Code. 
I.  Health Hazards. Any thing or condition on the property which in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer creates a health hazard or which is a violation of any health or sanitation law. 
J.  Statute and Common Law Nuisances. Any thing or condition on property which is known to the common law of the land as a nuisance, or which is defined or declared to be a nuisance by the Statutes of Minnesota or the Wayzata City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.03 - Violations. 
A.  No person shall, directly or indirectly or by omission, create a nuisance. 
B.  No owner or responsible party shall allow a nuisance to remain upon or in any property or structure under his or her control. 
C.  No owner of any truck, trailer, railroad car or flat, or other vehicle shall leave the vehicle standing on or along any street, highway, freeway or railroad track or other property within the City of Wayzata carrying or containing any refuse, noxious substance or hazardous waste, except as otherwise permitted by the Wayzata Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.04 - Disclosure of Responsible Party. 
Upon the request of the Enforcement Officer or the City Clerk, a responsible party or owner shall disclose the name of any other responsible party or owner known to him/her. This shall include, but not be limited to the persons for whom he/she is acting, from whom he/she is leasing the property, to whom he/she is leasing the property, with whom he/she shares joint ownership, or with whom he/she has any conveyancing contract. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.05 - Inspection of Unoccupied Buildings. 
An owner or responsible party shall, upon the request of the Enforcement Officer, provide the Officer with access to all interior portions of an unoccupied building in order to permit the Officer to make a complete inspection. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.06 - Order to Cease. 
In the event that an Enforcement Officer observes a person creating a nuisance, the officer may, after presenting proper identification, order that the person cease creating a nuisance. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.07 - Enforcement Officer Authorized to Enter. 
The Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to enter any property or structure in the City for the purpose of enforcing and assuring compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.08 - Authority to Abate. 
A.  The City is authorized to abate nuisances in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 720.10, 720.11 and 720.12. All abatement costs incurred including administrative, legal and engineering fees shall be charged against the property as a special assessment to be assessed and collected in the manner provided in Minn. Stats.  429.101 or in any alternative manner provided elsewhere in Minnesota Statutes except that when a request is filed for a review of an emergency abatement the assessment hearing shall be replaced by the hearing provided for in Section 720.12. 
B.  Abatement may include, but shall not be limited to removal, cleaning, extermination, cutting, mowing, grading, covering or filling dangerous unfinished or abandoned excavations, sewer repairs, draining, securing, boarding unoccupied structures, barricading or fencing, removing dangerous portions of structures and demolition of dangerous structures or abandoned buildings. 
C.  Abatement costs shall include the cost of the abatement; the cost of investigation, such as title searches, inspection and testing; the cost of notification; filing costs; and administrative costs. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.09 - Service. 
When service of an order or notice is required, any one or more of the following methods of service shall be adequate: 
A.  By personal service; or 
B.  By mail, unless it is a written order which gives three days or less for the completion of any act it requires; or 
C.  If the appropriate party or address cannot be determined after reasonable effort, by posting a copy of the order in a conspicuous place on the property. 
If a mailed order or notice is returned by the United States Postal Service, a good faith effort shall be made to determine the correct address, unless the order or notice orders abatement and that abatement has been completed. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.10 - Abatement Procedure. 
Unless the nuisance is as described in Sections 720.11 or 720.12, the City may abate the nuisance by the procedure described below: 
A.  Order. The Enforcement Officer shall serve a written order upon the owner. The written order shall also be served upon any responsible party known to the Officer and may be served upon any party known to have caused the nuisance. 
The written order shall contain the following: 
1.  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
2.  A description and the location of the nuisance and the remedial action required to abate nuisance; 
3.  The abatement deadline, to be determined by the Enforcement Officer, allowing a reasonable time for the performance of any act required; 
4.  A statement that the order may be appealed and a hearing before the City Council obtained by filing a written request with the City Clerk before the appeal deadline which shall be the abatement deadline designated in the order or seven calendar days after the date of the order, whichever comes first; and 
5.  A statement that if the remedial action is not taken nor a request for a public hearing filed with the City Clerk within the time specified, the City will abate the nuisance and charge all costs incurred therein against the real estate as a special assessment to be collected in the same manner as property taxes. 
B.  Setting Hearing Date. In the event that an appeal is filed with the City Clerk, the City Council shall within two weeks fix a date for a public hearing. 
C.  Notice. The City Clerk shall mail a notice of the date, time, place and subject of the hearing to the owner and known responsible parties. The City Clerk shall also notify the Enforcement Officer. 
D.  Hearing. At the time of the public hearing, the City Council shall hear from the Enforcement Officer, and any other parties who wish to be heard. After the hearing, the City Council may confirm or modify the order of the Enforcement Officer. In either case, if the Council's determination requires abatement, the City Council shall, in the resolution, fix a time within which the nuisance must be abated and shall provide that if corrective action is not taken within the time specified, the City may abate the nuisance. The City Clerk shall mail a copy of this resolution to the same parties required to be notified in the "Notice" section of this part. 
E.  Abatement. If the remedial action is not taken nor an appeal filed within the time specified, the City may abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.11 - Substantial Abatement. 
When the Enforcement Officer determines that a nuisance exists on a property and the cost of abatement of the nuisance is estimated to exceed $2,000.00 or the abatement involves demolition or a building other than a structure accessory to a residential building or the abatement substantially diminishes the value of the property and except in the case of an emergency as provided for in Section 720.12, the City shall abate the nuisance by the procedure described below. A good faith estimate of the abatement costs, not the actual cost calculated after the abatement is completed, shall be the basis which determines whether this abatement procedure shall be used. 
A.  Orders. The Enforcement Officer shall serve a written order upon the owner, all interested parties and any responsible party known to the Officer. 
The order shall contain the following: 
1.  A description of the real estate which is sufficient for identification and which shall include the legal description; 
2.  The location of the nuisance on the property; 
3.  A description of the nuisance and the basis upon which it is declared to be a nuisance; 
4.  The remedial action required to abate the nuisance; 
5.  The abatement deadline, to be determined by the Enforcement Officer allowing a reasonable time for the completion of any act required; and 
6.  A statement that if the remedial action is not taken before the abatement deadline, the matter will be referred to the City Council who, after a public hearing, may order the City to abate the nuisance and charge all costs incurred against the real estate as a special assessment to be collected in the same manner as taxes. 
B.  Notice to Public. When an order requires, exclusively or as an option, the demolition of a building, the public shall be put on notice as follows: 
1.  A copy of the order shall be placed on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 
2.  The Enforcement Officer shall notify the City Council of each property subject to a demolition order as follows. The Enforcement Officer shall send to the City Council a list of the properties that have become subject to a demolition order. The list shall be in the form of a resolution declaring that an enforcement action has been commenced and that as a result of the nuisance status of a building on the property an order has been issued detailing the violations and requiring, exclusively or as an option, that the building be demolished and that a copy of this order is on file in the Office of the City Clerk. This resolution shall include the legal description of each property and shall authorize and direct the City Manager to file a copy of the resolution with the Hennepin County Recorder. 
C.  Setting a Hearing Date. If the remedial action is not taken within the time specified in the written order, the Enforcement Officer may notify the City Council that substantial abatement is necessary and appropriate. Upon being notified by the Enforcement Officer, the City Council shall, within two weeks, fix a date for an abatement hearing. 
D.  Notice. Written notice of the time, date, place and subject of the hearing shall be given as set forth in this subdivision. 
1.  The City Clerk shall immediately notify the Enforcement Officer. 
2.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner and all interested parties by personal service of the notice upon the owner or his/her duly authorized representative and upon each interested party or his/her duly authorized representative. If, after reasonable effort personal service cannot be made, either of the following methods of notice shall be considered adequate. 
a)  Confirmed mail service which is either certified mail with a signed receipt return or first class mail confirmed by written response. 
b)  Mailing the notice to the last known address and publishing the notice once a week for two weeks in the official city newspaper of general circulation in the City of Wayzata and posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the building or property. 
At least ten days prior to the hearing, the Enforcement Officer shall mail a notice to any responsible party known to the Enforcement Officer. 
E.  Hearing. At the time of the public hearing, the City Council shall hear from the Enforcement officer and any other parties who wish to be heard. After the hearing, the City Council shall adopt a resolution, describing what abatement action, if any, it deems appropriate. If the resolution calls for abatement action it may either order the City to take the abatement action or fix a time within which the nuisance must be abated and provide that if corrective action is not taken within the specified time, the City shall abate the nuisance. The City Clerk shall give copy of this resolution to the Enforcement Officer who shall mail copies to any of the parties required to be notified in the Notice section of this part for whom the Enforcement Officer has a current mailing. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.12 - Emergency Abatement Procedure. 
When the Enforcement Officer determines that a nuisance exists on a property and the nuisance constitutes an immediate danger or hazard which if not immediately abated will endanger the health or safety of the public and there does not exist sufficient time to follow the procedures of Section 720.10 or 720.11, the City may abate the nuisance by the procedure described below. 
A.  Order by City Manager. The City shall order emergency abatement by an administrative order to be signed by the City Manager or, in the case of unavailability of the City Manager, by the official authorized to act in the Manager's behalf as established by the chain of authority stated in the City Policy Manual. A good faith effort shall be made to inform the owner that the action is being taken. 
B.  Notice of the Abatement. Following an emergency abatement as soon as the costs incurred are known to the Enforcement Officer, he/she shall serve written notice upon the owner. The notice shall contain: 
1.  A description of the nuisance; 
2.  The action taken by the City; 
3.  The reasons for immediate action; 
4.  The costs incurred in abating the nuisance; and 
5.  A statement that the owner may request, by writing to the City Clerk within two working days of the date of the notice, a hearing at which the City Council shall review the actions taken by the Enforcement Officer. 
C.  Setting Hearing Date. In the event that the owner files a request for a review of the action, the City Clerk, the City Council shall within two weeks fix a date for a public hearing. 
D.  Notice. The City Clerk shall notify the Enforcement Officer and the owner of the date, time, place and subject of the hearing. 
E.  Hearing. At the time of the hearing, the City Council shall hear form the Enforcement Officer and any other parties who wish to be heard. After the hearing the City Council may adopt a resolution levying an assessment for all or a portion of the costs incurred by the Enforcement Officer in abating the nuisance. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the owner. A copy shall also be given to the Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.13 - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or fails to comply with a lawful written order issued pursuant to Section 720.10 or 720.11 or a lawful verbal order issued pursuant to Section 720.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
720.14 - Other Remedies. 
This Chapter shall not be construed to establish the exclusive penalties for maintaining public nuisances or the exclusive procedure for nuisance abatement. Any penalties or abatement procedures that are authorized elsewhere in Minnesota Statutes or in the Wayzata City Code shall be in addition to and not in limitation of the penalties and abatement procedures established by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 557 [10-28-1992]) 
CHAPTER 721 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 

721.00 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations for the use of recreational vehicles on public property in the city. This chapter is not intended to allow what the Minnesota state statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the state statutes allow. It is intended to provide for public safety and prevent public nuisance. 
721.01 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A  Operate means to ride in or on, and control the operation of a recreational vehicle. 
B.  Operator means every person who operates, or is in actual physical control of a recreational vehicle. 
C.  Public Property means property that may be used by the public, subject to reasonable regulation by a governmental body. Such property includes city streets, sidewalks, city parks, city parking lots and public school parking lots and grounds. 
D.  Recreational Vehicle means a Utility Task Vehicles (UTV), as defined by Minn. Stats.  169.045(1)(3), a Class 2 ATV as defined by Minn. Stats.  84.92(10), and motorized golf carts. 
721.02 - Operation Regulations for Recreational Vehicles. 
A.  Operation Permitted. 
1.  For a recreational vehicle to be used off of the recreational vehicle owner's property, the owner first must request and obtain a City of Wayzata recreational vehicle permit from the Wayzata police department. This permit must be displayed on the recreational vehicle. 
2.  Every person operating a recreational vehicle on the roadway has the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 169, except those provisions that cannot be reasonably applied. 
3.  No recreational vehicle may be operated at a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances, but in no event at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour. 
4.  Consistent with the limitations found in the remainder of this section, recreational vehicles may be operated on the extreme right hand side of the right-of-way of streets, roadways, or alleys that are used for other public motor vehicular travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the City. 
5.  Operators must possess a valid Minnesota Drivers License. 
6.  Every operator/owner of a recreational vehicle must be able to provide proof of insurance complying with Minn. Stats.  65B.48, subd 5. 
7.  Passenger Limits. A person may operate a UTV, a Class 2 ATV or golf cart while carrying up to the number of passengers for which they were designed. 
8.  Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at any time where there is insufficient light to clearly see persons in vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet. 
9.  UTVs and Class 2 ATVs may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset, unless equipped with original equipment headlights, tail lights, and rear-facing brake lights as defined in Section 721.02.D. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions or at any time when there is insufficient visibility to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet. 
B.  Recreational Vehicle Permit Required. 
1.  An application containing the following information must be completed prior to receiving a recreational vehicle permit. 
a)  Registered owner name, address and telephone number. 
b)  Make, model, vehicle identification number and DNR registration number of the UTV, if not exempt. 
c)  Proof of insurance for the recreational vehicle. 
d)  Prior to a recreational vehicle permit being issued, the Wayzata Police Department will inspect the recreational vehicle to ensure compliance with all requirements. 
2.  Requirements for recreational vehicle permit. Applicants must present proof of registration of the Class 2 ATV, if such registration is required by Minn. Stats.  84.922. Applicants must present proof of insurance from their insurance provider verifying that the applicant maintains liability insurance for the payment of tort liabilities arising out of the maintenance or use of the recreational vehicle in this state in accordance with the limits contained in Minn. Stats.  65B.49, Subd. 3(1), as the same may be amended from time to time. 
3.  Permits must be affixed to the lower center windshield area, or other location visible from the front center of the vehicle. 
4.  A granted permit will be valid for a period up to one year. 
5.  A permit may be revoked for a violation of any provision of this recreational vehicle ordinance. 
6.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from: 
a)  The operation of a recreational vehicle by a permit holder; 
b)  The grant of such permit; or 
c)  The failure by the city to revoke said permit. 
C.  Required Equipment for Golf Carts. 
1.  Slow moving vehicle emblem provided for in Minn. Stats.  169.522. 
2.  Rear view mirror. 
3.  Operable horn. 
4.  Seat belts for driver and passengers. 
5.  Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the golf cart under normal operating conditions. 
D.  Required Equipment for UTVs and Class 2 ATVs. 
1.  Operable horn. 
2.  Seat belts for driver and passengers. 
3.  A rear view mirror or left and right side view mirrors, located so as to reflect to the operator a view of the roadway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the vehicle. 
4.  Standard mufflers as required by Minn. R. 6102.0040, subpart 4, which are properly attached and in constant operation, and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe or similar device on a UTV or ATV motor. 
5.  Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the UTV or Class 2 ATV under normal operating conditions. 
6.  At least two clear headlamps and two red taillights. Such headlamps and taillights are to be lit at all times while operating Class 2 ATVs and UTVs. The headlamps must have sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. Such headlamps shall be aimed so that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming ATV or other motor vehicle operator. 
The taillights must have a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. 
7.  A throttle so designed that when pressure used to advance the throttle is removed, the engine will immediately and automatically return to idle. 
721.03 - Designated Roadways. 
A.  Recreational vehicles may only operate on the following city roadways: 
1.  Within a residential, single family detached, Planned Unit Development. 
2.  On a street where the speed limit is 30 MPH or less and only if the operation of the recreational vehicle is for commercial purpose or physical accessibility purpose. 
(Ord. 732 [11-29-2012]) 
3.  No United States, State of Minnesota, or county highway or road shall be a designated roadway. 
4.  Recreational vehicles may not be operated on any public property other than designated roadways. 
B.  Permitted operation of recreational vehicles to address physical accessibility needs of persons with a disability: 
1.  Persons with a "disability", as such term is defined under section 12101 of the Americans with Disabilities Act, who hold a recreational vehicle permit issued under this Chapter may operate a recreational vehicle on all city streets where the speed limit is under 30 MPH or less. 
(Ord. 732 [11-29-2012]) 
721.04 - City Operation. 
The city of Wayzata is permitted to operate city owned UTVs, Class 2 ATVs or similar motorized carts for the purposes of city maintenance or city business, on city streets as well as private property. These carts shall be equipped with flashing yellow warning lights to the front and rear and/or a yellow flashing light on top and a slow moving vehicle emblem to the rear. Only authorized city personnel with a valid Minnesota driver's license shall operate motorized carts. The city shall be exempt from the permit requirements contained in this ordinance. 
721.05 - Permit Fee. 
The permit fee for recreational vehicle uses under this section shall be set by council resolution and listed in the rates and fees. 
721.06 - Penalty. 
Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
721.07 - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by the City Council and publication. 
(Ord. 729 [07-12-2012]) 
PART VIII - BUILDING AND LAND USE REGULATIONS 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 801 - ZONING CODE 

801.01 - Cross-Reference to Zoning Ordinance. 
The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wayzata, Minnesota, adopted by the City Council on February 20, 1979, together with all amendments thereto, shall be the official zoning code for the City. The Zoning Ordinance has been included in this Code at Part IX, Zoning. At least one copy of said Ordinance shall be kept on file at all times in the City offices. Said Ordinance may be maintained separately or as an appendix to this Code, but in either case the provisions of said Ordinance shall be considered a part of this Code as completely as if set out in full herein. 
(Zoning Ordinance was Deleted and Replaced by Ord. 552 [1-8-1992]) 
CHAPTER 802 - BUILDING CODE 

802.01 - Codes Adopted by Reference. 
The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 326B, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this Chapter. The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this Chapter as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. 575 [5-9-1995]; Ord. 611 [3-11-1999]; Ord. 658A [2-8-2005]; Ord. 771 [4-27-2017]) 
802.02 - Application, Administration and Enforcement. 
The application, administration and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minn. Stat.  326B.121, Subd. 2(d), when so established by this subchapter. 
The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the Building Inspection Department. 
This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official designated by this Municipality to administer the code (Minn. Stat.  326B.133, Subdivision 1). 
(Ord. 575 [5-9-1995]; Ord. 658A [2-8-2005]; Ord. 771 [4-27-2017]) 
802.03 - Permits and Fees. 
The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minn. Rules Chapter 1300. 
Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the municipality by resolution. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with Minn. Stat.  326B.148. 
(Ord. 575 [5-9-1995]; Ord. 658A [2-8-2005]; Ord. 771 [4-27-2017]) 
802.04 - Violations and Penalties. 
A violation of the code is a misdemeanor (Minn. Stat.  326B.082, Subd. 16). 
(Ord. 575 [5-9-1995]; Ord. 658A [2-8-2005]; Ord. 771 [4-27-2017]) 
802.05 - Building Code Optional Chapters. 
The Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter 1300 allows the Municipality to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code. 
The following optional provisions identified in the most current edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the building code for this municipality: 
A.  Chapter 1306, Special Fire Protection Systems. 1306.0020 Municipal option, subpart 2, including 1306.0030 Requirements, A through D. 
(Ord. 575 [5-9-1995]; Ord. 611 [3-11-1999]; Ord. 658A [2-8-2005]; Ord. 771 [4-27-2017]) 
802.05 - Plumbing Permits-Repealed. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
802.06 - Heating Permits-Repealed. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
802.07 - Gas Fitting Permits-Repealed. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
802.08 - Additional Fees-Repealed. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 658A [2-8-2005]) 
802.09 - City Council Approved-Repealed. 
(Ord. 771 [4-27-2017]) 
802.10 - Performance Bond. 
In any case where screening, landscaping or other on-site improvements are required by City ordinance, are shown on an approved site plan, or are required as a condition of Building Permit approval, a performance bond or escrow in lieu of a bond may be required to guarantee the completion of said improvements. Said bond or escrow shall be in a form satisfactory to the City and shall be in an amount established by the City Manager. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 489 [12-15-1987]; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 575 [5-9-1995]; Ord. 611 [3-11-1999], Ord. 658A [2-8-2005]) 
CHAPTER 803 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

803.01 - Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code. 
The International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), First Edition 2006, published by the International Code Council, Inc. ("ICC"), is hereby adopted by reference for the City of Wayzata, as modified and amended in this Chapter. It shall be referred to as the Wayzata Property Maintenance Code. At least one copy of the IPMC shall be kept on file at all times in the City offices. The provisions of the IPMC as modified and amended in Section 803.02 shall be considered a part of this Chapter as completely as if set out in full herein. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 616 [5-27-1999]; Ord. 684 [6-4-2008]) 
803.02 - Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code. 
The IPMC adopted by reference in Section 803.01 is hereby amended in the following respects for application within the City of Wayzata: 
A.  Section 101.1. The name "City of Wayzata" is inserted in the brackets. 
B.  Section 102.3. In the first sentence, the terms: "International Building Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code and International Electrical Code" are deleted and replaced with Minnesota State Building Code." In the second sentence the term "International Zoning Code" is deleted and replaced with "Wayzata City Code." 
C.  Section 102.7. The entire section is revised to read as follows: "The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in the Minnesota State Building Code and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the Minnesota State Building Code, the more restrictive shall apply." 
D.  Section 103.5. The entire section entitled "Fees" is deleted. 
E.  Section 106. A new subsection 106.6 is added to read: "Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this code shall be penalized under the administrative citation process set forth in Chapter 105 of this code or shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be penalized as for a misdemeanor and subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as prescribed under state law. Each day of each violation constitutes a separate offense. The Code Official may post the premises by appropriate signs or notices prohibiting occupancy, and may act to cause the premises to be vacated or remain vacant until the Code violations are corrected." 
(1-1-09 Code; Ord. 702 [12-22-09]) 
F.  Section 201.3. The terms "International Building Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code and International Electrical Code" are deleted and replaced with "Minnesota State Building Code, Minnesota State Fire Code and the Wayzata City Code." 
G.  Section 302.4. The words appearing in the first parenthetical in the first sentence are deleted and the words "ten inches" are inserted therein. The final sentence of the section is deleted and inserted in its place is the following: Weed shall mean useless and troublesome plants commonly known as weeds including noxious weeds such as cocklebur, burdock, tumble mustard, wild mustard, wild oats, Canadian thistle, oxeye daisy, quack grass, French weed and Russian thistle. 
H.  Section 304.14. The date "May 1" replaces the word "DATE" in the first set of brackets and the date "October 1" replaces the word "DATE" in the second set of brackets. 
I.  Section 304.17. The entire section entitled "Guards for Basement Windows" is deleted. 
J.  Section 401.3. The term "International Building Code" is deleted and replace with the term "Minnesota State Building Code." 
K.  Section 403.1. The section is amended by adding the following exemption: "In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilation system may be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12 of the Uniform Building Code or provisions in effect at the time of construction. 
L.  Section 502.4. The entire section is deleted. 
M.  Section 502.4.1. The entire section is deleted. 
N.  Section 503.3. The entire section is deleted. 
O.  Section 505.1. The term "International Plumbing Code" is deleted and replace with the term "Minnesota State Plumbing Code." 
P.  Section 602.3. The date "October 1" replaces the word "DATE" in the first set of brackets and the date "May 1" replaces the word "DATE" in the second set of brackets. The paragraph labeled "Exceptions" is deleted in its entirety. 
Q.  Section 602.4. The date "October 1" replaces the word "DATE" in the first set of brackets and the date "May 1" replaces the word "DATE" in the second set of brackets. 
R.  Section 603.2. The exception is deleted in its entirety. 
S.  Section 604.2. The term "ICC Electrical Code" is deleted and the term "National Electrical Code" is inserted in its place. 
T.  Section 702.1. The term "International Fire Code" is deleted and the term "Minnesota State Fire Code" is inserted in its place. 
U.  Section 702.2. The term "International Fire Code" is deleted and the term "Minnesota State Fire Code" is inserted in its place. 
V.  Section 702.3. The term "International Building Code" is deleted and the term "Minnesota State Building Code" is inserted in its place. 
W.  Section 704.1. The term "International Fire Code" is deleted and the term "Minnesota State Fire Code" is inserted in its place. 
X.  Section 704.2. The term "International Fire Code" is deleted and the term "Minnesota State Fire Code" is inserted in its place. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 616 [5-27-1999]; Ord. 684 [6-4-2008]) 
CHAPTER 804 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

804.01 - Code Adoption by Reference. 
That document known as the Minnesota State Fire Code is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Wayzata, in the State of Minnesota, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City of Wayzata are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Chapter. The 2000 edition of the International Fire Code as promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., is incorporated by reference and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
804.02 - Establishment and Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
A.  The Minnesota State Fire Code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the City which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. 
B.  The Fire Marshal in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by the Wayzata Fire Chief on the basis of examination to determine his or her qualifications. 
C.  The Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the City Manager the employment of technical inspectors who, when the authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the Fire Department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
804.03 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of the Minnesota State Fire Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
A.  "Fire Marshal" means the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
B.  "Jurisdiction" means the City of Wayzata. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
804.04 - Appeals. 
Whenever the Chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief to the Fire Marshal for the State of Minnesota within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
804.05 - Geographic Boundary. 
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2000 International Fire Code are the legal jurisdictional boundary of the City of Wayzata. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
804.06 - Repeal of Existing Ordinance. 
Ordinance No. 612 of the City of Wayzata entitled Fire Prevention Code and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
804.07 - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
804.08 - Local Governmental Rules. 
Pursuant to Chapter 101.6 of the Minnesota State Fire Code, the following rules are adopted regulating open burning: 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish permitted categories of open burn events within the city and provide for a permitting process for open burning, except when the open burning is defined as a "camp or recreation fire" as prescribed in this chapter. 
B.  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
1.  "Open Fire" or "Open Burning" means a fire burning in matter, whether concentrated or dispersed, which is not contained within a fully enclosed fire box, structure or vehicle, and from which the products of combustion are emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct, or chimney. 
2.  "Recreation Fire" means a fire set for cooking, warming, or ceremonial purposes, which is not more than three feet in diameter by three feet high, and has had the ground five feet from the base of the fire cleared of all combustible material. 
3.  "Starter Fuel" means dry, untreated, unpainted wood or charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candies and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open fire. 
4.  "Wood" means dry clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, "presto logs," charcoal, cordwood or untreated dimensional lumber. "Wood" does not include wood that is green, with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreation fires when cut into three-foot lengths. 
C.  Prohibited Materials. 
1.  No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of oils, petro fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood, composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring paint or paint fillers. 
2.  No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous waste or salvage operations, or open burning of solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or institutional structures. No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food. 
D.  Permit Required for Open Burning. 
1.  No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the City without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not required for any fire which is a camp or recreation fire as defined herein. 
2.  Fire training and permanent burn site permits can only be issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Forest Officers. 
3.  It is not the City's intent to promote open burning. Before a permit is issued, alternative methods such as composting and recycling must always be given consideration in cooperation with solid waste management programs. 
a)  Disposal of vegetative matter or managing forest, prairie or wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are not practical. 
b)  Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected nursery stock, diseased bee hives, and approved agricultural practices. 
c)  Ground thawing for utility repair and construction. 
d)  Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes where recycling, reuse, removal or other alternative disposal methods are not practical. 
e)  No fire may be allowed to smolder. 
E.  Permit Application; Fees. 
1.  Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the City. The permit application shall be presented to the City Fire Chief, or his or her designee, to review and process the application. 
2.  An open burning permit shall require a non-refundable application fee. In the event the open burning permit application is approved, the permit fee shall be volume based. Application and permit fees shall be set by City Council resolution. The fees established by City Council resolution shall continue to be the required fee until amended by resolution. 
F.  Permit Process. Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit fee, the Fire Chief or his or her designee shall schedule a preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, draft a fire event safety plan, and note special conditions. The materials to be burned may then be piled for burning, at which time a second inspection shall be scheduled to assess volume of material and associated fees, set dates and times of permitted burn and review fire safety considerations. On the day of burning, the permit holder shall notify the City Fire Department of the proposed burn. 
G.  Permit Holder Responsibility. 
1.  Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his/her competent representative. The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder or his/her representative leaves the site. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this section, available for inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department or DNR Forest/Conservation Officer. 
2.  The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of all general conditions, special conditions and the burn event safety plan as established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn including, but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees. 
H.  Revocation of Permit. The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of the City Fire Chief or his or her designee, or a DNR Forest/Conservation Officer. Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to, a fire hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame present. 
I.  Denial of Permit. If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not met or during review of the application, it is determined that a practical alternative method of disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, then the Fire Chief or his or her designee may deny the open burning permit application. 
J.  Burning Ban or Air Quality Alert. No camp or recreation fire or open burn will be permitted when the City or DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or when the MPCA has declared an air quality alert. 
K.  Fires or Barbecues on Balconies or Patios. The City hereby adopts Appendix K of the Minnesota State Fire Code in its entirety, which states as follows: 
1.  Open Flame Prohibited. In any structure containing three or more dwelling units, no person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of a structure. 
2.  Fuel Storage Prohibited. No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch, or other similar heating or lighting chemical or device in the locations designated in Section 804.08.K.1. 
    Exception: Listed electric or gas-fired barbecue grills that are permanently mounted and wired or plumbed to the building's gas supply or electrical system and that maintain a minimum clearance of 18 inches on all sides, unless listed for lesser clearances, may be installed on balconies and patios when approved by the chief. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]; Ord. 786 [11-29-2018]) 
804.09 - Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code as adopted and amended herein or fail to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Fire Marshal for the State of Minnesota or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the required time, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished according to '10.99. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibit conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
C.  Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties therefor established by State statute. 
(Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 568 [11-24-1993]; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 612 [3-11-1999]; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 657 [2-1-2005]) 
CHAPTER 805 - SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 

805.01 - Cross-Reference to Subdivision Ordinance. 
The Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Wayzata, Minnesota, together with all amendments thereto, shall be the official Subdivision Ordinance for the City. The Subdivision Ordinance has been included in this Code at Part X, Subdivisions. At least one copy of said Ordinance shall be kept on file at all times in the City offices. Said Ordinance may be maintained separately or as an appendix to this Code, but in either case the provisions of said Ordinance shall be considered a part of this Code as completely as if set out in full herein. 
CHAPTER 806 - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT 

806.01 - Statutory Authorization. 
The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minn. Stats. Ch. 103F and Minn. Stats. Ch. 462 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.02 - Findings of Fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of Wayzata, Minnesota, are subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  This Chapter is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 
C.  This Chapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.03 - Statement of Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 806.02.A. by provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.04 - Lands to Which Chapter Applies. 
This Chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Wayzata shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Flood Plain Districts. 
806.05 - Establishment of Official Zoning Map. 
The Official Zoning Map together with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. The attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study, Volume 1 of 2 and Volume 2 of 2, Hennepin County, Minnesota, All Jurisdictions and the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels numbered 27053C0306E, 27053C0307E, 27053C0308E, 27053C0309E, 27053C0326E, and 27053C0328E for the City of Wayzata, dated September 2, 2004, as developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the office of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.06 - Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. 
The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.07 - Interpretation. 
A.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
B.  The boundaries of zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the Community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance, and other available technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit technical evidence. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.08 - Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. 
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, provisions of this Chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.09 - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. 
This Chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Wayzata or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.10 - Severability. 
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.11 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this Chapter its most reasonable application: 
A.  "Accessory Use or Structure" means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
B.  "Basement" means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. 
C.  "Conditional Use" means a specific type of structure or land use listed in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that: 
1.  Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist. 
2.  The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood. 
D.  "Equal Degree of Encroachment" means a method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. 
E.  "Flood" means a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas. 
F.  "Flood Frequency" means the frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded. 
G.  "Flood Fringe" means that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Wayzata. 
H.  "Flood Plain" means the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. 
I.  "Flood Proofing" means a combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
J.  "Floodway" means the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge. 
K.  "Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor. 
L.  "Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle." 
M.  "Obstruction" means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water. 
N.  "Principal Use or Structure" means all uses or structures that are not accessory uses or structures. 
O.  "Reach" means a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach. 
P.  "Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this Chapter, the term recreational vehicle shall be synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle. 
Q.  "Regional Flood" means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in the Flood Insurance Study. 
R.  "Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation" means the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway. 
S.  "Structure" means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Section 806.31.C.1 of this Chapter and other similar items. 
T.  "Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
U.  "Substantial Improvement" means within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure." For the purpose of this Chapter, "historic structure" shall be as defined in CFR part 59.1. 
V.  "Variance" means a modification of a specific permitted development standard required in an official control including this Chapter to allow an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a community's respective planning and zoning enabling legislation. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.12 - Establishment of Zoning Districts. 
A.  Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section 806.05. 
B.  Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas designated as floodway fringe. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as adopted in Section 806.05 as being within Zone AE, Zone A0, or Zone AH but being located outside of the floodway. 
C.  General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain District shall include those areas designated as Zone A or Zones AE, Zone A0, or Zone AH without a floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section 806.05. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.13 - Compliance. 
No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Flood Plain Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in Sections 806.14-806.17 and 806.18-806.22, and 806.23-806.24 that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that: 
A.  New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this Chapter and specifically Section 806.31. 
B.  Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this Chapter and specifically Section 806.36. 
C.  As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of this Chapter and specifically as stated in Sections 806.31-806.35 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.14 - Floodway District (FW). 
Permitted Uses. 
A.  General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
B.  Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
C.  Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas and single or multiple purpose recreational trails. 
D.  Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.15 - Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses. 
A.  The use shall have a low flood damage potential. 
B.  The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists. 
C.  The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or equipment. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.16 - Conditional Uses. 
A.  Structures accessory to the uses listed in Section 806.14 above and the uses listed in Sections 806.16.B-806.16.H below: 
B.  Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials. 
C.  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control structures. 
D.  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines. 
E.  Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials. 
F.  Placement of fill or construction of fences. 
G.  Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of Section 806.31.C of this Chapter. 
H.  Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.17 - Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses. 
A.  All Uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected. 
B.  All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and standards contained in Section 806.35 of this Chapter. 
C.  The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists. 
D.  Fill. 
1.  Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. 
2.  Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan. 
3.  As an alternative, and consistent with Subsection 2 immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the Governing Body has received an appropriate plan which ensures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the Office of the County Recorder. 
E.  Accessory Structures. 
1.  Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation. 
2.  Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters: 
a)  Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and 
b)  So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures. 
3.  Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed accessory structures must meet the following additional standards: 
a)  The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; 
b)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly flood proofed; and 
c)  To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings. 
F.  Storage of Materials and Equipment. 
1.  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
2.  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Governing Body. 
G.  Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 103G. Community-wide structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway. 
H.  A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.18 - Flood Fringe District (FF). 
Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s). If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential or non-residential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe District provided such use does not constitute a public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe District "Permitted Uses" listed in Section 806.19 and the "Standards for all Flood Fringe Uses" listed in Section 806.22. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.19 - Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses. 
A.  All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon. 
B.  As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its largest projection may be internally flood proofed in accordance with Section 806.17.E.3. 
C.  The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with Section 806.19.A of this Chapter. 
D.  The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
E.  The provisions of Section 806.22 of this Chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.20 - Conditional Uses. 
Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in accordance with Section 806.19.A or B and/or any use of land that does not comply with the standards in Section 806.19.C or D shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in Sections 806.21, 806.22 and 806.35 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.21 - Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses. 
A.  Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: 
1.  The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 
2.  It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and 
3.  It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional standards: 
a)  Design and Certification. The structure's design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding. 
b)  Specific Standards for Above-Grade, Enclosed Areas. Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate: 
1)  A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention; and 
2)  That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage. 
B.  Basements, as defined by Section 806.11.B of this Chapter, shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
2.  Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with Section 806.21.C of this Chapter. 
C.  All areas of non-residential structures including basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be flood proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted. 
D.  When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the Governing Body. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists. 
E.  Storage of Materials and Equipment: 
1.  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
2.  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Governing Body. 
F.  The provisions of Section 806.22 of this Chapter shall also apply. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.22 - Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses. 
A.  All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist. 
B.  Commercial Uses means accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four upon occurrence of the regional flood. 
C.  Manufacturing and Industrial Uses means measures shall be taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in Section 806.22.B above. In considering permit applications, due consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be located in flood plain areas. 
D.  Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation; FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. 
E.  Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been specified on the Official Zoning Map. 
F.  Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in Section 806.31.C. 
G.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.23 - General Flood Plain District. 
Permissible Uses. 
A.  The uses listed in Section 806.14 of this Chapter shall be permitted uses. 
B.  All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria pursuant to Section 806.24 below. Sections 806.14-806.17 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway District and Sections 806.18-806.22 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe District. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.24 - Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determination within the General Flood Plain District. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District: 
1.  A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water information. 
2.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground, pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location, and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and the location and elevations of streets. 
3.  Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and downstream, and soil types. 
4.  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed development. 
B.  The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations 1983, Parts 6120.5000-6120.6200 and 44 CFR part 65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall: 
1.  Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood. 
2.  Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas. 
3.  Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries. 
C.  The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and findings of the designated engineer or expert to the Governing Body. The Governing Body must formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the permit application. The Governing Body, prior to official action, may submit the application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning Commission for review and comment. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District Boundaries have been determined, the Governing Body shall refer the matter back to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of Sections 806.14-806.17 and 806.18-806.22 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.25 - Subdivisions Review Criteria. 
No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the flood plain districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this Chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
This Section is not intended as a substitute for a comprehensive city or county subdivision ordinance. It can, however, be used as an interim control until the comprehensive subdivision ordinance can be amended to include necessary flood plain management provisions. 
806.26 - Floodway/Flood Fringe Determinations in the General Flood Plain District. 
In the General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide the information required in Section 806.24 of this Chapter to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.27 - Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation: 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.28 - Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges. 
All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.29 - Public Transportation Facilities: 
Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the flood plain shall comply with Sections 806.14-806.17 and 806.18-806.22 of this Chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.30 - On-Site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems. 
Where public utilities are not provided: 
A.  On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
B.  New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the State's current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this Section. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.31 - Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement of Recreational Vehicles. 
A.  New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by Sections 806.25-806.26 of this Chapter. 
B.  The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance with Sections 806.18-806.22 of this Chapter. If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with Sections 806.18-806.22, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the Governing Body. 
1.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
C.  Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in Section 806.31.C.1 below shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter and as specifically spelled out in Sections 806.31.D-806.31.E below. 
1.  Exemption-Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in Section 806.31.C.2 below and further they meet the following criteria: 
a)  Have current licenses required for highway use. 
b)  Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it. 
c)  The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district. 
2.  Areas Exempted for Placement of Recreational Vehicles: 
a)  Individual lots or parcels of record. 
b)  Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds. 
c)  Existing condominium type associations. 
D.  Recreational vehicles exempted in Section 806.31.C.1 lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500.00 for a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500.00 for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in Sections 806.14-806.17 and 806.18-806.22 of this Chapter. There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur. 
E.  New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said recreational vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with Section 806.22.A of this Chapter. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this Section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood. 
2.  All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria of A above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of Section 806.35 of this Chapter. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate tie and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of Section 806.31.C.1.a) and 806.31.C.1.b) of this Chapter will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with Section 806.30 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.32 - Zoning Administrator. 
A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the Governing Body shall administer and enforce this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this Chapter the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures stated in Section 806.37 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.33 - Permit Requirements. 
A.  Permit Required. A Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter shall be secured prior to the erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment. 
B.  Application for Permit. Application for a permit shall be made in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel. 
C.  State and Federal Permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits. 
D.  Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or Nonconforming Use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Chapter. 
E.  Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits, Variances and Certificates of Zoning Compliance. Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and punishable by Section 806.37 of this Chapter. 
F.  Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Flood proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect. 
G.  Record of First Floor Elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the flood plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are flood proofed. 
H.  Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. The Zoning Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minn. Stats. Ch. 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
I.  Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease the 100-Year Flood Elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.34 - Board of Adjustment. 
A.  Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such Boards by State law. 
B.  Administrative Review. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter. 
C.  Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this Chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of such variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this Chapter, any other zoning regulations in the Community, and in the respective enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower that those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied: 
1.  Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued by a community upon: 
a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
D.  Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board of Adjustment shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days' notice of the hearing. 
E.  Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall arrive at a decision on such appeal or variance within 30 days. In passing upon an appeal, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other public official. It shall make its decision in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those specified in Section 806.35.F, which are in conformity with the purposes of this Chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter punishable under Section 806.37. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of such action. 
F.  Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Adjustment may be made, and as specified in this community's official controls and also by Minnesota Statutes. 
G.  Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.35 - Conditional Uses. 
The City Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses permissible under this Chapter. Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, who shall forward the application to the Planning Commission for consideration. 
A.  Hearings. Upon filing with the City of Wayzata an application for a conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days' notice of the hearing. 
B.  Decisions. The City Council shall arrive at a decision on a conditional use within 60 days. In granting a conditional use permit the City Council shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those specified in Section 806.35.F, which are in conformity with the purposes of this Chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter punishable under Section 806.37. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of such action. 
C.  Procedures to Be Followed by the City Council in Passing on Conditional Use Permit Applications Within all Flood Plain Districts. 
1.  Require the applicant to furnish such of the following information and additional information as deemed necessary by the City Council for determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use: 
a)  Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel; and 
b)  Specifications for building construction and materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
2.  Transmit one copy of the information described in subsection C.1 of this section to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters. 
3.  Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or expert, the City of Wayzata shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard. 
D.  Factors Upon Which the Decision of the City of Wayzata Shall Be Based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the City Council shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this Chapter, and: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 
2.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other hydraulic structures. 
3.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 
4.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
5.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
6.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
7.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
8.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
9.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for the area. 
10.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
11.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
12.  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this Chapter. 
E.  Time for Acting on Application. The City Council shall act on an application in the manner described above within 60 days from receiving the application, except that where additional information is required pursuant to Section 806.35.D of this Chapter. The City Council shall render a written decision within 30 days from the receipt of such additional information. 
F.  Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this Chapter, the City Council shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities. 
2.  Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation. 
3.  Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions. 
4.  Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures. 
5.  Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and this Chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.36 - Continuation of a Nonconforming Use. 
A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this Chapter but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in Section 806.11.U.2 of this Chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 806.36.A-806.36.E of this Chapter. 
A.  No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
B.  Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulator Flood Protection Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 flood proofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in 806.11.1.C and 806.36.F below. 
C.  The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed since the adoption of the Community's initial flood plain controls must be calculated into today's current cost which will include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of Sections 806.14-806.17 and 806.18-806.22 of this Chapter for new structures depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. 
D.  If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this Chapter. The Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period of 12 months. 
E.  If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in Section 806.11.T of this Chapter, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in Sections 806.14-806.17 and 806.18-806.22, or 806.23-806.24 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Flood Plain District, respectively. 
F.  If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Section 806.11.U of this Chapter, from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building, then the building addition (as required by Section 806.36.B above) and the existing nonconforming building must meet the requirements of Sections 806.14-806.17 and 806.18-806.22 of this Chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.37 - Penalties for Violation. 
A.  Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. 
B.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Wayzata from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  In responding to a suspected Chapter violation, the Zoning Administrator and Local Government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The Community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct Code violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
2.  When a Code violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources' and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with the Community's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible. 
3.  The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the requirements of this Chapter and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the Community. If the construction or development is already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either: 
a)  Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official controls; or 
b)  Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
4.  If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this Chapter and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
806.38 - Amendments. 
The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use. 
All amendments to this Chapter, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map, must be submitted to and must be approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA's) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days' written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this Chapter and said notice shall include a draft of the Chapter amendment or technical study under consideration. 
(Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
(7-21-81 Code; Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 652 [9-2-2004]) 
CHAPTER 807 - REPEALED 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 515 [8-2-1988], and superseded by Chapter 408) 
CHAPTER 808 - CITY DEVELOPMENT 

808.01 - Address Numbers Required. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of each residential, institutional or commercial building within the City to place address numbers on the front of each such building, in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
808.02 - Standards for Numbers. 
Address numbers for all one- and two-family residences shall be at least three inches in height, shall be constructed of durable materials, and shall be of contrasting color to the base to which they are attached. Address numbers and other identification for all multiple-family dwellings, townhouse complexes, institutional buildings and commercial buildings also shall conform with these standards, except that the Building Inspector may require numerals exceeding three inches in height. 
808.03 - Location of Numbers. 
Address numbers and other identification shall be placed so as to be directly and conveniently visible from public access to the building, in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  In the case of one- and two-family residences the numbers shall be attached to the building at the front entrance or at such other location(s) as is approved or required by the Building Inspector. 
B.  In the case of multiple-family dwellings and townhouse complexes the numbers shall be attached to the building(s) at the main entrance nearest the adjoining driveway, public or private street and at such other location(s) as is approved or required by the Building Inspector. In the case of such dwellings or complexes which may be assigned a common address, the numbers shall be displayed at the main entrance(s) to the dwelling or complex in a manner approved or required by the Building Inspector. 
C.  In the case of individual, detached institutional and commercial buildings the numbers shall be attached to the building at the front entrance or at such other location(s) as is approved or required by the Building Inspector. 
D.  In the case of attached commercial establishments clustered in a complex or in a multi-tenant building the numbers shall be attached to the building(s) at the main entrance(s) nearest the adjoining driveway public or private street and at such other location(s) as is approved or required by the Building Inspector. In the case of such complexes which may be assigned a common address, the numbers shall be displayed at the main entrance(s) to the complex in a manner approved or required by the Building Inspector. 
E.  Individual dwelling units in multiple-family dwellings and individual tenant areas in multi-tenant commercial buildings which have entrances not facing upon an adjoining driveway, public or private street shall have address numbers placed at the entrance to each such dwelling unit or tenant area. In the case of multi-story buildings said numbers shall be sequential, corresponding with the respective floor or level of the dwelling unit or tenant area. 
808.04 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the City Building Inspector to enforce the requirements of this Chapter. The owner or occupant of any residential, institutional or commercial building within the City which does not comply with said requirements shall be given, in writing, 180 days within which to comply. In addition, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any new or remodeled building until it complies with said requirements. 
808.05 - Assignment of Numbers. 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to assign address numbers to all residential, institutional or commercial buildings within the City which do not have such numbers, in accordance with the plan and system on file and of record with the City. Whenever any new residence or building is to be erected, said number shall be assigned at the time a Building Permit is issued therefor. 
CHAPTER 809 - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 

809.01 - Underground Installation Required in New Developments. 
All electric and telephone lines, excluding high-voltage electric transmission lines, and all other communication circuits and services as defined in the National Electric Code shall be placed underground when installed in the following areas or when installed to the following types of customers: 
A.  In all new residential subdivisions or plats containing six or more dwelling units; 
B.  To all new multiple-dwellings of four or more family units; and 
C.  To all new commercial buildings. 
809.02 - Underground Installation in Existing Developments. 
The City Council may by Resolution designate any area of the City as an Underground Utility District, and within such a District all lines and circuits outlined in Section 809.01 shall be required thereby to be placed underground within a period of time set by the Council. The cost of such underground installation may be assessed by the City against benefitting properties as a Public Improvement, following a public hearing and in full accordance with Chapter 206 of this Code. The cost to the City of said installation shall reflect existing regulations and procedures of the Federal Power Commission and the Federal Communications Commission, but unless specified to the contrary in such regulations and procedures the following costs shall not be chargeable to the City: 
A.  The depreciated value of existing facilities; 
B.  The salvage value of facilities which are removed; and 
C.  Improvements in the capacity of new facilities which exceed the capacity of original facilities. 
If underground installation in such a district is not to be assessed, the City may provide for such installation by direct agreement with the applicable utility companies. 
809.03 - Administration. 
The owner(s) of the types of developments or buildings listed above in Section 809.01 shall submit to the City written instruments from the applicable utility companies showing that necessary arrangements have been made to comply with that Section. If any new lines are to be placed underground in public rights-of-way, such installation shall have been approved by the City Engineer. 
809.04 - Exceptions. 
The City Council may provide for exceptions from the requirements of this Chapter when in their opinion the underground installation of utilities is unreasonable or impractical. 
CHAPTER 810 - SWIMMING POOLS 

810.01 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this Chapter, the words and terms defined in Section 604.01 of this Code shall have the meanings given them therein. 
B.  "Pool Deck" shall mean the finished area around a swimming pool. 
C.  "Pool Depth" shall mean the distance between the floor of a swimming pool and its maximum operating level when the pool is in use. 
810.02 - Permit Required. 
No person shall construct, repair, enlarge, alter, change, remodel or otherwise improve a swimming pool within the City without first having been issued a permit therefor, when said pool has a capacity of over 3,000 gallons of water or has a pool depth of over 31/2 feet of water. A separate Building Permit for said pool also may be required in accordance with Chapter 802. 
810.03 - Permit Fee. 
The fee which shall be charged for a permit issued under this Chapter shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 449 [1-7-1986]) 
810.04 - Application Procedures. 
Each application for a permit under this Chapter shall be submitted to the Building Inspector on forms provided by the City. Each such application shall include a site plan drawn to scale showing: the type and size of pool; its location; the location of house(s), garage(s), fencing, trees and other improvements on the lot; the location of structures on all adjacent lots; the location of the filter unit, heating unit and pump, and information indicating their types; the location of back-flush and drainage outlets; a grading plan; finished elevations and final treatment around the pool (e.g., decking and landscaping); and the location of existing overhead and underground wiring, utility easements and similar features. 
810.05 - Permit Restrictions-All Pools. 
Every permit issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the following provisions, which shall govern the issuance and continued validity of all such permits: 
A.  Pools shall not be located within 20 feet of any septic tank or drainfield. No portion of a swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be located less than ten feet from any side or rear property line nor in front of any building line. 
B.  No filter unit, pump, heating unit, or other noise-making mechanical equipment shall be located less than 50 feet from any adjacent or nearby residential structure or less than ten feet from any lot line. 
C.  Any proposed deviation from subsection A or B above shall require a variance in accordance with the City Zoning Code. 
D.  Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines or underground utility lines of any type nor within 15 feet of any such lines, except that with the approval of the Building Inspector underground utility lines for pool lighting and pool accessories may be permitted. 
E.  Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility, walkway, drainage or other easement. 
F.  In the case of underground pools, necessary precautions shall be taken during construction to avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby property and to ensure that proper care will be taken in stockpiling excavated material to avoid erosion, dust or other infringements upon adjacent property. 
G.  All access for construction shall be over the owner's land, and due care relative thereto shall be taken to avoid damage to public streets and adjacent private or public property. 
H.  To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool drainage shall be directed onto the owner's property or into approved public drainageways. Water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private property or into the sanitary sewer system. The drainage of pools into public streets or public drainageway requires the written permission of all appropriate public officials. 
I.  All lighting shall be directed toward the pool and away from adjacent property. 
J.  A structure or safety fence of a non-climbable type at least five feet in height shall completely enclose the pool. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates having self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate or otherwise having been made inaccessible to small children. The openings between the bottom of a fence and the ground or other surface shall not be more than four inches. All structures or safety fencing shall be completely installed within three weeks following the installation of the pool and before any water is placed in the pool. 
K.  All wiring, installation of heating units, grading, installation of piping and all other installation and construction shall be subject to inspection by the City. 
L.  All piping systems shall be constructed of materials in compliance with the City Plumbing Code. A separate Plumbing Permit for said piping may be required under said Code. 
810.06 - Permit Restrictions-Public Pools. 
In addition to the requirements of Section 810.05, all public swimming pools shall conform with the following provisions: 
A.  No part of the water surface of any such pool shall be less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
B.  All deck areas, adjacent patios and similar areas used in conjunction with the pool shall be located no less than 30 feet from any lot line adjacent to a single-family residential district. 
C.  The pool area shall be screened on all sides adjacent to residentially used or residentially-zoned property. Screening shall consist of screen plantings which within three years of installation will provide 60 percent or greater opacity and be at least four feet in height. 
D.  All such pools shall be constructed and operated in conformance with standards for such installations promulgated under Minnesota State Board of Health Regulation No. 10874. Prior to the beginning of any construction for which a permit has been issued under this Chapter, one set of plans showing compliance with said Regulation shall be filed with the Building Inspector. 
CHAPTER 811 - SIGN REGULATIONS-REPEALED 

811.01 - Purpose. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.02 - Definitions. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 450 [3-20-1986]; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.03 - Permit Required. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.04 - Permit Fees. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 450 [3-20-1986]; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.05 - Application Procedures. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.06 - Permit Restrictions. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.07 - Prohibited Signs. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 450 [3-20-1986]; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.08 - Signs Requiring No Permit. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 450 [3-20-1986]; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.09 - Permitted Signs. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 478 [6-16-1987]; Ord. 502 [5-17-1988]; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.10 - Illumination. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 450 [3-20-1986]; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.11 - Non-Conforming Signs. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.11.a - Non-Conforming Uses. 
(7-21-81 Code; Ord. 479 [7-7-1987]; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.12 - Abatement. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.13 - Appeals. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
811.14 - Variances. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 528 [7-18-1989]) 
CHAPTER 812 - FENCE REGULATIONS-REPEALED 

812.01 - Definitions. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 521 [2-7-1989]) 
812.02 - Permit Required. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 521 [2-7-1989]) 
812.03 - Permit Fee. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 521 [2-7-1989]) 
812.04 - Application Procedures. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 521 [2-7-1989]) 
812.05 - General Provisions. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 521 [2-7-1989]) 
812.06 - Fences along Property Lines. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 521 [2-7-1989]) 
812.07 - Fences within Required Yards. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 521 [2-7-1989]) 
812.08 - Appeals. 
(7-21-81 Code; Repealed by Ord. 521 [2-7-1989]) 
CHAPTER 813 - CONVERSION OF APARTMENTS TO CONDOMINIUMS 

813.01 - Definitions. 
A.  "Condominium" shall mean real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate ownership portions. Real estate is not a "condominium" unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit's owners. 
B.  "Conversion Condominium" shall mean a condominium within a building which at any time before the recording of the declaration creating a condominium under Minnesota Statutes contained residential rental units. 
C.  "Declarant" shall mean: 
1.  If a condominium has been created, any person who has executed a declaration other than persons holding interests in the real estate solely as security for an obligation, persons whose interests in real estate will not be conveyed to unit owners, or in the case of a leasehold condominium a lessor who is not an affiliate of a declarant; or 
2.  If a condominium has not yet been created, any person who offers to dispose of his interest in a unit not previously disposed of. 
D.  "Affiliate of a Declarant" shall mean any person who controls, is controlled by or is under common control with a declarant. A person "controls" a declarant if that person: 
1.  Is a general partner, officer, director or employee of the declarant; 
2.  Directly or indirectly, acting in concert with one or more other persons, or through one or more subsidiaries owns, controls, holds with power to vote or holds proxies representing more than 20 percent of the voting interests of the declarant; 
3.  Controls in any manner the election of a majority of the directors of the declarant; or 
4.  Has contributed more than 20 percent of the capital of the declarant. 
A person "is controlled by" a declarant if the declarant: 
1.  Is a general partner, officer, director or employee of the person; 
2.  Directly or indirectly, acting in concert with one or more other persons, or through one or more subsidiaries owns, controls, holds with power to vote or holds proxies representing more than 20 percent of the voting interests of the person; 
3.  Controls in any manner the election of a majority of the directors of the person; or 
4.  Has contributed more than 20 percent of the capital of the person. 
E.  "Purchaser" shall mean any person, other than a declarant, who by means of a voluntary transfer acquires a legal or equitable interest in a unit, other than: 
1.  A leasehold interest (including renewal options) of less than three years; or 
2.  As security for an obligation. 
F.  "Security for an Obligation" shall mean the vendor's interest in a contract for deed, mortgagee's interest in a mortgage, purchaser's interest under a sheriff's certificate of sale, or the holder's interest in a lien. 
G.  "Unit" shall mean a portion of a condominium whether or not contained solely or partially within a building designated for separate ownership. 
813.02 - Application. 
This Chapter shall apply to all conversion condominiums for which the declaration creating a condominium under Minnesota Statutes is recorded after July 1, 1980. 
813.03 - Notice to the City. 
On the date of giving the first notice of a conversion as required in Section 813.04, the declarant also shall send by U.S. Mail to the City Manager written notice of the conversion, which states the fact of conversion or the intent to convert. 
813.04 - Notice to Occupants. 
A declarant of a conversion condominium which has been created or is intended to be created shall give all occupants of the building notice of the conversion, which states the fact of conversion or the intent to convert, at least 120 days before the declarant will require such parties to vacate, or 180 days before this in the case of a unit with an occupant on the date of delivery of the notice who is 65 years of age or older, under the age of 18 or legally handicapped as defined under Minnesota Statutes. Said notice shall be delivered once with respect to each unit and shall have attached thereto a copy of this Chapter and a form of purchase agreement setting forth the terms of sale contemplated by Section 813.05 hereof. No occupant may be required by the declarant to vacate during said 120- or 180-day period, except by reason of nonpayment of rent, waste or conduct which disturbs other occupants' peaceful enjoyment of the premises, or violation of any other term or condition of his lease other than its expiration, and the terms of the tenancy may not be altered during that period. Failure of a declarant to give notice as required by this Section constitutes a defense to an action for possession. After notice of conversion has been given to any unit, the declarant shall thereafter notify any new tenant who leases any unit in the building that the building is or is to become part of a condominium. 
The notice referred to in this Section shall state that a Tenants' Association may be formed for the purpose of making an offer to purchase the property which is the subject of the conversion. The provision contained in the preceding sentence does not create a right on the part of the Tenants' Association to purchase the property or an obligation on anyone to negotiate with, finance or arrange financing for or sell such property to the Tenants' Association. The notice referred to in this Section also shall include the following information: 
A.  A specific statement of the amount of any initial or special condominium fee due from the purchaser on or before settlement of the purchase contract and the basis of the fee; 
B.  Information on the actual expenditures made for all repairs, maintenance, operation or upkeep of the subject building or buildings within the last three years, set forth tabularly with the proposed budget of the condominium and cumulatively broken down on a per-unit basis in proportion to the relative voting strengths allocated to the units by the by-laws. If such building or buildings have not been occupied for a period of three years, this information shall be set forth for the maximum period such building or buildings have been occupied; 
C.  A description of any provisions made in the budget for reserves for capital expenditures and an explanation of the basis for the reserves, or if no provision is made for the reserves a statement to that effect; 
D.  A statement of the declarant as to the present condition of all structural components and major utility installations in the condominium, which statement shall include the approximate dates of construction, installation and major repairs, and the expected useful life of each item, together with the estimated costs (in current dollars) of replacing each of the same. 
813.05 - Purchase Rights. 
For 60 days after delivery of the notice of conversion described in Section 813.04, the holder of the lessee's interest created by the declarant or his predecessor shall have an option to purchase the leased unit on the terms set forth in the purchase agreement attached to the notice. If such holder fails to exercise said option during that 60-day period the declarant may not offer to dispose of an interest in that unit during the following 180 days at a price or on terms more favorable to the offeree than the price or term offered to such holder. This subsection does not apply to any unit in a conversion condominium if that unit will be restricted exclusively to nonresidential use or if the boundaries of the converted unit do not substantially conform to the dimensions of the residential unit before conversion. 
If a declarant, in violation of this Section, conveys a unit to a purchaser for value who has no knowledge of the violation, delivery of the deed conveying the unit extinguishes any right which a lessee not in possession may have under this Section to purchase that unit, but it does not affect the right of the lessee to recover damages from the declarant for a violation of this Section. 
Nothing in this Section permits the termination of a lease by a declarant in violation of its terms. The rights conferred by this Section are subject to any purchase agreement or other contract existing prior to July 1, 1980. 
813.06 - Express Warranties. 
Express warranties made by any declarant to a purchaser of a unit, if relied upon by the purchaser, are created as follows: 
A.  Any affirmation of fact or promise which relates to the unit, its use or rights appurtenant thereto, area improvements to the condominium that would directly benefit the unit, or the right to use or have the benefit of facilities not located in the condominium, creates an express warranty that the unit and related rights and uses will conform to said affirmation or promise; 
B.  Any model or description of the physical characteristics of the condominium, including plans and specifications of or for improvements, creates an express warranty that the condominium will conform to said model or description; 
C.  Any description of the quantity or extent of the real estate comprising the condominium, including plats or surveys, creates an express warranty that the condominium will conform to said description, subject to customary tolerances; 
D.  A provision that a purchaser may put a unit to a specified use is an express warranty that the specified use is lawful. 
Neither formal words, such as "warranty" or "guarantee," nor a specific intention to make a warranty are necessary to create an express warranty, but a statement purporting to be merely an opinion or commendation of the real estate or its value does not create a warranty. Any conveyance of a unit transfers to the purchaser all express warranties made by the declarant. 
813.07 - Implied Warranties. 
A.  A declarant warrants that a unit will be in at least as good condition at the earlier of the time of the conveyance or delivery of possession as it was at the time of contracting, reasonable wear and tear excepted. 
B.  A declarant impliedly warrants that a unit and the common elements in a condominium are suitable for the ordinary uses of real estate of its type, and that any improvements made or contracted for by him or made by any person in contemplation of the creation of the condominium will be free from defective materials and will be constructed in accordance with applicable law, according to sound engineering and construction standards, and in a workmanlike manner. 
C.  A declarant warrants to a purchaser of a unit which may be used for residential use that an existing use, continuation of which is contemplated by the parties, does not violate applicable law at the earlier of the time of conveyance or delivery of possession. 
D.  Warranties imposed by this Section may be excluded or modified as specified in Section 183.08. 
E.  For the purposes of this Section, improvements made or contracted for by an affiliate of a declarant are made or contracted for by the declarant. 
F.  Any conveyance of a unit transfers to the purchaser all of any declarant's implied warranties of quality. 
813.08 - Exclusion or Modification of Implied Warranties. 
Except as limited by the following paragraph, implied warranties may be excluded or modified by agreement of the parties, and they are excluded by expressions of disclaimer, such as "as is," "with all faults" or other language which in common understanding calls the buyer's attention to the exclusion of warranties. 
With respect to a purchaser of a unit which may be occupied for residential use, no general disclaimer of implied warranties shall be effective, but a declarant may disclaim liability in an instrument signed by the purchaser for a specified defect or specified failure to comply with applicable law, if the defect or failure entered into and became a part of the basis of the bargain. 
813.09 - Limitations on Warranties. 
A judicial proceeding for breach of any obligation arising under Sections 183.06 and 183.07 must be commenced within six years after the cause of action accrues. Subject to the following paragraph, a cause of action under these Sections accrues, regardless of the purchaser's lack of knowledge of the breach: 
A.  As to a unit, when the purchaser to whom the warranty is first made enters into possession, if a possessory interest was conveyed, or at the time of acceptance of the instrument of conveyance, if a nonpossessory interest was conveyed; 
B.  As to each common element, the time the common element is completed or the time the first unit in the condominium is conveyed to a bona fide purchaser, whichever occurs later. 
If a warranty under Section 183.06 or 183.07 explicitly extends to future performance or duration of any improvements or component of the condominium, the cause of action accrues at the time the breach is discovered or at the end of the period for which the warranty explicitly extends, whichever is earlier. 
813.10 - Right to Rescind. 
A lessee may rescind a purchase agreement of a unit offered for sale hereunder by delivering to the declarant at the address stated in the purchase agreement, by registered or certified U.S. Mail with postage prepaid, a written notice of rescission within 15 days of execution of such an agreement by the lessee. Upon receipt of any such notice of rescission the declarant promptly shall refund any earnest money received without deduction therefrom or interest thereon, whereupon the purchase agreement shall become null and void. The rights under this section are in addition to the rights afforded purchasers under the Minnesota Condominium Act, Section 515.215, Subd. 6. 
813.11 - Delivery of Notice. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all notices required by this Chapter shall be in writing and shall be either personally delivered or delivered by U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the named tenant or "occupant" at the address of the unit. Delivery shall be complete upon the mailing. 
813.12 - Compliance with Wayzata Property Maintenance Code. 
No sale or transfer of a conversion condominium may occur unless the building to be converted complies in all respects with the requirements of the Wayzata Property Maintenance Code and the current State Fire Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, which is hereby incorporated in this Chapter as if fully set forth herein, and unless said compliance is certified as being accomplished in all respects by an architect or engineer certified by the State of Minnesota. Conversion condominium premises must be inspected by the Building Inspector for any repairs necessary to bring the project up to Housing and Fire Code standards, and a certificate of inspection must be issued to that effect by the Building Inspector prior to the sale or transfer of any conversion condominium unit. 
(7-21-81 Code; Reenacted by Ord. 408 [2-2-1982]; Ord. 684 [6-4-2008]) 
CHAPTER 814 - ARTIFICIAL LIGHTING REGULATIONS 

814.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect and promote the general welfare, health, safety and order within the City of Wayzata through the establishment of a comprehensive and impartial series of standards, regulations and procedures governing existing and future artificial lighting. 
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to encourage tasteful, appropriate and non-obtrusive artificial lighting for purposes such as landscape and building decoration, parking lot lighting, security lighting, sign lighting, and lighting of other appropriate subjects. The necessity for such regulations has arisen because of significant technological developments in the field of artificial lighting over the last decade. The invention of artificial light sources of extraordinary intensity can cause a nuisance to surrounding property owners because of improper wattage, lumens, direction, fixture design and the like. 
814.02 - Definitions. 
A.  "Artificial Lighting" shall mean any form of light other than light generated by the sun or the moon which shall include glare. 
B.  "Fixture" or "Light Fixture" shall mean the mechanical device which the lamp or light source is affixed to or contained in. 
C.  "Opaque" shall mean not pervious to light; light thus cannot pass through an opaque surface. 
D.  "Transparent" shall mean transmitting light so that objects beyond can be seen clearly. 
E.  "Translucent" shall mean transmitting and diffusing light so that objects beyond cannot be seen clearly. 
814.03 - General Provisions. 
The following general provisions shall be applicable to all artificial light sources within the City: 
A.  Artificial light only shall be used for purposes necessary and appropriate to the use of the property upon which the light is located. 
B.  Only that amount of artificial light shall be used as is needed to fulfill the intended purpose of the light. Specifically, wattage and lumen output of all light sources shall be kept to the minimum necessary to accomplish said purpose. 
C.  Light sources shall not be placed at any height taller than is essential to accomplish the intended purpose of the light. Light sources attached to a building shall be no higher than the main part of the building's roof. All other light sources shall be no more than 16 feet above the ground. 
D.  Light fixtures shall be of a design such that the light source is fully enclosed by opaque materials and such that light may be transmitted in only one direction (e.g., sharp cut-off or "shoe box" fixtures), except that incandescent light bulbs with a wattage of 50 watts or less need not be fully enclosed. Light fixtures must have flat diffusers or glass flush mounted to the opaque fixture such that no part of the lamp or light source, diffuser, glass or the like projects beyond the opaque portion of the fixture. It is intended that the visibility of the light source itself (e.g., the light bulb) be minimal. 
E.  All light sources shall direct light either straight down or straight up, or shall be located, so close to a building that there is no broadcast or glare of light beyond the building. There shall be no appreciable glare onto adjacent property. 
814.04 - Variances. 
The City Council may approve a variance from this Chapter upon finding that the requested variance will meet each of the following criteria, although it shall not be required to do so: 
A.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property and/or structure(s) in question, which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to other property and/or structures. 
B.  The variance is necessary for the preservation of substantial property rights of the applicant. 
C.  Under the circumstances of the particular situation the variance will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of residents of the surrounding area or of the community as a whole. 
D.  The variance will not conflict with the Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
814.05 - Non-Conforming Artificial Light Sources. 
A.  Any artificial light source lawfully existing on January 6, 1981, shall be allowed to continue in use for a period of not more than seven years thereafter, but it shall not be rebuilt, altered, (other than to change the message), or relocated without being brought into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. After a non-conforming light has been removed, it shall not be replaced by another non-conforming light. 
B.  Whenever the use of a non-conforming light has been discontinued for a period of three months, such usage shall not thereafter be resumed unless in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
814.06 - Violations. 
If any artificial light is in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the City Manager or his representative shall give written notice of said violation to the owner of the premises. If the owner fails to remove or correct said violation so as to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, then: 
A.  The artificial light source shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be abated by the City by proceedings taken under Minn. Stats. Ch. 429. The cost of abatement, including legal fees and administrative expenses, may be levied as a special assessment against the property upon which the artificial light source is located; or 
B.  The owner may be prosecuted for violating this Chapter and, if convicted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the applicable penalties therefor. Each period of ten days within which the artificial light source is not removed or corrected shall be deemed to constitute another violation of this Chapter and shall be punishable as a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 815 - RENTAL DWELLING LICENSES 

815.01 - Purpose. 
This chapter may be referred to as the Rental Dwelling License Ordinance. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that rental housing in the City is decent, safe, and sanitary; that it is so operated and maintained as not to become: 
A.  A nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood; or 
B.  An influence that fosters blight and deterioration, or creates a disincentive to reinvestment in the community. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]) 
815.02 - Scope. 
This chapter applies to all rental dwellings and the individual units therein that are rented or leased in whole or in part, including apartment buildings, town homes, single-family and two-family housing, guest and caretaker houses, and condominiums with private entrances. It also includes any accessory structures of the rental dwellings, such as garages and storage buildings, and appurtenances such as sidewalks, driveways and retaining walls, which are on the property of the rental dwelling. This chapter does not apply to Minnesota Department of Health licensed rest homes, convalescent care facilities, nursing homes, hotels or motels licensed by the City. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]) 
815.03 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
A.  "City" means the City of Wayzata. 
B.  "City Council" means the City Council of the City of Wayzata. 
C.  "Compliance Official" means the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
D.  "Dwelling Unit" means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
E.  "License" means the license required by and issued pursuant to this chapter. 
F.  "License Holder" means an owner holding a license. 
G.  "Licensed Premises" means a licensed rental dwelling and all accessory structures of the rental dwellings, such as garages and storage buildings, and appurtenances such as sidewalks, driveways and retaining walls, which are on the property of the rental dwelling. 
H.  "Official Order" means a written notice stating violation(s) of City Code and corrective action to be taken. 
I.  "Operate" means to charge a rental fee or other form of rent for the use of a unit in a rental dwelling. 
J.  "Owner" means a person or legal entity that owns a rental dwelling. 
K.  "Property Manager" means a person authorized by the owner to operate and/or manage the licensed premises. 
L.  "Rental Dwelling" means any building containing one or more dwelling units. 
M.  "Revoke" means to take back, in whole or in part, a license issued by the City. 
N.  "Subchapter" means Sections 815.01-815.27 of the Wayzata City Code. 
O.  "Suspend" means to make a license temporarily inoperative, in whole or in part. 
P.  "Tenant" means any person granted temporary use of a dwelling unit or sleeping room pursuant to a lease or other agreement with the owner of the dwelling unit. 
Q.  "Unit" means a part of a rental dwelling that is leased to a tenant. 
R.  "Wayzata Property Maintenance Code" means Sections 803.01-803.02 of Wayzata City Code. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.04 - License Required. 
No rental dwelling may be operated in the City without the owner first obtaining a license as provided for in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.05 - Crime Free/Drug Free Training. 
Every owner or property manager of a rental dwelling must attend Phase I Crime Free Training or similar City-approved program, or provide the City with proof of having received such training, prior to the issuance of a license for that owner's rental dwelling. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.06 - Application Procedures. 
Every application for a license shall be made in writing on forms provided by the City, accompanied by the fee amounts as established in the current fee schedule of the City. The Compliance Official may cause inspection to be made of the rental dwelling that is the subject of the application to determine whether it is in compliance with the Wayzata Property Maintenance Code, other Wayzata City Code sections or the laws of State of Minnesota. Once the Compliance Official is satisfied that all requirements of this Code have been met by the applicant, the license shall be issued. 
The application must be submitted by an owner or property manager living or located in the one of the seven counties in the metro Twin Cities area (Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Scott and Washington) who shall be legally responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
    Applications shall specify the following: 
A.  Mailing, street and legal address of the rental dwelling. 
B.  Name and address of the owner of the rental dwelling. 
C.  Name and address of any property manager or agent actively managing the rental dwelling. 
D.  Name and address of on-site property manager, if any. 
E.  Name and address of the vendee if the rental dwelling is owned or being sold on a contract for deed. 
F.  Number and kind of units within the rental dwelling, however classified, including dwelling units, rooming units or other. 
G.  Any other information requested by the compliance official to ensure compliance under this chapter. 
H.  Verification that the designated property manager has attended required training as specified in this chapter and that the Crime Free/Drug Free and Disorderly Conduct language required by this chapter is contained in the licensed property tenant lease or leases. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.07 - Provisional Licenses. 
A provisional license may be issued for up to six months to give any applicant or existing license holder the opportunity to comply with the training requirements of this chapter. The provisional license shall be valid until: 
A.  A regular license is issued, or 
B.  It is determined that license requirements have not been met and the City will not issue a regular license. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.08 - Expiration. 
Except as otherwise provided, all licenses under this chapter shall be valid for one calendar year and shall expire on April 1 unless suspended or revoked earlier. All licenses issued for a portion of a calendar year also shall expire on April 1. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.09 - Renewal. 
All applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the current license. All such applications shall be submitted to the Compliance Official in the manner described in Section 815.06 of this Chapter on forms provided by the City and shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.10 - Transferability. 
A license is not transferable to another owner or to another rental dwelling. Every license holder must give notice in writing to the compliance official within 72 hours after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any rental dwelling. The notice must include the name and address of the owner succeeding to the ownership or control of such rental dwelling. A new license shall be applied for by the new owner. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.11 - License Fees. 
License fees and Administrative Penalties shall be in the amount established in current fee schedule adopted by the City Council. License fees shall not be prorated for any portion of the calendar year, nor shall any license fee be refunded in whole or in part. The license fee may be doubled whenever a renewal application is received after it is due. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.12 - Posting. 
The license shall be conspicuously posted or otherwise available to the tenant, prospective tenant, or Compliance Official upon request. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.13 - Maintenance Standards. 
Every rental dwelling shall conform to the standards of the Wayzata Property Maintenance Code, in addition to any other building or zoning requirements of the City Code, special permits issued by the City, or the laws of the State of Minnesota. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.14 - Inspection. 
The compliance official may set up a schedule of periodic inspections of rental dwellings and units to ensure compliance with this chapter. The compliance official shall provide reasonable notice to the owner or the owner's agent as to the date and time of the inspection. Inspections shall include all common areas, utility and mechanical rooms, garages, exterior of structures and exterior property areas. 
Inspection of dwelling units shall take place if the number of complaints or violations warrants such inspection or when requested by a tenant or property owner. Each occupant of a dwelling unit shall give the owner or the owner's agent access to any part of such dwelling unit at reasonable times for the purpose of effecting inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If any owner, owner's agent or tenant of a dwelling unit fails or refuses to permit entry to the dwelling unit under its control for an inspection pursuant to this chapter, the compliance official may seek a court order authorizing such inspection. Should the owner or owner's agent fail to keep a scheduled inspection without reasonable cause or refuse to permit entry to the dwelling unit, a reinspection fee will be charged. 
There shall be no fee charged for an initial inspection to determine the existence of a Wayzata Property Maintenance Code violation, nor any fee for the first reinspection to determine compliance with an order to correct such violation. A reinspection fee shall be charged for each subsequent reinspection occurring after the due date for compliance with an order. The compliance official may waive the reinspection fee in case of an error or other reasonable cause, including extension of time granted for compliance. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.15 - Maintenance Violations. 
A.  A license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the City Council if the license holder or its agents, employees, representatives or tenants directly or indirectly operate or maintain the licensed rental dwellings contrary to the provisions of Section 815.13. 
B.  Upon determining violation(s) of Section 815.13, the compliance official shall issue an official order to the license holder. If the license holder fails to comply with the terms of the official order, a written notice shall be sent to the license holder specifying the date for a hearing before the City Council. That date shall not be less than ten days from the date of the written notice. 
C.  At such hearing before the City Council, the license holder or its representative may submit and present evidence on its behalf. 
D.  After the hearing, the City Council may suspend or revoke the license if it finds a violation of Section 815.13 has occurred. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.16 - Summary Action. 
A.  When the condition of the rental dwelling is so detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute an immediate nuisance, fire hazard or other unsafe or dangerous condition, the compliance official shall have the authority to summarily condemn or close off such area of the rental dwelling. 
B.  Any person aggrieved by the action of the compliance official under this section may appeal to the City Council immediately, by filing a notice of appeal. The City manager shall schedule a date for a hearing before the City Council and notify the aggrieved person of the date. 
C.  The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as a suspension or revocation hearing under Section 815.15. 
D.  The summary action taken by the City under this section shall not be changed while the hearing is pending. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.17 - Criminal Background Check. 
A license holder shall conduct criminal background checks on all prospective tenants. The criminal background check must include the following: 
A.  A statewide (Minnesota) criminal history check of all prospective tenants covering at least the last three years; the check must be done utilizing the most recent update of the state criminal history files; 
B.  A statewide criminal history check from the prospective tenant's previous state of residence, if available, if the tenant is moving directly from the state other than Minnesota; 
C.  A criminal history check of any prospective tenant in the tenant's previous states of residence, if available, covering the last three years if they have not resided in Minnesota for three years or longer; and 
D.  A criminal history check of all prospective tenants covering the seven counties in the metro Twin Cities area (Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Scott and Washington) covering at least the last three years, that includes any misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor, and felony convictions. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.18 - Crime Free/Drug Free and Disorderly Conduct Lease Requirements. 
All tenant leases entered into or renewed after April 1, 2012, shall contain the following "Crime Free/Drug Free and Disorderly Conduct" language or language that is the contractual and legal equivalent: 
Crime Free/Drug Free. 
A.  Resident, any members of the resident's household or a guest or other person under the resident's control shall not engage in illegal activity, including drug-related illegal activity, on or near the said premises. "Drug-related illegal activity" means the illegal manufacture, sale, distribution, purchase, use or possession with intent to manufacture, sell, distribute, or use of a controlled substance (as defined in Section 102 or the Controlled Substance Act [21 USC 802]) or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
B.  Resident, any member of the resident's household or a guest or other person under the resident's control shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate illegal activity, including drug-related illegal activity, on or near the said premises. 
C.  Resident or members of the household will not permit the dwelling to be used for, or to facilitate illegal activity, including drug-related illegal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging in such activity is a member of the household. 
D.  Resident or members of the household will not engage in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs at any locations, whether on or near the dwelling unit premises or otherwise. 
E.  Violation of the above provisions shall be a material violation of the lease and good cause for termination of tenancy. a single violation of any of the provisions of this agreement shall be deemed a serious violation and material non-compliance with the lease. 
Disorderly Conduct. 
A.  Resident, members of the resident's household, guests, or other persons under the resident's control shall not engage in the following Disorderly Conduct activities: violations of state law relating to alcoholic beverages, trespassing or disorderly conduct; violations of the Wayzata City Code; violations listed in Section 815.16 of the Rental Dwelling License Ordinance. 
B.  Three disorderly conduct violations involving the same tenancy within a continuous 12-month period shall be substantial and material violation to the lease and good cause for termination of the tenancy. 
Non-exclusive Remedies. 
The Crime Free/Drug Free and Disorderly Conduct provisions are in addition to all other terms of the lease and do not limit or replace any other provisions. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.19 - Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. 
Disorderly conduct is prohibited on all licensed premises. It shall be the responsibility of the license holder to take appropriate action to prevent disorderly conduct by rental dwelling tenants and their guests on the licensed premises. For the purposes of this chapter, a violation of any of the following statutes or ordinances shall be deemed disorderly conduct: 
A.  Minn. Stats.  609.75-609.76, which prohibit gambling; 
B.  Minn. Stats.  609.321-609.324, which prohibit prostitution and acts relating thereto; 
C.  Minn. Stats.  152.01-152.025, and Minn. Stats.  152.027, Subd. 1 and 2, which prohibit the unlawful sale or possession of controlled substances; 
D.  Minn. Stats.  340A.401, which prohibit the unlawful sale of alcoholic beverages; 
E.  Minn. Stats.  340A.503, which prohibit the underage use of alcoholic beverages; 
F.  Chapter 720 Wayzata City Code, which prohibit nuisances; 
G.  Minn. Stats.  97B.021 and 97B.045, Minn. Stats.  609.66-609.67 and Minn. Stats.  624.712-624.716, and Chapter 704 of Wayzata City Code, which prohibit the unlawful possession, transportation, sale or use of a weapon; 
H.  Minn. Stats.  609.72, which prohibit disorderly conduct, when the violation disturbs the peace and quiet of the occupants of at least one unit on the licensed premises or other premises, other than the unit occupied by the person(s) committing the violation; 
I.  Minn. Stats.  609.185, 609.19, 609.195, 609.20, and 609.205 which prohibit murder and manslaughter; 
J.  Minn. Stats.  609.221, 609.222, 609.223, and 609.2231 which prohibit assault; 
K.  Minn. Stats.  609.342, 609.343, 609.344, 609.345, and 609.3451 which prohibit criminal sexual conduct; 
L.  Minn. Stats.  609.52, which prohibit theft; 
M.  Minn. Stats.  609.561, 609.562, 609.563, 609.5631, and 609.5632 which prohibit arson; 
N.  Minn. Stats.  609.582, which prohibit burglary; 
O.  Minn. Stats.  609.595 which prohibit damage to property; and 
P.  Chapter 708 of Wayzata City Code, which prohibits offences against public peace and safety. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.20 - Disorderly Conduct and Crime Free/Drug Free Violations. 
A.  Upon determination by the Police Department that a licensed premises or unit within a licensed premise was used in violation of the Crime Free/Drug Free provisions of this chapter, the Police Department shall cause notice to be made to the owner and property manager of the violation. The owner or property manager shall notify the tenant or tenants within ten days of the notice of violation of the Crime Free/Drug Free lease language and proceed with termination of the tenancy of all tenants occupying the unit. The owner shall not enter into a new lease for a unit located in the licensed property with an evicted tenant for a period of one year after the eviction. 
B.  Upon determination by the Police Department that a licensed premises or unit within a licensed Premises was used for disorderly conduct activities as set forth in Section 815.19, the Police Department shall cause notice to be made to the owner and property manager of the violation and direct the owner and property manager to take steps to prevent further disorderly conduct violations. 
C.  If a second disorderly conduct violation as determined by the Police Department occurs within a continuous 12-month period involving the same tenancy, the Police Department shall cause notice to be made to the owner and property manager of the second violation. The owner or property manager shall respond in writing within ten days of receipt of the notice with a written action plan to prevent further disorderly conduct violations. 
D.  If a third disorderly conduct violation as determined by the Police Department occurs within a continuous 12-month period involving the same tenancy, the Police Department shall cause notice to be made to the owner and property manager of the third violation. The owner or property manager shall notify the tenant or tenants within ten days of the notice of disorderly conduct violation of the Crime Free/Drug Free lease language within the lease and proceed with termination of the tenancy of all tenants occupying the unit. The owner shall not enter into a new lease for a unit located in the licensed premises with an evicted tenant for a period of one year after the eviction. 
E.  The provisions of Subsections A, B, C, and D herein do not apply if the determination that the licensed premises have been used in violation of the Crime Free/Drug Free provisions of Subsections A.1 and A.2 herein originates from a call from or at the request of one or more of the tenants occupying the licensed premises for police or emergency assistance, or in the case of domestic abuse, from a call for assistance from any source. The term "domestic abuse" has the meaning given in Minn. Stats.  518B.01, Subd. 2. 
F.  If the City Manager determines that the owner has proceeded in good faith to secure termination of the tenancy in accordance with this subsection, but was unsuccessful for reasons beyond the owner's reasonable control, than the owner shall not be subject to the penalties in subsection 815.21. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.21 - Administrative License Violation Fee. 
An owner failing to proceed with an action to terminate the tenancy after Police Department notification in accordance with a Crime Free/Drug Free violation or the third Disorderly Conduct violation shall pay an administrative license violation fee of $750.00 for each calendar month that the owner fails to proceed. Any outstanding fees must be paid prior to the City renewing a rental license for the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.22 - Determining Disorderly Behavior. 
A determination that a licensed premises or any particular unit has been the location of a third disorderly conduct violation shall be made upon a finding of fact by the City Council to support such a determination. It shall not be necessary that criminal charges be brought in order to support such finding, nor shall the dismissal or acquittal of such a criminal charge operate as a bar to any action under this chapter. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.23 - Multiple Violations. 
If two or more units in a licensed premises are in violation of the Crime Free/Drug Free and Disorderly Conduct Lease Requirements of this chapter within a 12-month period, fines specified in section 815.21 may be doubled. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.24 - Penalties. 
A person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine and imprisonment as prescribed by state law. Each day of each violation constitutes a separate offense. The compliance official may affix to the rental dwelling appropriate signs or notices prohibiting occupancy and may act to cause the rental dwelling to be vacated or remain vacant until all violations under this chapter are remedied. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.25 - No Retaliation. 
A.  A license holder may not: 
1.  Bar or limit a tenant's right under state law to call for police or emergency assistance in response to domestic abuse or any other conduct; or 
2.  Impose a penalty on a tenant for calling for police or emergency assistance in response to domestic abuse or any other conduct. 
B.  A tenant may not waive and a license holder may not require the tenant to waive the tenant's right under state law to call for police or emergency assistance. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.26 - No Warranty by City. 
By enacting and undertaking to enforce this chapter, the City, City Council, its agents, and employees do not warrant or guaranty the safety, fitness or suitability of any rental dwelling in the City. Owners and occupants of rental dwellings should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interests, health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
815.27 - Applicable Laws. 
Licenses shall be subject to all of the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State of Minnesota relating to rental dwellings; this Chapter shall not be construed or interpreted to supersede or limit any other such applicable law. 
(Ord. 685 [6-4-2008]; Ord. 725 [03-15-2012]) 
CHAPTER 816 - PUBLIC SAFETY 800 MHZ RADIO BUILDING COVERAGE 

816.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the City by ensuring that police, fire and rescue personnel have complete and reliable radio communication coverage. This Chapter provides specifics on the systems required of buildings in the City, and the installation, testing and maintenance of those systems. 
816.02 - Definitions. 
The following used in this Chapter shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Adequate Radio Coverage" shall be defined as an average received field strength of no less than -93 dBm, or one percent BER, measured at 30 to 36 inches above the floor over 95 percent of the area of each floor including the basement in the building and other critical areas determined by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee. Such critical areas may include as fire command centers, stairwells, elevators, high hazard areas, basements, and parking garages and ramps. 
B.  "Building" shall be as defined in the Building Code of the City, and shall include parking garages, parking ramps, stair shafts, elevators and stairwells. 
C.  "dBm" means dB, decibels, in milli-watts. A unit of measure for RF signal level. 
D.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission. 
E.  "NPSPAC" means the National Public Safety Planning and Advisory Committee. 
F.  Other Terms. Any term used in this Chapter that is not defined herein shall be as defined in the Building Code of the City or, if the term is not defined in the Building Code, the Zoning Ordinance. 
816.03 - Requirement of Adequate Radio Coverage. 
Except as provided in Section 816.04, no person shall construct any building, construct an addition to any building that increases the gross floor area of the building by more than 20 percent, change the occupancy classification of more than 50 percent of the floor area of any building or cause the same to be done to a building, if such building fails to support adequate radio coverage for the Minnesota Regional Radio Communications System, including, but not limited to, firefighters and police officers, as specified in this Chapter. 
816.04 - Exempt Buildings. 
The requirements of Section 816.03 shall not apply to: 
A.  One- and two-family dwellings or associated accessory buildings. 
B.  Any building of less than 10,000 square feet in gross floor area, provided that such building does not contain any below grade levels or below grade parking areas. 
C.  Any building constructed of wood frame, provided that such building does not contain any metal construction or any below grade levels or below grade parking areas. 
816.05 - Amplification Systems Allowed. 
Buildings required by Section 816.03 to support adequate radio coverage which cannot support the level of radio coverage required by Subsection 816.03 shall be equipped with approved bi-directional 800 MHz signal enhancement system(s) as needed to meet such level. Such system must be installed and maintained at the property owner's expense. If used, bi-directional amplifiers shall include filters to reduce adjacent frequency interference at least 35 dB below the NPSPAC band. The filters shall be tuned to 825 MHz and to 870 MHz so that they will be 35 dB below the NPSPAC frequencies of 824 MHz and 869 MHz respectively. If amplification is used in the system, all required FCC authorizations must be obtained by the building owner prior to the use of the system. If any part of the installed system or systems contains an electrically powered component, the system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a continuous period of at least 12 hours without external power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of an external power input. 
816.06 - Testing Procedures. 
The following testing procedures shall apply to each building or structure required by Section 816.03 to support adequate radio coverage: 
A.  Acceptance Test Procedure. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner of the building shall arrange for testing conducted by qualified testing personnel acceptable to the Fire Chief to ensure the building conforms with the requirements of this Chapter. Testing procedures shall conform to practices adopted and on-file with the Building Official. 
B.  Annual Tests. The owner of a building required under this Chapter to install and maintain adequate radio coverage shall arrange for testing conducted by qualified testing personnel acceptable to the Fire Chief of all active components of the system, including, but not limited to, amplifiers, power supplies and backup batteries, a minimum of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the one-hour test period, in the opinion of the testing technician, the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional one-hour periods until the testing technician confirms the integrity of the battery. All other active components shall be checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturer's specifications for the intended purpose. All deficiencies found shall be corrected and testing repeated. All test results shall be submitted to the Fire Chief within 30 days of the test date. 
C.  Five-Year Tests. In addition to the annual test required under this Section, the owner of a building required under this Chapter to install and maintain adequate radio coverage shall arrange for testing conducted by qualified testing personnel acceptable to the Fire Chief to perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio system continues to meet the requirements of the original acceptance test. A radio test shall also be performed whenever there is a change in or to the building that may have an impact on coverage. Examples of the types of changes that may change radio coverage are interior remodeling that adds and/or changes partitions, removal of windows, and the addition of metalized treatment to window surfaces. The procedure described by practices adopted by the City shall be used for these tests. All test results shall be submitted to the Fire Chief within 30 days of the test date. 
D.  Field Testing. Fire and police personnel, after providing reasonable notice to the owner or the owner's representative, shall have the right to enter onto the property to conduct testing to be certain that the required level of radio coverage is present. 
(Ord. 733 [11-29-2012]) 
PART IX - ZONING 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 901 - TITLE AND APPLICATION 

901.01 - Short Title. 
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wayzata, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this Ordinance." 
901.02 - Purpose. 
This is an ordinance for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare, by regulating the location, size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot which may be occupied; the size of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the uses of buildings and structures for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities or other purposes; and the use of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, forestry, soil conservation, water supply conservation, conservation of shorelands, flood control and other purposes and establishing standards and procedures regulating such uses. 
901.03 - Intent. 
To protect the public, such provisions are intended to provide for adequate light and air, safety from fire and other danger; prevent undue concentration of population; provide ample parking facilities; regulate the location and operation of businesses, industries, dwellings and buildings for other specified purposes; preserve property values by providing for orderly and compatible development of the various land uses; encourage energy conservation and the use of renewable energy resources; provide for administration of this Ordinance; provide for amendments hereto; and provide for official recording of this Ordinance and all amendments hereto. 
901.04 - Relation to Comprehensive Municipal Plan. 
It is the policy of the City of Wayzata that the enforcement, amendment, and administration of this Ordinance be accomplished with due consideration of the recommendations contained in the City Comprehensive Plan as developed and amended from time to time by the Planning Commission and City Council of the City. The Council recognizes the City Comprehensive Plan as the policy to regulate land use and development in accordance with the policies and purpose herein set forth. 
901.05 - Standard Requirements. 
A.  More Restrictive Provisions to Govern. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, code, statute, resolution or regulation, the regulations which are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. 
B.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
C.  Conformity with this Ordinance. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, constructed, reconstructed moved or altered, and no building, structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and without a building permit being issued when required by this Ordinance. 
D.  Building Occupancy. Except as herein provided, no building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building permit shall be granted that does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
E.  Non-Reduction of Yards or Lots. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance. 
F.  Regulation Application. In their application, these regulations shall not abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement where such is legally enforceable, provided, that where the regulations of this Ordinance are more restrictive, or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this Ordinance shall be controlling. 
901.06 - Conditional Uses. 
Any established use or building legally existing prior to the establishment of this Ordinance and which now classified as a conditional use may be continued in like fashion and activity and shall automatically be considered as having received conditional use permit approval. Any change to such a use, or any other subsequently approved conditional use, shall however, require a new conditional use permit be processed according to this Ordinance. 
901.07 - Monuments. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, all international, federal, state, county and other official monuments, benchmarks, triangulation points, and stations shall be preserved in their precise locations; and it shall be responsibility of the applicant to insure that these markers are maintained in good condition during and following construction and development. All section, one-fourth section and 1/16 section corners shall be duly described and tied. 
901.08 - Uses Not Provided Within Zoning Districts. 
Whenever in any zoning district a use is neither specifically allowed nor denied, the use shall be considered prohibited. In such cases, the City Council or the Planning Commission, on their own initiative or upon request, may conduct a study to determine if the use is acceptable and if so what zoning district would be most appropriate and the determination as to conditions and standards relating to development of the use. The City Council, Planning Commission or property owner, upon receipt of the staff study shall, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to this Ordinance to provide for the particular use under consideration or shall find that the use is not compatible for development within the City. 
901.09 - Separability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City that the several provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance with the following: 
A.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment. 
B.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment. 
901.10 - Schedules of Administrative Fees, Charges and Expenses. 
The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning applications, building permits, variances, conditional uses, appeals and other matters pertaining to this Ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted as appropriate and may be altered or amended only by the Council. 
901.11 - Authority. 
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal Planning Act, Minn. Stats.  462.351 to 462.363. 
901.12 - Comprehensive Revision. 
The Council intends this Ordinance to be a comprehensive revision to Chapter 801 of the City Code and all other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance, as amended. Any act done, offense committed, or rights accruing or accrued, or liability, penalty incurred or imposed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance is not affected by its enactment. 
CHAPTER 902 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

902.01 - Rules of Word Construction. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
A.  The word "person" includes an owner or representative of the owner, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
B.  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
D.  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
E.  All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot. 
F.  When calculating parking stall requirements, any fraction of a number shall constitute an additional parking space. 
G.  When calculating density, any fraction of a number shall not constitute an additional dwelling unit. 
H.  For terminology not defined in this Ordinance, the most current Webster's dictionary shall be used to define such terms. 
902.02 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Ordinance, shall be interpreted as herein defined: 
"Abutting" means making direct contact with or immediately bordering. 
"Accessory Building or Use" means a subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary, appropriate and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use. 
"Addition" means a physical enlargement of an existing structure. 
"Adjacent" means in close proximity to or neighboring, not necessarily abutting. 
"Adult Uses" include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theatres, adult motion picture sales/rentals, adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minn. Stats.  617.241, as may be amended, are not included. 
A.  "Specified Anatomical Areas" means: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
B.  "Specified Sexual Activities" means: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
4.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or 
5.  Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; or 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
C.  "Adult Uses-Accessory" means the offering of retail goods for sale which are classified as adult uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines, the sale and/or rental of adult motion pictures, the sale of adult novelties, and the like. 
D.  "Adult Uses-Principal." means the offering of goods and/or services which are classified as adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  "Adult Use-Body Painting Studio." An establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas." 
2.  "Adult Use-Bookstore." A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public extending any minor by reason of age or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
3.  "Adult Use-Cabaret." A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
4.  "Adult Use-Companionship Establishment." A companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
5.  "Adult Use-Conversation/Rap Parlor." A conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
6.  "Adult Use-Health/Sport Club." A health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
7.  "Adult Use-Hotel or Motel." Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexually activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
8.  "Adult Use-Massage Parlor, Health Club." A massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
9.  "Adult Use-Mini-Motion Picture Theatre." A building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
10.  "Adult Use-Modeling Studio." An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in "specified sexual activities" or display "specified anatomical areas" while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
11.  "Adult Use-Motion Picture Arcade." Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
12.  "Adult Use-Motion Picture Theatre." A building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
13.  "Adult Use-Novelty Business." A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation. 
14.  "Adult Use-Sauna." A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished of characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
15.  "Adult Use-Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility." A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age of if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Alley." A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street. 
"Animals, Domestic." For purposes of this Ordinance, domestic animal shall be defined as house pets such as dogs, cats, and birds which can be contained within a principal structure throughout the entire year, provided that the containment can be accomplished without special modification to the structure requiring a building permit from the City. 
"Apartment." A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms which is designed for, intended for, or used as a residence by a single family or an individual, and is equipped with cooking facilities. Includes dwelling unit and efficiency unit. 
"Applicant." The owner, their agent or person having legal control, ownership and/or interest in land which the provisions of this Ordinance are being considered for or reviewed. 
"Attic." Space of a building located directly under a roof which is not directly free and open to the public and is unfinished or finished only to a limited degree to provide for inactive storage and/or mechanical equipment. Said space shall not be occupied or actively utilized. Under the provision of this Ordinance, said space shall not constitute a story, and shall not be included in space calculations for parking. 
"Automobile Repair-Major." General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle steam cleaning. 
"Automobile Repair-Minor." Installation, including cellular telephones, audio systems, and minor repairs, incidental body and fender work, painting and upholstering, replacement of parts (tires, glass, etc.) and minor motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight, but not including any operation specified under "Automobile Repair-Major." 
"Automobile Service Station." See "Motor Fuel Station." 
"Automobile Wrecking or Junk Yard." Any place where two or more vehicles not in running condition and/or not licensed, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof; and including any commercial salvaging and scavenging of any other goods, articles or merchandise. 
"Basement." Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as defined herein. 
"Bay." Cantilevered area of a room. 
"Bed and Breakfast." A building designed as a single family dwelling, where for compensation, meals and lodging are provided to transient guests but not including a building providing these services to more than ten persons or operating more than five guestrooms. 
"Block." A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and public parks, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, waterways or boundary lines of the corporate limits of the City. 
"Boarder." One who receives regular meals and/or regular meals and lodging for pay. 
"Boarding (House) Home-Foster Children." A family dwelling where children out of their own homes are cared for. 
"Boarding/Lodging House." A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or boarding/lodging and meals are provided to three or more persons, not of the principal family therein, pursuant to previous arrangements and not including a building providing these services for more than five persons. 
"Boarding/Lodging Room." A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one boarding/lodging room. 
"Boundary Lines." Any line indicating the bounds or limits of any tract or parcel of land; also a line separating the various use districts as shown on the City's Zoning Map. 
"Brewery." A facility that produces for sale beer, ale, malt liquor, or other beverages made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. A brewery may include a taproom. 
"Brewpub." A Brewery that operates a restaurant on the same premises as the Brewery, whose malt liquor production per calendar year may be limited by Minnesota State Statute. 
"Buffer." The use of land, topography (difference in elevation), space, fences or landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from the vision of another use or property. 
"Buildable Area." The space remaining on a lot after the minimum setback and open space requirements of this Ordinance have been met. 
"Building." Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or movable property of any kind, and includes any structure. 
"Building Height." The vertical distance above a Grade Plane measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to the uppermost point on a shed, round or arch type roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched, hipped or gambrel roof. Modifications to the site grading that would affect the grade plane of a lot shall not be undertaken as a means of achieving increased building height, unless approved by the City Council. The height of a stepped or terrace building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
"Building Line." A line parallel to the street right-of-way or ordinary high water level at any story level of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or any part of the building is set back from said right-of-way or ordinary high water level. 
"Building Setback." The minimum horizontal distance between the building and the lot line. 
"Business." Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise where merchandise is manufactured, exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for compensation. 
"Cellar." That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade and is so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. 
"Cemetery." A site or property set apart for the burial or interment of the human dead. 
"Channel." A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or periodically. 
"Child Care." A specialized limited day care facility which is an accessory use that provides temporary babysitting service while parents are engaged in short-term social, recreational or business activities. (See also Day Care) 
"Church." A building, together with its accessory buildings and use; where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes. 
"City Council." The governing body for the City of Wayzata. 
"Clear Cutting." The removal of an entire stand of trees and/or vegetation. 
"Club or Lodge." A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, with the use of the premises being restricted to members and their guests. 
"Cluster Development." The development pattern and technique whereby structures are arranged in closely related groups to make the most efficient use of the natural amenities of the land as accomplished through a planned unit development. 
"Coffee Shop." A business establishment providing services limited to the sale and production of coffee products and foods associated with the drinking of coffee, as distinguished from a full service restaurant or convenience (fast) food establishment. 
"Commercial Recreation." Electronic games, bowling alley, jump center, golf, billiards (pool) hall, dance hall, skating, trampoline, boat rental, park, and similar uses. 
"Common Open Space." Any privately owned open space including private parks, nature areas, playgrounds, trails, and recreational buildings and structures which is an integral part of a development and is not owned on an individual basis by each owner of the dwelling unit. 
"Community Center." A building or a room or group of rooms within a building designed specifically as a gathering place for the general public or for a specific segment of the general public and operated on a non-profit basis. 
"Comprehensive Plan." A comprehensive long range plan prepared and approved by the City, including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, fiscal guidelines, and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development of the City, including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
"Concept Plan." A report in map and text form submitted as the first stage of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) proposal, depicting the location, general purpose, general type of land use and circulation patterns, primary relationships between site elements and between the proposed development and surrounding development, proposed general schedule of development, and information on the applicant. 
"Conditional Use." Those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions, or uses specifically designated in each zoning district, which for the respective conduct or performance in such designated districts may require reasonable, but special, unusual or extraordinary limitations peculiar to the use for the protection, promotion and preservation of the general public welfare, health, and safety, and the integrity of the City Comprehensive Plan. 
"Conditional Use Permit." A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with procedures specified in this Ordinance, as a flexibility device to enable the City Council to assign dimensions to a proposed use or conditions surrounding it after consideration of adjacent uses and their functions and the special problems which the proposed use presents. 
"Condominium." A multiple dwelling or development containing individually owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of the Minnesota Condominium Law, Minn. Stats.  515.A.1-101 to 515.A.4-118. 
"Convenience (Fast) Food Establishment." An establishment which serves food in or on disposable or edible containers in individual servings for consumption on or off the premises. (See also drive-in restaurant). 
"Cooperative (Housing)." A multiple family dwelling owned and maintained by the residents and subject to the provisions of MS 290.09 and 290.13. The entire structure and real property is under common ownership as contrasted to a condominium dwelling where individual units are under separate individual occupant ownership. 
"Curb Level." The elevation of the established curb in front of a building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been established, the engineering staff shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
"Day Care Facility." Any facility licensed by the State Department of Public Welfare, public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other than the person's own home. Day care facilities include, but are not limited to, family day care homes, group family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, daytime activity centers, day treatment programs and day services as defined by Minn. Stats.  245.782, Subd. 5. (See also Child Care). 
"Density, Residential." A number expressing the relationship of the number of dwelling units to an acre of land as established in the Comprehensive Plan. 
"Deposition." Any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material deposited naturally or by man into a waterbody, watercourse, floodplains or wetlands. 
"Design Guidelines." The Wayzata Design Guidelines as amended. 
"Distillery." A facility that produces Ethyl Alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, rum, brandy, gin, or other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for non-industrial use. A distillery may include a tasting room. 
"Diversion." A channel that intercepts surface water runoff and that changes the accustomed course of all or part of a stream. 
"Dog Kennel." Any place where three dogs or more over three months of age are kept for the use of the owner, or are boarded, bred and/or offered for sale, except a veterinary clinic. 
"Draining." The removal of surface water or groundwater from land. 
"Dredging." To enlarge or clean-out a waterbody, watercourse, or wetland. 
"Drive-In Restaurant." Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages on the premises, typically eaten in the customers vehicle on the site. (See also convenience food establishment) 
"Dwelling." A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for residential occupancy, including one family, two family, and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses, or manufactured housing. 
"Dwelling, Multiple (Apartment Building)." A building designed with three or more dwelling units exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, but sharing hallways and main entrances and exits. 
"Dwelling, Single-Family." A dwelling unit designed exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
A.  "Attached." A dwelling which is joined to another at one or more sides by a party wall. 
B.  "Detached." A dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling or structure or is entirely surrounded by open space. 
"Dwelling, Two Family." A residence designed for or occupied by two families only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. A two family dwelling with a separate rooming unit(s) shall be considered and classified as a multi-family dwelling, unless specifically noted. 
A.  "Double Bungalow." A two family dwelling with two units side-by-side. 
B.  "Duplex." A two family dwelling unit with one unit above the other. 
"Dwelling Unit." A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by one or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, seasonal cabins, boarding or rooming houses, motor homes or travel trailers. 
"Dwelling Unit Occupancy." Occupancy of a dwelling unit for the purpose of enforcing provisions of this Ordinance shall be limited by restrictions as included in the definition of family in this Section. 
"Earth Berm." (House Construction) An earth covering on the above grade portions of the building walls. 
"Earth Sheltered Building." A building so constructed that 50 percent or more of the completed structure is covered with earth. Earth covering is measured from the lowest level of the livable space in residential units and of usable space in non-residential buildings. An earth sheltered building is a complete structure that does not serve just as a foundation or sub-structure for above grade construction. A partially covered building shall not be considered earth sheltered. 
"Easement." A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner. 
"Efficiency Apartment (Dwelling Unit)." A one room dwelling unit, exclusive of bathroom, consisting of one principal room having cooking facilities and used for combined living, dining and sleeping purposes. 
"Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing." A public agency owned or controlled multiple dwelling building with open occupancy limited to persons over 62 years of age. 
"Elevator Penthouse." An enclosure located on the top of a building which houses the working mechanisms of an elevator. 
"Engineer." The registered engineer employed or retained by the City, unless otherwise stated. 
"Erosion." The wearing away of land surface by the action of natural elements. 
"Essential Services." The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or Municipal departments of underground or overhead telephone, gas, electrical, steam, hot water, communication or water transmission, distribution, collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, dire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith for the furnishing of adequate service by such private or public utilities or Municipal departments. 
"Essential Service Structures." Structures and buildings necessary for the operation of essential services, including, but not limited to, telephone buildings, telephone booths, gas regulator stations, substations, electrical stations, water tanks, lift stations. 
"Exterior Storage." The storage of goods, materials, equipment, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building. 
"Family." An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or a group of not more than six persons who need not be related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit. 
"Fence Related." 
A.  "Fence" shall mean a partition, wall, hedge, row(s) of continuous plantings, or gate erected as a dividing marker, visual or physical barrier, or enclosure. 
1.  "Man Made Fence" shall mean a partition or wall constructed of wood, metal, masonry, brick, stone, concrete, and the like. 
2.  "Natural Hedge or Planting" shall mean a divider or barrier comprised of vegetation materials. 
B.  "Fence Height" shall mean the distance from the adjacent finished grade to the highest projection of a fence structure, not including support posts, provided that the support posts are no more than four inches above the fence structure. 
"Filling." The act of depositing any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material so as to fill a waterbody, watercourse, or wetland. 
"Floodplain Overlay District Related." 
A.  "Base Flood Elevation." The elevation of the regional flood. The term base flood elevation is used in the flood insurance survey. 
B.  "Basement." Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. 
C.  "Development." Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
D.  "Equal Degree of Encroachment." Method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. 
E.  "Flood." A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas. 
F.  "Flood Frequency." The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded. 
G.  "Flood Fringe." That portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (one percent annual chance flood) located outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City. 
H.  "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)." An official map on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM). 
I.  "Floodplain." The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. 
J.  "Flood-Proofing." A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
K.  "Floodway." The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse, and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge. 
L.  "Lowest Floor." The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR Part 60.3. 
M.  "Manufactured Home." A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle." 
N.  "New Construction." Structures, including additions and improvements, and placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
O.  "Obstruction." Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water. 
P.  "One Hundred Year Floodplain." Lands inundated by the regional flood. 
Q.  "Reach." A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach. 
R.  "Recreational Vehicle." A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 40 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term recreational vehicle is synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel vehicle." 
S.  "Regional Flood." A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the one percent chance or 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in a Flood Insurance Study. 
T.  "Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation." An elevation not less than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increase in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. 
U.  "Repetitive Loss." Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
V.  "Special Flood Hazard Area." A term used for flood insurance purposes synonymous with "One Hundred Year Floodplain." 
W.  "Start of Construction." Substantial improvement, and means the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement that occurred before the permit's expiration date. The actual start is either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
X.  "Structure." Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Chapter 993 of this Ordinance, and other similar items. 
Y.  "Substantial Damage." Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Z.  "Substantial Improvement." Within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." For the purpose of this Ordinance, "historic structure" is as defined in 44 CFR part 59.1. 
"Floor Area, Gross." The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of the building or portion thereof devoted to a particular use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space such as, activities to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. However, the floor area shall not include basement or cellar floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. The floor area of a residence shall not include the cellar area. 
"Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)." The floor area of a building or buildings on any lot divided by the area of such lot, or in the case of planned developments by the net site area. The floor area ratio requirements as set forth under each zoning district shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for a building or buildings (total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot. 
"Footprint." The outline of the foundation of a building, including that portion of an upper story that is occupied and/or actively utilized. 
"Frontage." That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street, watercourse or similar barrier. 
"Garage, Private (Residential)." An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles and trucks not exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight, of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business service or industry is carried on. 
"Garage, Public." Any garage other than a private garage. May also mean parking ramp. 
"Gas Station." See "Motor Fuel Station." 
"Grade Plane." A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the building, between the building and a point six feet from the building. 
"Grading." Changing the natural or existing topography of land. 
"Group Day Care Center." Any location which provides care for six or more unrelated children at one time, for compensation, and which is licensed to provide such services by the Minnesota Department of Public Welfare. This term shall include, but is not limited to, uses such as nursery schools, day nurseries, child care centers and drop-in care centers. 
"Growler." A specially designed 64-ounce beer container for exclusive off-sale of micro-production facility beer. A growler shall have the following packaging requirements: 
A.  Growlers shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper or plug. 
B.  At the time of sale, paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container and extended over the top of the closure, forming a seal. 
C.  The growler and/or band, strip or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer, and the container shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt liquor, and shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless labeled otherwise. 
"Halfway House." See "Residential Care Facility." 
"Hardship." A situation where property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use under the conditions allowed by the official controls; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to his property, not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship if a reasonable use for the property exists under terms of the official controls. 
"Health Club." A facility which provides athletic activities such as tennis, handball, racquetball, track, basketball, exercise devices, etc. and such incidental services as whirlpool, sauna or massage service for members and guests. 
"Home Occupation." Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a residential dwelling unit, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises and does not change the character of said premises. 
"Hotel." Any building or portion thereof occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals and containing more than ten guest rooms, used, designated, or intended to be used, let or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied by more than ten individuals for compensation, whether the compensation be paid directly or indirectly. 
"Impervious Surface." A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increase rate of flow than prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads. 
"Inn Establishment." A building, other than a hotel, whose use includes the renting of rooms at a transient daily rate (whether or not billed or paid daily), and wherein a dining room and other facilities are operated on the premises. A maximum of ten guestrooms may be operated within the principal structure. 
"Junk Yard." An open area where waste, used, or second hand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled; including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other materials, paper, rags, rubber, tires, lumber, and bottles. A junk yard includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses established entirely within closed buildings. 
"Landscaping." Plantings such as trees, flowers, grass and shrubs and improvements directly related thereto. 
"Land Reclamation." The process of the re-establishment of acceptable topography (i.e. slopes), vegetative cover, soil stability and the establishment of safe conditions appropriate to the subsequent use of the land. 
"Loading Space (Off-Street)." A space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a vehicle or truck while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access. 
"Lot." A parcel or portion of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street. 
"Lot (of Record)." Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed, or one unit of an auditor's outlot or a registered land survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered but for which a deed, auditor's subdivision or registered land survey has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Titles for Hennepin County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
"Lot Area." The total land area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines. 
"Lot, Base." Lots meeting all specifications in the zoning district prior to being subdivided into a two family dwelling or quadraminium subdivision. 
"Lot, Corner." A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees. 
"Lot Coverage." The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and all accessory buildings. 
"Lot Depth." The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line measured from a 90 degree angle from the street right-of-way within the lot boundaries. 
"Lot, Double Frontage." An interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
"Lot, Front." The front of a lot shall be considered to be that boundary abutting a public right-of-way having the least width. 
"Lot Improvement." Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
"Lot, Interior." A lot, other than a corner lot, including through or double frontage lots. 
"Lot Line." A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership; except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way. 
"Lot Line, Rear." That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10') feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
"Lot, Reversed Frontage." A lot in which the frontage is at right angles, or approximately right angles, to the general pattern in the area involved. A reversed frontage lot may be a corner lot or an interior lot. 
"Lot, Substandard." A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in the Office of the Hennepin County Recorder upon or prior to the effective date of this Ordinance which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks or other dimensional standards of this Ordinance. 
"Lot, Through." A lot fronting on two parallel streets. 
"Lot, Unit." Lots created from the subdivisions of a two family dwelling or quadraminium having different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional base lots within the zoning district. 
"Lot Width." The minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth, at the minimum building setback line. If no setback line is established, the distance between the side lot lines measured along the public right-of-way. 
"Malt Liquor." Any beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
"Manor Home." A residential structure with five to eight units with each unit having a separate entrance/exit. There may be more than one floor and an attached garage space. 
"Medical and Dental Clinic." A structure intended for providing medical and dental examinations and service available to the public. This service is provided without overnight care available. 
"Metes and Bounds Description." A description of real property which is not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof. 
"Micro-Production Facility." A facility in which beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages are brewed, fermented, or distilled for distribution and consumption. Micro-production facilities include breweries, brewpubs, wineries, and distilleries. 
"Minerals." Soil, clay, stone, sand and gravel and other similar solid material or substance to be mined from natural deposits. 
"Model Home." A home which is similar to others in a development and which is open to public inspection for the purpose of selling said other homes. 
"Motel/Motor Hotel." A building or group of detached, semi-detached or attached buildings containing guest rooms or units, each of which has a separate entrance directly from the outside of the building, or corridor, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of transient guests traveling by automobile. 
"Motor Fuel Station." A place where gasoline is stored only in underground tanks, kerosene or motor oil and lubricants or grease, for operation of automobiles, are retailed directly to the public on premises, and including minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not including automobile major repairs and rebuilding. 
"Non-Conforming Structure, Use, or Lot, Illegal." A lot, building, structure, premises, or use illegally established when it was initiated, created, or constructed, which did not conform with the applicable conditions or provisions of the City Code for the district in which the structure or use is located. 
"Non-Conforming Structure, Use, or Lot, Legal." A lot, building, structure, premises, or use lawfully established when it was initiated, created, or constructed, which does not now conform with the applicable conditions or provisions of this Ordinance for the district in which the structure or use is located. 
"Noxious Matter or Material." Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. 
"Nursing Home." A private building with facilities for the care of children, the aged, or the infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not containing equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury. The nursing home shall be licensed by the State Board of Health as provided for in Minnesota State Statutes. 
"Obstruction." Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water. 
"Occupancy." The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors. 
"Open Sales Lot." Land devoted to the display of goods for purchase, sale, rent, lease or trade where such goods are not enclosed within a building, and for the storage of same prior to sale. 
"Open Space." Any open area not covered by structures, including, but not limited to, the following uses, required or established yard areas, parking areas, sidewalks, school walks, trails, recreation areas, water bodies, shorelands, watercourses, wetlands, groundwater recharge areas, floodplain, floodway, flood fringe, erodible slopes, woodland, and soils with severe limitation for development. 
"Open Storage." Storage of material outside of a building. 
"Out-Patient Care." Medical examination or service available to the public in a hospital. This service is provided without overnight care and shall be considered a separate, independent, principal use when combined or operated in conjunction with a hospital. 
"Overburden." The earth, rock and other materials that lie above a natural deposit of mineral. 
"Outlot." A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open space or other future use, and upon which no structure is to be located and for which no building permit shall be issued. 
"Owner." An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in land, buildings, structures, dwelling unit(s) or other property. 
"Parcel." An individual lot or tract of land. 
"Parking Space (Off-Street)." An area of such shape and dimensions as provided by this Ordinance, enclosed in the principal building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one motor vehicle, which has adequate access to a public street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile. 
"Performance Standard." Criterion established for setbacks, fencing, landscaping, screening, drainage, accessory buildings, outside storage and to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat or other nuisance elements generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings. 
"Permitted Use." A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards (if any) of such districts. 
"Person." Any individual or legal entity. 
"Planned Unit Development." 
A.  As a conditional use permit, a development procedure whereby internal site design standard deviations from this Ordinance may be allowed in order to accommodate two or more principal structures, and/or facilitates improved site design and operation. 
B.  As a zoning district, a development procedure whereby a mixing of buildings and uses can occur which cannot be otherwise addressed under this Ordinance, and/or whereby internal site design standard deviations from this Ordinance may be allowed to improve site design and operation. 
"Planning Commission." The Wayzata Planning Commission. 
"Principal Use." The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A "principal use" may be either permitted or conditional. 
"Protective Covenants." Contracts entered into between all owners and holders of mortgage constituting a restriction on the use of property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and providing mutual protection against undesirable aspects of property value and economic integrity of any given area. 
"Public Uses." Uses owned or operated by municipal, school districts, county, state, or other governmental units. 
"Public Utility." Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board fully authorized and furnishing under municipal regulation to the public electricity, gas, steam, communication services, cable television, telegraph services, transportation, water or the like. 
"Publication." Notice placed in the official City newspaper stating time, location and date of meeting and description of the topic. 
"Quadraminiums." Single structures which contain four subdivided dwelling units all of which have individually separate entrances from the exterior of the structure. 
"Railroad Right-of-Way." A strip of land with railway tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation. 
"Recreation, Field or Building." An area of land, water, or any building in which amusement, recreation or athletic sports are provided for public or semi-public use, whether temporary or permanent, except a theatre, whether provision is made for the accommodation of an assembly or not. A golf course, arena, baseball park, stadium, circus or gymnasium is a recreation field or building for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
"Recreational Vehicle." Includes manufactured homes less than 30 feet in overall length, including those with telescope or fold down, chassis, mounted campers, house cars, motor homes, tent trailers, slip-in-campers (those mounted in a pickup truck or similar vehicle), converted buses, and converted vans used primarily for recreational purposes. Cars utilized for racing shall not be included in this definition. 
"Residential Care Facility." Any facility licensed by the State Department of Health or Department of Public Welfare, public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with 24 hour per day substitute for care, food, lodging, training, education, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation and treatment they need, but which for any reason cannot be furnished in the person's own home. Residential facilities include, but are not limited to. State institutions under the control of the Commissioner of Public Welfare, foster homes, halfway houses, residential treatment centers, maternity shelters, group homes, residential programs or schools for handicapped children. 
"Restaurant." An establishment which serves food in or on non-disposable dishes to be consumed primarily while seated at tables or booths within the building. 
"Retail." The sale of items in small quantities directly to the consumer. 
"Roof Line." Is defined as the top of the coping; or, when the building has a pitched roof, at the intersection of the outside wall with the roof. 
"Roomer." One who rents a room and eats meals elsewhere. 
"Satellite Dish." Shall mean a combination of: 
A.  Antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources; 
B.  A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals; 
C.  A coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into the interior of the building. 
"Satellite Dish Height." Shall mean the height of the antenna or dish measured vertically from the highest point of the antenna or dish when positioned for operation, to the top of the foundation which supports the antenna. 
"School." A building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary education, which meets all the requirements of compulsory education laws of the State of Minnesota, and not providing residential accommodations. 
"Semi-Public Use." Uses owned by private or private non-profit organizations which are open to some, but not all, of the public, such as denominational cemeteries, private schools, clubs, lodges, recreation facilities, churches, etc. 
"Septic Sewer System." A septic sewer disposal system consists of. septic tank, absorption field of standard trenches or a dry well, house sewer and outlet sewer. In the septic tank, bacterial action breaks down sewage. Standard trenches or a dry well handles final disposal of liquid from the septic tank. The house sewer brings wastes to the tank and the outlet sewer carries sewage liquids (effluent) from the absorption field. 
"Setback." The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the property line nearest thereto; within Shoreland Districts it shall also mean the minimum horizontal distance between a structure or a sewage treatment system and the ordinary high water level. For purposes of earth shelter buildings only, above grade portions shall be used in determining setback requirements. Distances are to be measured from the most outwardly extended portion of the structure at ground level, except as provided herein after. 
"Shopping Center." An integrated grouping of commercial stores, under single ownership or control. 
"Shoreland Related." 
A.  "Bluff." A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than 18 percent over a distance for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff): 
1.  Part of all of the feature is located in a shoreland area. 
2.  The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the waterbody. 
3.  The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30 percent or greater. 
4.  The slope must drain toward the waterbody. 
B.  "Bluff Impact Zone." A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the top of a bluff. 
C.  "Boathouse." A structure designed and used primarily for the storage of boats or boating equipment. 
D.  "Commercial Planned Unit Development." Uses that provide transient, short-term loading spaces, rooms, or parcels and their operations are essentially service-oriented. For example, hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks, and other primarily service-oriented activities are commercial planned unit developments. 
E.  "Commissioner." The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources. 
F.  "Deck." A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three feet above ground. 
G.  "Guest Cottage." A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain sleeping spaces and kitchen and bathroom facilities in addition to those provided in the primary dwelling unit on a lot. 
H.  "Intensive Vegetation Clearing." The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row or block. 
I.  "Ordinary High Water Level." The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowage, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool. 
J.  "Public Waters." Any waters as defined in Minn. Stats.  103G.005, Subdivisions 14 and 15. However, no lake, pond, or flowage of less than ten acres in size in municipalities and 25 acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated for the purposes of Minn. R., parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the local government, be exempted from Minn. R., parts 6120.2500 to 6120.2900. 
K.  "Public Waters-General Development (GD)." Large, deep lakes or lakes of varying sizes and depths with high levels and mixes of existing development. These lakes often are extensively used for recreation and, except for the very large lakes, are heavily developed around the shore. Second and third tiers of development are fairly common. The larger examples in this class can accommodate additional development and use. 
L.  "Public Waters-Recreational Development (RD)." Medium sized lakes of varying depths and shapes with a variety of landform, soil, and ground water situations on the lands around them. They often are characterized by moderate levels of recreational use and existing development. Development consists mainly of seasonal and year-round residences and recreationally-oriented commercial uses. Many of these lakes have capacities for accommodating additional development and use. 
M.  "Sensitive Resource Management." The preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over ground water or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special protection. 
N.  "Sewer System." Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other constructions, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal. 
O.  "Shore Impact Zone." Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the structure setback. 
P.  "Shoreland." Land located within the following distances from public waters. One thousand feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by Ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the commissioner. 
Q.  "Significant Historic Site." Any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minn. Stats.  307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota State Archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites. 
R.  "Steep Slope." Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having slopes over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs. 
S.  "Surface Water-Oriented Commercial Use." The use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use. 
T.  "Toe of the Bluff." The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to steeper slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent, the toe of the bluff shall be determine to be the lower end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18 percent. 
U.  "Top of the Bluff." The point on a bluff where there is, as virtually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent, the top of the bluff shall be determined to be the upper end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18 percent. 
V.  "Water-Oriented Accessory Structure or Facility." A small, above ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached decks. 
"Sign Related." 
A.  "Artificial light." Illumination resulting from internal or external artificial light sources, including glare and reflected light byproducts of artificial light sources. 
B.  "Address Sign." A sign communicating only a street address. 
C.  "Advertising Sign." Any permanent non-governmental sign advertising products, services, commodities, entertainment or other activity not offered at the location of the sign or not exclusively related to the premises on which the sign is located. 
D.  "Alteration." Any change to a sign excluding routine maintenance, repair, painting or change of copy of any existing sign. 
E.  "Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign." A sign that is permanently or semi-permanently affixed to an awning, canopy, marquee or other similar device. 
F.  "Banners." Attention getting devices which resemble flags and are of a paper, cloth or plastic-like consistency. 
G.  "Building Facade." That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. 
H.  "Copy." The wording on a sign surface either permanent or removable letter form. 
I.  "Directional Sign." An on-site sign for the purpose of making specific locations known and to assist in finding these locations (e.g. "Parking," "Shipping Receiving Area"). 
J.  "Directory Sign, Private." An exterior information wall sign, or a free-standing sign identifying the names of residences, businesses or professional offices served by a common public entrance such as an apartment complex, shopping center, or office building. 
K.  "Directory Sign, Public." A sign, group of signs on a sign panel or any identifiable object intended to communicate a public message or direction when located on public property as may be approved by the Wayzata City Council. 
L.  "District." A specific zoning district as defined in the City Zoning Ordinance. 
M.  "Flashing Sign." Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an externally-mounted intermittent light source. 
N.  "Freestanding Sign." A self-supporting sign affixed to a freestanding frame structure not attached to a building. 
O.  "Gross Surface Area." The entire area in square feet within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the complete message of any sign, which limits shall include the surface on which the message is affixed, except that if individual letters of the message are affixed directly to the surface of a wall the maximum height and width of the message shall apply. Such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of the sign surface which do not form an integral part of the sign message, except where the sign structure is held by the City Manager to be larger than is required for structural strength. 
P.  "Ground or Low Profile Sing." A sign not supported by exposed posts or poles which is architecturally designed and located directly at grade, and where the base width dimension is 50 percent more of the greatest width of the sign. Also called monument sign. Also called a Low Profile Sign. 
Q.  "Holiday or Seasonal Sign." Signs such as religious decorations, etc. or those used for a historic holiday or special event and displayed for a limited period of time. 
R.  "Identification Sign." A sign which identifies the business, owner, manager, resident or address of the premises where the sign is located and which contains no other material. 
S.  "Illuminated Sign." A sign illuminated by an artificial light source either directed upon it or illuminated from an interior source. 
T.  "Integral Sign." A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure. 
U.  "Monument Sign." A sign not supported by exposed posts or poles which is architecturally designed and located directly at grade, and where the base width dimension is 50 percent more of the greatest width of the sign. Also called a ground sign or low profile sign. 
V.  "Parapet." A low wall which is located on a roof of a building. 
W.  "Political Sign." A sign used exclusively to call attention to the candidacy of any individual or party for elective office which appears on the official ballot to be voted upon by the citizens of the City. 
X.  "Portable Sign." A sign advertising a product or service so designed as to be movable from one location to another and not permanently attached to the ground or a structure. 
Y.  "Principal Frontage." The wall of the principal building on a lot which fronts toward the principal public streets. 
Z.  "Projecting Sign." Any sign which projects over 12 inches from the front edge of a roof structure and/or building facade. 
AA.  "Pylon Sign." A sign supported by a column-type structure that is set firmly in or below ground surface and finished in a material consistent with the sign. 
BB.  "Real Estate Sign." A business sign placed only upon a property advertising that particular property for sale, for rent or for lease. 
CC.  "Roof Sign." A sign erected upon or against a sloping roof but no extending above or beyond the roof line. 
DD.  "Setback Line." The minimum horizontal distance between a property line and the nearest edge of the sign, base or support structure. 
EE.  "Sign." A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon an awning, canopy, marquee, building, structure or piece of land which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business, a "sign" shall not include any official court or other public notices, nor shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit, school or religious, service or fraternal group. 
FF.  "Sign Height." Sign height shall be determined from the base of the sign structure to the peak of the sign. 
GG.  "Sign Structure." The supports, uprights, bracing, foundations and framework of any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign as defined herein. 
HH.  "Swinging Sign." A sign installed or an arm or spar, that is not, in addition, permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole. 
II.  "Temporary Sign." A sign erected or displayed for a specific period of time. 
JJ.  "Time and/or Temperature Sign." A sign that displays the current time and/or temperature without advertising material, company name, logo or other identifying marks. 
KK.  "Total Allowable Sign Area." The maximum allowable gross surface area in square feet of a sign or signs. The maximum number of signs cannot be arranged and integrated so as to create a surface area in excess of this requirement. 
LL.  "Traffic Sign." A sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purpose of directing or guiding traffic. 
MM.  "UL Approved." A device which has been approved by the "Underwriters' Laboratories (48)," a U.S. non-profit organization which establishes standards for electrical equipment. 
NN.  "Wall Sign." A single-faced sign attached to or painted on an exterior wall of a building, parallel to the building wall and which does not project more than 12 inches from the plane of the building. 
OO.  "Window Sign." A sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. This does not include merchandise on display. 
"Site Plan." A map drawn to scale depicting the development of a tract of land, including, but not limited to, the location and relationship of structures, streets, driveways, recreation areas, parking areas, easements, utilities, landscaping, and walkways, as related to a proposed development. 
"Slope." Means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually, expressed in percent of degrees. 
"Solar Energy System." Any solar collector or other solar device or any structural design of a building whose primary purpose is to collect, convert and store solar energy for useful purposes including heating and cooling of buildings, domestic water heating, electric power generation and other energy using processes. 
"Spot Zoning." A zoning situation where a property or group of properties is unjustifiably zoned differently from adjacent properties, and is not sufficiently unique from such adjacent properties to justify a different zoning classification, nor is such action in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
"Stacking Area." That area which allows for a line of automobiles in such instances as drive-up tellers and other vehicle service areas. 
"Story." That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, including below ground portions of earth sheltered buildings, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, or unused under floor space is more than six feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than 20 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement or unused under floor space shall be considered as a story. 
"Story, First." The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a first story, provided such floor level is not more than four feet below grade, as defined herein, for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or not more than eight feet below grade, as defined herein, at any point. 
"Street." A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, through-way, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and which affords principal means of access to abutting property. 
"Street-Collector." Collector roadways provide a balance between land access and mobility. Their primary function is to move traffic from the local street system to the arterial system. When collectors intersect with arterials, traffic signals generally control traffic. Intersections with local streets are usually under stop sign control with collector streets having their right-of-way. 
"Street-Local." Local streets provide local land access with limited emphasis on mobility. Local streets account for 65 percent to 80 percent of the total road system mileage but carry only ten percent to 30 percent of the total traffic. In a residential setting, driveways are freely permitted and intersections of local streets are often uncontrolled. Stop signs are usually installed where traffic control is required such as at intersections with collector streets. 
"Street-Minor Arterial." Minor arterials make up the class of roadways including other state highways, certain county roads and major city streets. These roads primarily provide mobility, carrying short to medium length trips (two to six miles), and have controlled land access. Minor arterials as a group account for about 15 percent to 25 percent of the total mileage and carry roughly one-fourth of all traffic for the metropolitan roadway system. Minor arterials generally are given the traffic right-of-way over local streets and they usually have traffic signals at intersections with other minor arterials and some collector streets. 
"Street-Intermediate Arterial." The intermediate arterial category was developed by the City of Wayzata and is not included in the Metropolitan Council's Development Guide. Intermediate arterials function at a level between the minor arterial and major arterial categories. Intermediate arterials are not limited access facilities but serve primarily trips between rather than within subregions. 
"Street-Principal (Major) Arterial." Major arterials provide a high level of mobility between subregions, serving medium to long distance trips. Principal arterials are grade separated or have high capacity controlled at-grade intersections. No parking is permitted, the posted speed limit is typically 40-55 mph and traffic volumes range from 10,000 to 50,000 ADT. The Metropolitan Council recommends that major arterials be spaced one to three miles apart. 
"Street Pavement." The wearing or exposed surface of a street or roadway used by vehicular traffic. 
"Street Width." The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
"Structure." Anything which is built, constructed or erected; an edifice or building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner whether temporary or permanent in character. Among other things, structures including, but not limited to, buildings, decks, walls, fences, and swimming pools. 
"Structural Alteration." Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong, or modify the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations. 
"Surveyor." A land surveyor registered under Minnesota State laws. 
"Swimming Pool." A structure designed to be used for swimming which has a capacity of 3,000 gallons or more or which has a depth of over 36 inches. 
"Taproom (Brewery)." An area for the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of a brewery. A taproom may also include sale for off-premises consumption of malt liquor produced at the brewery location or adjacent taproom and owned by the brewery for off-premises consumption, packaged subject to Minn. Stats.  240A.301, Subd. 7(b), or its successor. 
"Tasting Room (Winery/Distillery)." An area for the on-sale consumption of distilled spirits or wine produced on the premises of one winery or one distillery and in common ownership to the producer of the wine or distilled spirits. 
"Townhouses." Structure housing four or more dwelling units contiguous to each other only by the sharing a common wall(s), each such unit having a separate primary entrance to the exterior of the building at or near grade level, such structures to be of the town or row houses type as contrasted to multiple apartment structures. 
"Travel Trailer." Any vehicle or structure designed and used for human living quarters which meets all of the following qualifications. 
A.  Is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or occupant. 
B.  Is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant while engaged in recreational or vacation activities. 
C.  Is towed or otherwise transported by its own or by other motive power, on the public streets or highways incidental to such recreational or vacation activity. 
The term "travel trailer" shall not include manufactured home. The term "travel trailer" shall include, but not be limited to, campers, camper tents, house trailers, camping trailers, travel trailers, tent trailers and any other self-propelled vehicle constructed to provide living accommodations. (See also the definition of "Recreation Vehicle.") 
"Use." The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained, and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this Ordinance. Uses are classified as principal or accessory and as permitted conditional, and prohibited. 
"Usable Open Space." A required ground area or terrace area on a lot which is graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and maintained for either active or passive recreation or both, available and accessible to and usable by all persons occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit on the lot and their guests. Such areas shall be grassed and landscaped or covered only for a recreational purpose. Roofs, driveways and parking areas shall not constitute usable open space. 
"Variance." A variance is a relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance where such deviation will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to physical conditions unique to the individual property under consideration and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
"Veterinary Clinic." Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and medical care of animals including animal or pet hospitals. 
"Warehousing." The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed building. 
"Waterbody." Means a body of water (lake, pond) or a depression of land or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed basin that holds water and is surrounded by land. 
"Watercourse." A channel or depression through which water flows, such as rivers, streams, creeks, and may flow year-round or intermittently. 
"Watershed." The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage system, bounded peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage areas. 
"Wetlands Related." 
A.  "Wetland." Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that in normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands have the following general diagnostic environmental conditions: 
1.  "Vegetation." The prevalent vegetation consists of macrophytes that are typically adapted to areas having hydrologic and soil conditions described above. Hydrophytic species, due tomorphological, physiological, and/or reproductive adaptation(s), have the ability to grow, effectively compete, reproduce, and/or persist in anaerobic soil conditions. The period of inundation or soil saturation varies according to the hydrologic/soil moisture regime. 
2.  "Soil." Soils are present and have been classified as hydric, or they possess characteristics that are associated with reducing soil conditions. 
3.  "Hydrology." The area is inundated either permanently or periodically at mean water depths less than two meters (6.6 feet), or the soil is saturated to the surface at some time during the growing season of the prevalent vegetation. The period of inundation or soil saturation varies according to the hydrologic/soil moisture regime. 
Indicators of vegetation associated with wetlands, of developed under reducing conditions, and of hydrologic conditions that occur in wetlands are listed in the "Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual" (U.S.-ACOE, Environmental Laboratory, 1987. Technical Report Y-87-1, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Miss.). As defined here, wetlands also include any watercourse, natural drainage system, water body, stormwater detention basin or wetland that may be subject to periodic flooding, overflow, and/or seasonal high water table. 
B.  "Wetlands Overlay District." The area containing the wetlands within the City of Wayzata, such wetlands being defined as any watercourse, natural drainage system, water body, stormwater detention basin or wetland that may be subject to periodic flooding, overflow, or seasonal high water table. 
C.  "Accessory Structure." A structure not intended for human habitation, the structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
D.  "Wetland District Boundary." That area located between the calculated 100-year frequency flood elevation and 21/2 feet above the 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
E.  "Essential Services." Those services deemed by the City Council to be necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of residents of the community and surrounding area. 
F.  "Flood Envelope." Represents the boundary of the Wayzata Overlay District, such boundary being defined as that area located between the calculated 100-year frequency flood elevation and 21/2 feet above the 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
G.  "Flood Envelope of a Wetland/Detention Basin." Represents the boundary of the detention basin, such boundary being defined as that area located between the calculated 100-year frequency flood elevation and 21/2 feet above the 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
H.  "Stormwater Detention Basin." A basin, depression or holding area which is intended or used for the detention or storage of stormwater runoff. 
I.  "Wetland System District Map." That map showing the wetland districts within the City of Wayzata. The wetlands are classified pursuant to the "Corps of Engineer Wetlands Delineation Manual" (U.S. ACOE, Environmental Laboratory, 1987. Technical Report Y-87-1, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Miss.), and the "Stormwater Management Plan for the City of Wayzata." 
J.  "Wetland Systems Impact Plan." Plan for development of any area within the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District. 
"Wholesaling." The selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business that in turn sells to the final customer. 
"Winery." A facility operated by the owner of a Minnesota farm and producing table, sparkling, or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice, other fruit bases, or honey with a majority of the ingredients grown or produced in Minnesota. A winery may include a tasting room. 
"Yard." An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
"Yard, Depth of." The mean horizontal distance between the line of a building and the lot line. 
"Yard, Front." The front yard of a lot shall be considered to be the area extending along the full length of a front lot line between side lot lines and to the depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which it is located. 
"Yard, Rear." A space extending between the rear line of the principal building and the rear line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot. 
"Yard, Required." That distance specified in the yard requirements pertaining to setbacks. Setbacks and required yards are used interchangeably. 
"Yard, Side." A yard between the principal building and the side line of the lot extending from the front to the rear building lines. 
"Zero Lot Line." The reduction of side yard setback requirements to zero, permitting the placement of a structure near or adjacent to the side yard lot line. With zero lot line, no portion of the structure or accessory appurtenance shall project over the lot line. 
"Zoning Administrator." The duly appointed officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance. 
"Zoning Amendment." A change authorized by the City Council either in the allowed use within a district or in the boundaries of the district. 
"Zoning District." An area or areas of the City (as delineated on the Zoning Map) set aside for specific uses with specific regulations and provisions for use and development as defined by this Ordinance. 
"Zoning District Overlay." A zoning district containing regulations superimposed upon other zoning district regulations and superseding the underlying zoning district use regulations. 
"Zoning District Underlying (Base)." All zoning districts except overlay zoning districts. 
"Zoning Map." The map or maps incorporated into this Ordinance as part thereof, designating the zoning districts. 
CHAPTER 903 - ADMINISTRATION-AMENDMENTS (TEXT AND MAP) 

903.01 - Amendments to Zoning Ordinance. 
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed; provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties with interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least ten days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of general circulation in the City. Any action taken pursuant to this Section shall be in compliance and accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Natural Resources, State of Minnesota, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
903.02 - Procedure. 
A.  Requests for rezoning (text or map) shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided by City Council resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by five large scale copies and one reduced scale (81/2 x 11 inch) copy of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use. The request for amendment shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting occurring at least 30 days from the date of official submission of the application unless waived by the Zoning Administrator. The request shall be considered "officially submitted" and the application approval timeline shall commence when all the informational requirements are complied with as required by this Ordinance. 
B.  Proof of Ownership or Authorization. The applicant shall supply proof of title of the property for which the rezoning is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested rezoning. 
C.  Upon receipt of an officially submitted application, the City shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification as applicable. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of the request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to hearing and written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to all owners of land within 350 feet of the property in question (public right-of-way shall not be included in the 350 foot measurement). The records of the city Assessor shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and ownership of all such properties. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding. 
D.  Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Section provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this Section. 
E.  The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council. 
F.  The Planning Commission shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed amendment. Its judgment shall be based upon (but not limited to) the following factors: 
1.  The proposed action in relation to the specific policies and provisions of the official City Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The proposed use's conformity with present and future land uses of the area. 
3.  The proposed use's conformity with all performance standards contained herein (i.e., parking, loading, noise, etc.). 
4.  The proposed use's effect on the area in which it is proposed. 
5.  The proposed use's impact upon property value in the area in which it is proposed. 
6.  Traffic generation by the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets serving the property. 
7.  The proposed use's impact upon existing public services and facilities including parks, schools, streets, and utilities, and the City's service capacity. 
G.  The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant, said information to be declared necessary to evaluate the request and/or to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request. 
H.  The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed request. 
I.  The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request. 
J.  As may be applicable, the Planning Commission shall hold a discussion and design review of the proposal in accordance with Chapter 909 of this Ordinance. 
K.  The City Council shall not act upon an amendment until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission. If, however, the Planning Commission has not acted upon the request within a period of time sufficient to allow a decision to be made within the time requirements of Section 903.02.Q, the City Council may proceed with its consideration and action on the request. 
L.  Upon receiving the report and recommendation the Planning Commission, the City shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting. 
M.  Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary. 
N.  If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide the Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular request. 
O.  Approval of a proposed amendment (text or map) shall require passage by a majority vote (three of five) of the City Council, except when the proposed amendment would change the existing zoning from residential to commercial, where a two-thirds majority vote (four of five) of the City Council is required. 
P.  The amendment shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves the ordinance reflecting said amendment and after said ordinance is published in the official newspaper. 
Q.  Pursuant to Minn. Stats.  15.99, as may be amended, an application for an amendment shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the date of its official submission unless notice of extension is provided by the City or time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and decision-making period an additional 60 days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. 
R.  Whenever an application for an amendment has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for the amendment affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year from the date of its denial except as follows: 
1.  Applications are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on the matter. 
2.  If the City Council determines that the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly. 
3.  If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a vote of not less than four of five. 
903.03 - Amendments-Initiation. 
The City Council or Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text or the district boundaries of this Ordinance. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein, within the City may initiate a request to amend the district and map boundaries or text of this Ordinance, so as to affect the said real estate. 
CHAPTER 904 - ADMINISTRATION-CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 

904.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of a conditional use permit is to provide the City of Wayzata with a reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of certain designated uses upon the general welfare, public health and safety. In making this determination, whether or not the conditional use is land or buildings, the effect upon traffic into and from the premises, or on any adjoining roads, and all other or further factors as the City shall deem a prerequisite of consideration in determining the effect of the use on the general welfare, public health and safety. 
904.02 - Procedure. 
A.  Request for conditional use permits, as provided within this Title shall be filed with the City on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council Resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by five large scale copies and one reduced scale (81/2 x 11 inch) copy of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use. The request for a conditional use permit shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting occurring at least 30 days from the date of official submission of the application unless waived by the Zoning Administrator. The request shall be considered as being "officially submitted" and the application approval timeline shall commence when all the information requirements are complied with as required by this Ordinance. 
B.  Proof of Ownership or Authorization. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the conditional use permit is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified together with any unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested conditional use permit. 
C.  Upon receipt of an officially submitted application, the City shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification as applicable. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing, and report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing and written notification of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to all owners of land within 350 feet of the boundary of the property in question (public right-of-way shall not be included in the 350 foot measurement). Records of the City Assessor shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and ownership of all such properties. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding. 
D.  Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Section provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this Section. 
E.  The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action of the City Council. 
F.  The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed conditional use. Their judgment shall be based upon (but not limited to) the following factors: 
1  The proposed action in relation to the specific policies and provisions of the official City Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The proposed use's compatibility with present and future uses of the area. 
3.  The proposed use's conformity with all performance standards contained herein (i.e., parking, loading, noise, etc.). 
4.  The proposed use's effect on the area in which it is proposed. 
5.  The proposed use's impact upon property values in the area in which it is developed. 
6.  Traffic generated by the proposed use is in relation to capabilities of streets serving the property. 
7.  The proposed use's impact upon existing public services and facilities including parks, schools, streets and utilities, and the City's service capacity. 
G.  The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said information is to be declared necessary to evaluate the request and/or to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request. 
H.  The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed request. 
I.  The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. 
J.  As may be appropriate, the Planning Commission shall hold a discussion and design review of the proposal in accordance with Chapter 909 of this Ordinance. 
K.  The City Council shall not grant a conditional use permit until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission. If, however, the Planning Commission has not acted upon the request within a period of time sufficient to allow a decision to be made within the time requirements of Section 903.02, the City Council may proceed with its consideration and action on the request. 
L.  Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting. 
M.  Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary and shall make a recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
N.  If, upon receiving said reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may before taking final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide the Planning Commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a specific request. 
O.  Approval of a request shall require passage by three of five votes of the entire City Council. The City Council reserves the right to impose reasonable conditions on the approval of a conditional use permit in order to protect the general welfare, public heath, and safety of the community. 
P.  Whenever an application for a conditional use permit has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the conditional use permit affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year from the date of its denial, except as follows: 
1.  The City Council determines that an application is different from that applied for within a one-year period. 
2.  If the City Council determines that the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly. 
3.  If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a vote of not less than three of five. 
Q.  If a request for a conditional use permit receives approval of the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the County Recorder within 30 days of the City Council approval date. The applicant, immediately upon recording such or as soon as is reasonably possible, shall furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City. 
904.03 - Application. 
The conditional use permit and the stipulations, limitations and conditions therein shall be applied to the property in question. 
904.04 - Information Requirement. 
The information required for all conditional use permit applications generally consists of the following items, and shall be submitted when requested by the City: 
A.  Site Development Plan. 
1.  Location of all buildings on lots including both existing and proposed structures. 
2.  Location of all adjacent buildings located within 350 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property in question. 
3.  Location and number of existing and proposed parking spaces. 
4.  Vehicular circulation. 
5.  Architectural elevations (type and materials used in all external surface). 
6.  Location and type of all proposed lights. 
7.  Curb cuts, driveways, number of parking spaces. 
8.  Site plan details such as trash receptacles, etc. 
9.  Site and project model. 
B.  Dimension Plan. 
1.  Lot dimensions and area. 
2.  Dimensions of proposed and existing structures. 
3.  "Typical" floor plan and "typical" room plan. 
4.  Setbacks of all buildings located on property in question. 
5.  Proposed setbacks. 
6.  Sanitary sewer and water plan with estimated use per day. 
C.  Grading Plan. 
1.  Existing contours. 
2.  Proposed grading elevations. 
3.  Drainage configuration. 
4.  Storm sewer catch basins and invert elevations. 
5.  Spot elevations. 
6.  Proposed road profile. 
7.  Erosion control measures. 
D.  Landscape Plan. 
1.  Location of all existing trees, type, diameter, and which trees will be removed. 
2.  Location, type and diameter of all proposed plantings. 
3.  Location and material used for all screening devices. 
904.05 - Amended Conditional Use Permits. 
An amended conditional use permit may be applied for and administered in a manner similar to that required for a new conditional use permit. Amended conditional use permits shall include re-applications for permits that have been denied, requests for substantial changes in conditions or expansions of use, and as otherwise described in this Ordinance. 
904.06 - Lapse of Approval. 
A.  Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request, the conditional use permit shall become null and void 12 months after the date of approval, unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started the construction of any building, structure, addition or alteration, or use requested as part of the conditional use. The property owner or applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension in accordance with this section. 
B.  An application to extend the approval of a conditional use permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator not less than 30 days before the expiration of said approval. Such an application shall state the facts of the request, showing a good faith attempt to utilize the permit, and it shall state the additional time being requested to begin the proposed construction. The application shall be heard and decided by the City Council prior to the lapse of approval of the original request. 
C.  In making its determination on whether an applicant has made a good faith attempt to utilize the conditional use permit, the City Council shall consider such factors as the type, design, and size of the proposed construction, any applicable restrictions on financing, or special and/or unique circumstances beyond the control of the applicant which have caused the delay. 
904.07 - Performance Security. 
A.  Except in the case of non-income producing residential property (excluding relocated structures), upon approval of a conditional use permit the City shall be provided, when deemed necessary by the City Council, with a surety bond, cash escrow, certificate of deposit, securities, or cash deposit prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall be non-cancelable and shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the conditional use permit and the ordinances of the City. 
B.  The security shall be in the amount equal to 125 percent of the City Engineer's or City Building Official's estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements. Said project can be handled in stages upon the discretion of the City Engineer and Building Official 
C.  The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the conditional use permit and ordinances of the City has been issued by the City Building Official. 
D.  Failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit or the ordinances of the City shall result in forfeiture of the security. 
E.  Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the City, the applicant shall be required to enter into a performance agreement with the City. This agreement is to provide authorization to the City to utilize the posted security and complete stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms and conditions of the permit. Said agreement shall hold harmless the City for completion of the work and address other matters as may be determined by the City Attorney. 
904.08 - Initiation. 
The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request for a conditional use permit in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any person owning real estate or having documented interest therein, may initiate a request for a conditional use permit for said real estate in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
CHAPTER 905 - ADMINISTRATION-VARIANCES 

905.01 - General Provisions and Standards. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for deviations from the literal provisions of this Ordinance in instances where strict enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would cause practical difficulties because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration, and to grant such variances only when the variances are harmony with the general purposes and intent of this Ordinance, and the variances are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
C.  Criteria for Granting. Conditions governing considerations of variance requests. 
1.  Variances shall only be permitted when they are: 
a)  In harmony with the general purposes and intent of this Ordinance; and 
b)  Consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Variances may be granted when the Applicant for the variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with this Ordinance. 
3.  "Practical difficulties," as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that: 
a)  The property owner's proposal for the property is reasonable but not permitted by this Ordinance; 
b)  The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property, and not created by the landowner; and 
c)  The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
4.  Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. 
5.  Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined in Minn. Stats.  216C.06, Subd. 14, when in harmony with this Ordinance. 
6.  The City Council shall not permit as a variance any use that is not allowed under this Ordinance for property in the zoning district where the affected person's land is located, except the City Council may permit as a variance the temporary use of a one family dwelling as a two family dwelling. 
7.  The City Council may impose conditions in the granting of variances. A condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance. 
8.  An application for a variance shall set forth reasons that the variance is justified under the criteria of this section in order to make reasonable use of the land, structure or building. 
905.02 - Procedures. 
A.  Variances. 
1.  Processing. 
a)  Requests for variances shall be filed with the City on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council Resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by five copies and one reduced (81/2 x 11 inch) copy of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use. The request for variance shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting occurring at least 30 days from the date of the official submission of the application unless determined otherwise by the Zoning Administrator. An application shall be deemed complete when all the informational requirements have been met, as required by this Ordinance. 
b)  Upon receipt of an application, the City shall schedule a public hearing and provide notice of the hearing specified hereunder. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing, and report its findings and recommendations to the City Council in accordance with the procedure specified herein. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing and written notification of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to all owners of land within 500 feet of the boundary of the property in question (public right-of-way shall not be included in the 500-foot measurement). Hennepin County Property Tax Service records shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and ownership of said property. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding. 
c)  For properties within the Shoreland, Floodway or Flood Fringe Overlay District, the City shall submit a copy of the application for proposed variance to the Commissioner of Natural Resources sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days' advance notice of the hearing. 
d)  Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this Section. 
e)  The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the Council. 
f)  The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the request or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the request. Failure of an applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request. 
g)  The applicant or representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission to answer questions concerning the proposed variance. 
h)  The Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and recommend approval or denial of the request, and forward such report of factual findings and recommendation on the application to the City Council. Such findings and recommendation shall be based upon the criteria listed Section 905.01.C of this Ordinance. 
i)  Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such report and recommendation shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting. 
j)  If the Planning Commission has not acted upon the request within a period of time sufficient to allow a decision to be made by the City Council within the time requirements of Section 903.02.Q of this Ordinance, the City Council may proceed without the Planning Commission's consideration and action on the request. 
k)  The Council shall review the application and may at its option conduct a public hearing on the request. 
l)  The Council shall make findings of fact and approve or deny a request for variance as soon as such request may be heard after receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation. Such findings and decision shall be based upon the criteria listed Section 905.01.C of this Ordinance. 
m)  A variance shall be approved and granted upon the affirmative majority vote (at least three of five members) of the City Council. 
n)  All decisions by the Council involving a variance request shall be final except that an aggrieved person or persons shall have the right to appeal within 30 days of the decision to the Hennepin County District Court. 
o)  A copy of all decisions granting variances for properties in the Shoreland, Floodway or Flood Fringe shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of such action. 
p)  Whenever a variance has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for the variance affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least one year from the date of its denial, except as follows: 
1)  If the applicant or property owner can clearly demonstrate that the circumstances surrounding the previous variance application have changed significantly. 
2)  If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a vote of not less than three of five members. 
q)  If a request for a variance receives approval of the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the County Recorder within 30 days of the City Council approval date. The applicant, immediately upon recording such, or as soon as is reasonably possible, shall furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City. 
905.03 - Lapse of Variance. 
A.  Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request, the variance shall become null and void 12 months after the date of approval, unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started the construction of any building, structure, addition or alteration, or use requested as part of the variance. The property owner or applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension in accordance with this section. 
B.  An application to extend the approval of a variance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator not less than 30 days before the expiration of said approval. Such an application shall state the facts of the request, showing a good faith attempt to utilize the permit, and it shall state the additional time being requested to begin the proposed construction. The application shall be heard and decided by the City Council prior to the lapse of approval of the original request. 
C.  In making its determination on whether an applicant has made a good faith attempt to utilize the variance, the City Council shall consider such factors as the type, design and size of the proposed construction, any applicable restrictions on financing, or special and/or unique circumstances beyond the control of the applicant which have caused the delay. 
905.04 - Performance Security. 
A.  Upon approval of a variance, the City shall be provided, when deemed necessary by the City Council, with a surety bond, cash escrow, certificate of deposit, securities, or cash deposit prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said security shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the variance and City ordinance provisions. 
B.  The security shall be in the amount equal to 125 percent of the City Engineer's or Building Official's estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or development. 
C.  The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the variance and City Code provisions has been issued by the Building Official. 
D.  Failure to comply with the conditions of the variance or appeal and City Code provisions shall result in forfeiture of the security. 
E.  Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the City, the applicant shall be required to enter into a performance agreement with the City. This agreement is to provide authorization to the City to utilize the posted security and complete stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms and conditions of the permit. Said agreement shall hold harmless the City for completion of the work and address other matters as may be determined by the City Attorney. 
CHAPTER 906 - ADMINISTRATION-APPEALS 

906.01 - Board Designation. 
The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
906.02 - Applicability. 
An appeal shall only be applicable to an interpretation of legislative intent of provisions of this Ordinance. Opinions and evaluations as it pertains to the impact or result of a request are not subject to the appeal procedure. 
906.03 - Filing. 
An appeal from the ruling of an administrative officer of the City shall be made by the property owner or their agent within 30 days after the making of the order appealed from. 
906.04 - Stay of Proceedings. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed unless it is certified to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record on application, on notice to the City. 
906.05 - Procedure. 
The procedure for making such an appeal shall be as follows: 
A.  The property owner or their agent shall file with the City a notice of appeal stating the specific grounds upon which the appeal is made. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution. 
B.  The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall make its decision by resolution within 60 days. 
906.06 - Appeals From the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
Any person or persons, any private or public board, or taxpayer of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, shall have the right to seek review within 30 days of the decision with a court of record in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota, and particularly Minn. Stats. Ch. 462 as such statute may be from time to time amended, supplemented or replaced. 
CHAPTER 907 - ADMINISTRATION-CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

907.01 - Certificate Required. 
No building or structure hereafter erected or moved, or that portion of an existing structure or building erected or moved shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Official stating that the building or structure complies with all of the provisions within this Ordinance and applicable state building code sections. 
907.02 - Application. 
Said certificate shall be applied for simultaneously with the application for a building permit, conditional use permit, and/or variance and shall be issued within ten days after the Building Official shall have found the building or structure satisfactory and given final inspection. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution. 
CHAPTER 908 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

908.01 - Administration and Enforcement. 
This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator who is appointed by the City Manager. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the following duties: 
A.  Enforce this Ordinance through proper legal procedures, and interpret provisions of the Ordinance as may be necessary. 
B.  Examine all single family residential building permit applications to determine their compliance with this Ordinance, and approve the same when such compliance is established. 
C.  Periodically or upon request inspect buildings, structures and uses of property within the City to determine their compliance with this Ordinance. With regard to performance standards, the Zoning Administrator may employ the services of professional experts to determine such compliance. The cost of such services shall be paid by the property owner if a violation of this Ordinance is established; otherwise such costs shall be paid by the City. 
D.  Notify in writing any person responsible for violating any provision of this Ordinance, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
E.  Order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings or structures; order the removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions or alterations; order discontinuances of illegal construction in progress; and take any other action necessary to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of this Ordinance. 
F.  Maintain permanent records pertaining to this Ordinance, including all amendments to the Ordinance and all Zoning Maps. 
G.  Maintain a current file of all amendments, variances, conditional use permits, PUD permits, non-conforming uses, notices of violations and enforcement orders to such time as may be necessary to ensure continuous compliance with this Ordinance. 
H.  Upon request, provide information relative to a property to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in that property. 
908.02 - Penalties, Violations, and Enforcement. 
A.  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be penalized in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 104 of this Code. Each day such violation continued or occurs constitutes a separate offense and may be prosecuted as such. 
B.  Violations. Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance shall include by way of example and not limitation: 
1.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains a violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
2.  Failure to comply with a condition in a variance or a conditional use permit shall be a violation of this Ordinance. 
C.  Enforcement. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking any other appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law or City Code to prevent or remedy the violation or penalize the violator. 
CHAPTER 909 - DESIGN STANDARDS 

909.01 - Purpose. 
A.  The design standards set forth in this Chapter 909 of the Wayzata City Zoning Ordinance, are referred to collectively as the "Design Standards" or the "Standards." The purpose of the Design Standards is to shape the City's physical form and to promote the quality, character and compatibility of new development in the City. The Standards function to: 
1.  Guide the expansion and renovation of existing structures and the construction of new buildings and parking, within the commercial districts of the City; 
2.  Assist the City in reviewing development proposals; 
3.  Improve the City's public spaces including its streets, sidewalks, walkways, streetscape, and landscape treatments. 
B.  The Standards address issues that are critical to preserving and enhancing Wayzata's character, as described in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
909.02 - City Character. 
A.  One of the primary goals of the City's Comprehensive Plan is to "preserve and enhance Wayzata's lakeside small town character." Continuing reference is made in the Comprehensive Plan to the value of Wayzata's unique "small town" character, unlike the suburban qualities of other communities. The Standards seek to preserve the high quality "small town" environment while accommodating the inevitability of change. This character is to be preserved and enhanced by: 
1.  Attention to the scale, walkability, land use patterns, street and boulevard character of the City. 
2.  Reinforcing and enhancing residential neighborhoods. 
3.  Promoting a vibrant and healthy business climate, including a strong downtown as key to the economic and social base of the community, and other primary retail/commercial areas. 
4.  Shaping the physical environment of the City to allow for the development of cultural and social activities that provide the opportunity for social engagement. 
5.  Promoting community heritage by preserving and redeveloping historic or significant property to the City's small town roots. 
6.  Maintaining and enhancing the diversity of housing options and addressing the need and opportunities for life cycle housing. 
7.  Promoting a more connected community through building physical and psychological connections between all residential neighborhoods, business areas, and links to other recreational amenities. 
8.  Protecting and preserving significant natural resource areas, and promoting access to community parks and open space resources. 
9.  Strengthening and reinforcing community gateways, and providing announcement and a sense of place to areas of the community at key entry points through architectural, landscape and urban design elements. 
10.  Promoting sustainability in development. 
B.  The Standards encourage buildings that are well crafted and well detailed, and that express Wayzata's heritage, location, topography, and scale. The Standards address issues of building height and views of rooftops from above as well as from below. 
909.03 - Design Districts. 
The Design Standards apply in three "Design Districts" in the City that are established according to location, and use: Lake Street District; Bluff District; and Wayzata Boulevard District. Each Design District (or "District") shall be set forth in the Zoning Map according to delineations in the following summary: 
A.  Lake Street District extends along both sides of Lake Street, between Circle Drive on the east, and Ferndale Road on the west. 
B.  Bluff District comprises the land between Lake Street on the south and Wayzata Boulevard on the north, but not the street frontage of either street, as well as Barry Avenue on the west and Superior Avenue on the east. 
C.  Wayzata Boulevard District comprises all frontage parcels on both sides of Wayzata Boulevard from the eastern interchange with Hwy 12 to the western reconnection with Hwy 12. The district also includes properties fronting Central Avenue, from Wayzata Boulevard to Hwy 12. 
909.04 - Applicability. 
A.  The Design Standards apply to all development in the City that has a nonresidential and/or multifamily component and that involves any of the activities listed in Section 909.04.B. Standards that fall under the heading "All Districts" or similar shall apply in all Design Districts. Standards specified for a particular District or Districts shall apply in those specified District or Districts. In areas outside of the three Design Districts, the Standards applicable in the Bluff District shall apply. 
B.  Subject to the exceptions listed in Section 909.04.C, the Design Standards shall apply to all development with a nonresidential and/or multifamily component within the Design Districts that involve any of the following activities: 
1.  Modification involving 50 percent or more of an existing building's exterior facade. 
2.  Building demolition. 
3.  New building construction. 
4.  Addition which adds an additional story to an existing building. 
5.  Addition which increases the existing building's square footage by 50 percent or more. 
6.  Alteration of the roof type of an existing building. 
7.  Site alteration that changes 50 percent or more of the existing site. 
C.  The Design Standards shall not apply to the following activities: 
1.  Replacement, repair, or modification of windows or doors. 
2.  Replacement, repair, or modification of roofs with the same or similar materials. 
3.  Exterior painting. 
4.  Interior renovations. 
5.  Site alterations which only repave or repair the existing site. 
909.05 - Building Uses. 
A.  Lake Street District. All new buildings east of Barry Avenue on Lake Street shall have retail usage at least 80 percent of the ground floor facing Lake Street. The remaining 20 percent of the ground floor frontage may only be used for walkways, public access, or public facilities. Retail activities shall comprise a total of at least 50 percent of the usage of the total building footprint. 
909.06 - Building Recesses. 
A.  All Districts. 
1.  Building facades shall be articulated through the use of pilasters and/or recesses that create visible shadow lines and dimensions especially on the street level. 
2.  Street level landscaped courtyards outdoor seating areas and gathering areas shall be incorporated into building and site plan design. 
909.07 - Building Width. 
A.  New Buildings-All Districts. In order to reduce the scale of longer facades and to eliminate the long horizontal expressions of buildings, divisions or breaks in materials shall be included and at least three of the following design strategies shall be incorporated into the design: 
1.  Window bays. 
2.  Special treatment at entrances. 
3.  Variations in roof lines or parapet detailing. 
4.  Awnings. 
5.  Building setbacks or articulation of the facade. 
6.  Rhythm of elements. 
909.08 - Upper Story Setbacks. 
A.  New Buildings-All Districts. 
1.  Building height shall conform to the height of the applicable zoning district. Where three-story buildings are permitted, the third story must be recessed from all facades fronting public rights-of-way at least a distance equal to the vertical distance of the third story height from the second floor footprint, or an average of ten feet across the facade, but no portion of the third story structure shall be closer than six feet to the second story facade. The third story facade shall be designed with railings, pillars, dimensional windows, building recesses or other similar design techniques to break up the third story facade. 
2.  The facades fronting public right-of-ways of every two- and three-story building, longer than 60 feet, must have a recessed second story of approximately 25 percent of the facade's length, setting back a minimum of six feet from the face of the first floor facade. The required third floor setback must follow the frontal plane of the second story setback. 
3.  Wintertime sun orientation, solar access, and views of Lake Minnetonka are significant issues within the Design Districts. Building height should not negatively and significantly impact neighboring properties. 
909.09 - Roof Design. 
A.  All Districts. "Green" roofs, roof garden terraces, arbors and other similar structures are encouraged on roofs of building. 
B.  Roof Materials-All Districts. 
1.  The roof material for all sloped roofs in all districts shall be slate, untreated copper, pre-finished metal, cedar shake or asphalt shingle in dark colors. 
2.  The roof material for all flat roofs in all districts shall be treated synthetic membrane or other similar material in dark colors. 
909.10 - Screening of Rooftop Equipment. 
A.  Lake Street and Bluff Districts. No mechanical equipment for a building may be located on the roof deck. All such mechanical equipment must be located within the interior of the structure. 
B.  Wayzata Blvd District. 
1.  All mechanical equipment shall be completely screened behind a parapet wall, so as not to be visible from adjacent properties and pedestrian view vantage points from adjacent sidewalks. 
2.  No enclosure shall be larger than 25 percent of the roof area. 
909.11 - Facade Transparency. 
A.  Glass Calculations-All Districts. Applications for design approval must include facade diagrams that contain calculations of glass and solid surfaces. Calculations of facade areas for multiple story building shall be measured from grade to the floor above. Calculations of facade areas for one story buildings shall be measured from grade to the roof deck. 
B.  Lake Street District. No less than 50 percent of the ground level facade of any building fronting Lake Street shall be transparent glass. No less than 25 percent of the ground level side and rear facade facing a public right-of-way, parking area or open space shall be transparent glass. 
C.  Bluff District. No less than 35 percent of ground level public facades for buildings containing commercial or office uses shall be transparent glass. 
D.  Wayzata Boulevard District. No less than 50 percent of the ground level facade for buildings containing commercial or office uses fronting Wayzata Blvd shall be transparent glass. 
909.12 - Ground Level Expression-All Districts. 
In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be distinguished from the floors above by the use of at least three of the following elements: 
A.  An intermediate cornice line. 
B.  A difference in building materials or detailing. 
C.  An offset in the facade. 
D.  An awning, trellis, or loggia. 
E.  Arcade. 
F.  Special window lintels. 
G.  Brick/stone corbels. 
909.13 - Entries-All Districts. 
The front facade of all buildings shall be landscaped with window boxes or planters with seasonally appropriate plantings. The main entries shall face the primary street at sidewalk grade. 
909.14 - Building Materials and Quality-All Districts. 
The following standards for building materials and building details apply in all Design Districts: 
A.  Primary Opaque Surfaces. Other than the accent materials listed in Section 909.14.G, 90 percent of the non-glass surfaces of each elevation of the exterior building facade shall be composed of one or more of the following materials: 
1.  Brick. 
2.  Stone. 
3.  Cast stone. 
4.  Factory finished and certified wood, including, but not limited to: 
a)  Wood shingles (cedar shingles six-inch maximum exposure). 
b)  Lap-siding (six-inch maximum width). 
5.  Stucco. 
B.  Facade Coverage. The primary opaque surface materials of all free standing buildings must be the same on all facades of the building. 
C.  Type of Brick. On all facades of a free-standing building where brick is used, full course modular, Roman, Norman or other standard size brick must be used. 
D.  Facade Detail. 
1.  Brick and/or stone facades shall be well detailed and dimensionally designed in order to avoid fractional cuts and odd pieces. All outside brick corners must be full bricks (custom if necessary), with no mitering, forming continuous vertical joints. 
2.  The narrow face of an exposed stone butt joint, at corners, must be a minimum dimension of two inches. Mitered and quirked stone corners are also acceptable. 
E.  Brick Joints. 
1.  The mortar for brick must be dark grey or in the color range of the brick. All joints must be concave or 'v' joint. No mortar may be used beyond the face of the brick. 
2.  All brick walls must be built to avoid efflorescence 
F.  Stone Joints. Stone joints shall be no larger than one-fourth inch. 
G.  Accent Materials. Only the following materials may be used for lintels, sills, cornices, bases, and decorative accent trims, and must be no more than ten percent of the non-glass surfaces of each elevation of the exterior building facade: 
1.  Stone. 
2.  Cast stone. 
3.  Copper (untreated). 
4.  Rock faced stone. 
5.  Aluminum or painted steel structural shapes. 
6.  Fiber cement board. 
7.  Premium grade wood trim with mitered outside corners. Examples of premium grade wood are cedar, redwood, and fir. 
8.  EIFS. 
H.  Parapets, Flashing, Coping. 
1.  Only the following materials may be used for parapets, flashing and coping: 
a)  Copper (untreated). 
b)  Brick. 
c)  Stone. 
d)  Cast stone. 
e)  Premium grade wood. 
2.  Pre-finished, painted .032 aluminum may only be used as a standard parapet coping with a maximum exposed edge of five inches. 
I.  Awnings. 
1.  Only the following types of awnings may be used: 
a)  Fabric awnings of a heavy canvas in dark solid colors or other colors that are approved as part of the design review process. 
b)  Highly detailed, ornate metal in dark colors. 
c)  Glass awnings. 
2.  Backlit awnings are prohibited. 
3.  Awnings with text or graphic material may be permitted but require approval via the sign permit process of the Zoning Ordinance. 
J.  Balconies. Balconies shall be accessible and useable by persons. Fake or unusable balconies are prohibited. All balconies shall remain within the property line. Metal railings with members painted dark, or glass panels are permitted. 
K.  Glass. Glass shall not be mirrored, reflective or darkened. Slight green, bronze and grey tints are acceptable. Spandrel glass shall not be counted as transparent glass for the purposes of calculations under the transparency requirements of Section 909.11 of the Standards, but may be used for detailing purposes. Environmentally appropriate glass, such as Low-emissivity glass, shall be used in all projects. 
L.  Door Systems. Unless there are building security concerns, main entry doors shall be primarily glass. If, for security reasons, a main entry door is not possible or practical, a main entry door must be well detailed. Appropriately designed wood doors may be utilized for retail and office buildings. 
909.15 - Franchise Architecture-All Districts. 
A.  Typical or standardized franchise architecture (including building design that is the trade dress of, or identified with a particular chain, franchise or business and is repetitive in nature) is prohibited. 
B.  Large, bold or bright signage, trade dress or logos must be altered and scaled down to meet the purpose of these standards as articulated herein, and must not be repeated on the facades of the principal structure more than once. All new, altered and/or proposed signage for buildings must be submitted for review under Section 909.22 by the Planning Commission at the time of Design Standards Review application. 
909.16 - Walkways. 
A.  Lake Street District. 
1.  Continuous sidewalks at least 12 feet in width shall be provided along all public street frontages. 
2.  Lighted sidewalks shall extend between rear and side parking areas and building entrances. All sidewalk lighting must project downward. 
3.  Buildings with street frontage exceeding 50 feet shall have at least one bench. 
4.  All sidewalk surfaces must match the exposed aggregate/brick accent sidewalks on Lake Street. 
B.  Bluff District. 
1.  Continuous sidewalks at least five feet in width shall be provided along all public street frontages. The sidewalk street grid shall be maintained and extended wherever possible. 
2.  Where the sidewalk street grid is interrupted by steep slopes or other topographic variations, walkways or stairways shall be built to maintain pedestrian continuity. 
C.  Wayzata Boulevard District. 
1.  Continuous sidewalks at least five feet in width shall be provided along Wayzata Boulevard. 
2.  Lighted sidewalks shall extend between rear or side parking areas and building entrances. 
909.17 - Landscaping. 
A.  All Districts. 
1.  Seasonal landscaping shall be used in all Design Districts, including use of window boxes, hanging flowers baskets, vines and/or other similar seasonal landscaping. If feasible, garden areas and ornamental trees shall be used at the street level. 
2.  Window boxes, hanging baskets and planters with seasonally appropriate plantings shall be used around entries to buildings. 
3.  Vines shall be used to cover walls with more than 100 square feet of uninterrupted surface area. 
4.  Streetscaping shall include all of the following: 
a)  Boulevard species trees, with at least three caliper inches. 
b)  Exposed aggregate sidewalks with brick accents. 
c)  Street lights. 
d)  Benches (if building length is 50 feet or greater), which utilize existing city bench designs. 
e)  Flowers. 
B.  Lake Street District. 
1.  Established Lake Street landscape treatments shall be followed in accordance with the specifications of the Wayzata Engineering Guidelines set forth in Wayzata City Code. Exposed aggregate with brick accent sidewalks shall be used. 
2.  Approved boulevard trees, planted in sidewalk areas, shall be planted no more than 26 feet on center from each other. 
C.  Bluff District and Wayzata Boulevard District. Trees with a minimum of three caliper inches shall be planted no more than 26 feet apart within a landscaped boulevard. 
909.18 - Parking Lot Landscaping-All Districts. 
A landscaped buffer strip at least five feet wide shall be provided between all parking areas and the sidewalk or street. The buffer strip shall consist of shade trees appropriately spaced for the particular Design District, and a decorative metal fence, masonry wall or hedge. A solid wall or dense hedge shall be no less than three feet and no more than four feet in height. 
909.19 - Surface Parking-All Districts. 
A.  Off-street parking shall be located to the rear of buildings. When parking must be located in a side yard adjacent to the street, a landscaped buffer shall be provided in accordance with the Design Standards. The street frontage occupied by parking shall not exceed 60 feet per property. 
B.  Side-by-side parking lots creating a parking area frontage longer than 60 feet are prohibited, except where a heavily landscaped buffer of at least 20 feet wide completely separates both lots. 
C.  Side yard parking shall not extend beyond the front yard setback of the primary building on the property. 
D.  Front yard parking is prohibited. 
E.  There shall be no corner parking. 
909.20 - Bicycle Parking-All Districts. 
Commercial developments requiring more than 20 parking spaces shall provide at least four bicycle parking spaces in a convenient, visible, preferably sheltered location. 
909.21 - Parking Structures. 
A.  All Districts. Parking structures shall meet the following standards, along with all other applicable building code standards: 
1.  The ground floor facade abutting any public street or walkway shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding commercial or office buildings. 
2.  The parking structure shall be designed in such a way that sloped floors do not dominate the appearance of the facade. 
3.  Windows or openings shall be similar to those of surrounding buildings. 
4.  Vines and other significant landscaping shall be used to minimize the visual impact of the parking structure. 
B.  Lake Street District. 
1.  If any part of a parking structure abuts Lake Street, that entire portion of the ground floor facade shall be occupied by at least 80 percent retail usage, extending to a depth of at least 30 feet. 
2.  The ground floor level of a parking structure shall not come within 40 feet of Lake Street. 
3.  The top decks of parking structures visible from adjacent properties shall be designed with trellises and landscaping sufficient to screen at least 50 percent of the visible area. 
909.22 - Signs-All Districts. 
A.  Compatibility. 
1.  Signs shall be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building, and with other signs on nearby buildings. Signs shall be an integral part of the building and site design. 
2.  A sign plan shall be developed for buildings which house more than one business. Signs need not match, but shall be compatible with one another. 
2.  Franchise or national chains must comply with these Sign Standards to create signs compatible with their context. 
3.  When illuminated signs are proposed, only the text and/or logo portion of the sign may be illuminated. Illuminated signs must be compatible with the location. Illumination of the sign to highlight architectural details is permitted. Fixtures shall be small, shielded, and directed towards the sign rather than toward the street, so as to minimize glare for pedestrians and adjacent properties. 
4.  Sign plans must be submitted for review as part of an Applicant for Design Approval. Proposed signs must also conform to the requirements of Chapter 927 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Sign Location. 
1.  Wall signs on a storefront-type building shall be placed between the first and second floors of a building. 
2.  Wall or roof signs on buildings that are not storefront type buildings shall be placed where they do not obscure architectural features. 
C.  Sign Material. 
1.  The material of which signs are constructed shall be consistent and compatible with the original construction materials and architectural style of the building facade on which the signs are affixed. 
2.  Material, such as wood and metal, shall be used, as appropriate, for the sign location. 
3.  Neon signs may only be used for windows. 
909.23 - Permitted Signs. 
A.  Lake Street District. Only the following types of signs are permitted in the Lake Street District: 
1.  Awning, canopy or marquee signs. 
2.  Wall signs. 
3.  Monument or ground signs. 
4.  Projecting signs. 
5.  Window signs (small accent signs). 
6.  Roof signs if located on pitched-roof buildings, below the peak of the roof. 
B.  Wayzata Boulevard District. Only the following types of signs are permitted in the Wayzata Boulevard District: 
1.  Wall or awning signs. 
2.  Free-standing signs. 
3.  Monument or ground signs. 
Low-profile ground signs or monument signs are required for highway-oriented commercial uses such as restaurants and gas stations. Sign materials, colors and architectural detailing shall be similar to those of the principal building. External illumination of signs is permitted. 
C.  Bluff District. Only the following types of signs are permitted in the Bluff District: 
1.  Wall, awning or projecting signs (for storefront buildings at the street line). 
2.  Free-standing, ground or monument signs (for buildings with front yards). 
3.  Roof signs if located on pitched-roof buildings, below the peak of the roof. 
909.24 - Parking Lot and Building Lighting-All Districts. 
A.  Parking lot lighting shall be designed in such a way as to be in scale with its surroundings, and reduce glare. 
B.  Cutoff fixtures shall be located below the mature height of trees located in parking lot islands so as to minimize ambient glow and light pollution. 
C.  Pedestrian-scale lighting, not exceeding 13 feet in height, shall be located on walkways and adjacent to store entrances. All sidewalk lighting must be projected downwards. City light standard shall be followed for all public streets. 
D.  Light posts shall be of a dark color. 
E.  Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the architecture of the building. 
F.  Lights attached to buildings shall be screened by the building's architectural features to eliminate glare to adjacent properties. All facade lighting must be projected downwards. 
G.  All lighting fixtures shall comply with City Code Section 916.06 as it relates to glare. 
909.25 - Design Review Process-Presentation Requirements. 
A.  In addition to the other requirement of the Zoning Ordinance, applicants seeking design approval under the Standards shall provide the following design information to the City with an application: 
1.  Colored Illustrative Site Plan of the proposed project. 
2.  Illustrated Landscape Plan of the proposed project (this can be incorporated into the Site Plan). All images shall depict landscaping at five years' growth. 
3.  Samples of all exterior materials used in connection with the project including (but not limited to). 
a)  Brick mortar color. 
b)  Glass samples. 
c)  Window frame color. 
d)  Primary Opaque Surfaces and Accent Materials. 
4.  Accurately colored and detailed three-dimensional computer images from a program like Google Sketch Up (or similar program) from at least two vantage points that clearly show all aspects of the project. For small projects where the design changes mainly focus on a street facade, the computer images may be waived. 
5.  Colored building elevations of all facades (one-eighth inch scale min.). The applicant must also include the adjacent buildings. The Planning Commission and City Council must be able to accurately see the scale of adjacent buildings and landscaping from such elevation documents. 
6.  Facade diagrams with calculations of glass and solid surfaces for all exterior facades. 
7.  For the presentations before the City Planning Commission and the City Council, applicants shall provide a PowerPoint (or other similar format) presentation which provides a project overview and highlights the project's design features. 
8.  Other information and material reasonably requested by City staff, and/or information and material that applicant believes would be helpful to the City in evaluating the project under the standards. 
B.  The City Planning Department may require an applicant for design approval to prepare an accurate three dimensional massing model, built to at least a 1"= 30' scale, that depicts the proposed development; any existing buildings on the site that will remain following the proposed development; any adjacent structures; and topography on the site with a contour interval of not less than two feet. A physical massing model is required as part of a Design Review application for all projects involving properties of six acres or larger in lot area. For all other properties requiring a design review application, the City Planning Department may require a physical massing model if the City Planning Department determines that: 
1.  The project is a complex development with structures or architectural features; 
2.  The project is of great public significance; or 
3.  The site has unique topography, sensitive natural, manmade features, or is highly visible. If such massing model is required, the City Planning Department shall notify the applicant within ten days of submission of the application, and the following shall apply: 
a)  Before preparing the model, the applicant shall confer with the City Planning Department to determine whether the model should show topography and existing buildings on properties within 350 feet to the subject property, to provide a neighborhood connect for the proposed development. 
b)  The applicant shall provide the model for inspection by the City Planning Department no less than one week prior to the initial meeting at which the application is scheduled for review by the Planning Commission, so the Planning Department may confirm the accuracy and completeness of the model. 
c)  Following conclusion of the review of the project, the applicant shall submit photographs of the model so documentation of the appearance of the model can be part of the record of the application. 
909.26 - Design Review Process Schedule. 
A.  The Design Review process shall follow the following general schedule: 
1.  City staff shall have at least 30 days to review a competed development application and all required materials prior to review by the Planning Commission meeting. 
2.  The application and all supporting information shall be formally reviewed by City staff for conformance with the Design Standards. 
3.  If the application is deemed completed by City Staff under the Section 909.25, City staff shall inform the applicant; prepare a written report on the application; and schedule the application for a public hearing before the Planning Commission. 
4.  After the Planning Commission has held a public hearing on the application, and made a report and recommendation to the City Council, City staff will schedule the application for review by the City Council. The City Council will review the Application and provide a formal approval or denial of the application. 
5.  If the applicant materially alters an application for design approval under these Standards after the Planning Commission has made a recommendation on the application, the applicant must submit a side-by-side comparison, which highlights the changes in submittal materials presented to the Planning Commission and the altered submission to the City Council. This side-by-side comparison submittal must be received by City Staff at least one week prior to the City Council meeting at which the application will be reviewed. 
909.27 - Meeting with City Planning Department. 
A.  If requested by the City, after submitting an application for Design Approval, the applicant shall meet with the City Planning Department. Such meeting with the City Planning Department, if requested, must take place prior to the review of the Planning Commission and other City approvals. 
B.  At such meeting, the City Planning Department will review the Standards with the applicant and determine what information and material may be required for review of the project and the application. 
C.  The applicant may schedule additional meetings with the City Planning Department as needed during the design process. 
909.28 - Final Review-Design Report. 
A.  The applicant shall schedule a final review with the City Planning Department, from which the City Planning Department staff shall prepare a staff report on project design to be used by the Planning Commission in its review of the application. 
B.  The staff report on design shall provide a detailed review of the design of the project and its conformance to the Design Standards. 
909.29 - Deviations from the Design Standards-All Districts. 
A.  With the exception of Section 909.10 of the Design Standards, a deviation from any section of the Design Standards shall require a finding by the City Council (after considering the Planning Commission's recommendation) that the negative impact of such deviation is outweighed by one or more of the following factors: 
1.  The extent to which the project advances specific policies and provisions of the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The extent to which the deviation permits greater conformity with other Standards, policies behind the Standards, or with other Zoning Ordinance standards. 
3.  The positive effect of the project on the area in which the project is proposed. 
4.  The alleviation of an undue burden, taking into account current leasing, housing and commercial conditions. 
5.  The accommodation of future possible uses contemplated by the Design Standards, the Zoning Ordinance or the Comprehensive Plan. 
6.  A national, state or local historic designation. 
7.  The project is the remodeling of an existing building which largely otherwise conforms to the Design Standards. 
909.30 - Conflict with Other Sections of the Zoning Ordinance. 
To the extent possible, these Design Standards are meant to be read in conjunction with all other applicable requirements in the Zoning Ordinance. To the extent there is a conflict between the Design Standards and any other section of the Zoning Ordinance or City Code, the stricter standard shall apply. 
CHAPTER 910 - ADMINISTRATION-PLANNING COMMISSION 

910.01 - Establishment. 
There hereby is established a Planning Commission for the City of Wayzata. In addition to those duties and functions outlined in this Ordinance, the City Council by resolution may establish additional duties and functions for the Planning Commission. 
910.02 - Functions. 
The Planning Commission shall hold public hearings as required by this Ordinance, and it may initiate such additional hearings as it deems are necessary. To the extent possible, the Planning Commission shall transmit recommendations to the City Council on all matters which it considers. 
910.03 - Records. 
The Zoning Administrator shall provide for permanent records of the Planning Commission's proceedings, which shall include minutes of its meetings, its finding of fact, and the action taken on each matter which it considers. 
CHAPTER 911 - ADMINISTRATION-HERITAGE PRESERVATION BOARD. 

911.01 - Declaration of Public Policy and Purpose. 
Pursuant to the powers set forth in Minn. Stats. Ch. 84C, the City Council of the City of Wayzata hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the preservation, protection, perpetuation and use of areas, places, buildings, structures, districts, or objects having a special historical, community or aesthetic interest or value will promote the health, prosperity, and welfare of the community. The purpose of this Ordinance is to enlist the cooperation of the property owners in the City to: 
A.  Safeguard the heritage of the City of Wayzata by preserving sites and structures which reflect elements of the City's cultural, natural, social, economic, political, visual or architectural history; 
B.  Protect and enhance the City of Wayzata's appeal and attraction to residents, visitors and tourists, and to serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry; 
C.  Enhance the natural, visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the City of Wayzata; 
D.  Foster civic pride in the history, beauty, and notable accomplishments of the people and places that have helped shape the City of Wayzata; and 
E.  Promote the preservation and continued use of historic sites and structures for the education and general welfare of the people who live and work in or visit the City of Wayzata. 
911.02 - Definitions. 
As used herein, "Heritage Preservation Site" shall mean any area, place, building, structure, land, district, or object which has been duly designated as a Heritage Preservation Site pursuant to Section 911.04 of this Ordinance. 
911.03 - Establishment of Heritage Preservation Board. 
A.  Members. There is hereby created and established a City of Wayzata Heritage Preservation Board, hereinafter called the "Board" which shall consist of five voting members of whom a minimum of three shall be residents of the City, appointed by the City Council. All members should possess some knowledge or deep interest in historic preservation whether through education, professional training or devotion to the subject. The chair of the Planning Commission or his/her designate shall serve as an ex-officio non-voting member of the Board. 
B.  Terms of Office. The City Council will initially designate two appointees to serve a term of one year and three appointees to serve a term of two years. All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of two years. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms. In the event of a vacancy, the vacancy for the unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner as the appointment was made. Members shall serve without compensation and shall continue to hold office until their successors have been appointed. 
C.  Organization. The Board shall elect from its members, such officers as it may deem necessary. The Board, when necessary, shall have the responsibility to designate and appoint from its members various committees. The Board shall make such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Ordinance, which are not inconsistent with the laws of the City of Wayzata and the State of Minnesota. The Board shall make an annual report to both the City Council and the Planning Commission, in February, containing a statement of its activities and plans. 
D.  Additional Responsibilities and Duties of the Board. The Board shall have the following responsibilities and duties in addition to those otherwise specified in this ordinance: 
1.  The Board shall conduct a continuing survey of all areas, places, buildings, structures, districts, or objects in the City of Wayzata which the Board, on the basis of information available to it, has reason to believe are significant to the cultural, natural, social, economic, political, visual, or architectural history of the City of Wayzata; 
2.  The Board shall continually survey all areas of the City to determine needed and desirable improvements of older buildings throughout Wayzata, acting in an advisory capacity to owners of historically significant sites regarding their preservation, restoration and rehabilitation; 
3.  The Board shall work for the continuing education of Wayzata's residents with respect to the civic, natural, and architectural heritage of the City and to protect and enhance the City's appeal and attraction to residents, visitors and tourists, and to serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry; 
4.  The Board shall keep current a public register of designated and proposed Heritage Preservation Sites and areas, along with the plans and programs that pertain to them; 
5.  The Board shall have the authority to accept monetary gifts made to the City (to be administered by City Staff) for the purpose of historical preservation, including preparing applications for heritage preservation grant funds. Other types of gifts such as land, easements, etc. are subject to the approval of the City Council; 
6.  The Board may accept the services of technical experts and such persons as may be required to perform duties, as authorized by the City Council; and 
7.  The Board may on a continuing basis collect and review city planning and development records, documents, studies, models, maps, plans and drawings to be entered into the Wayzata Public Library Historical Archives as a permanent record of city history and development. 
911.04 - Designation of Heritage Preservation Sites. 
A.  Documentation. The Board shall recommend to the Planning Commission areas, places, buildings, structures, districts, or objects to be designated as Heritage Preservation Sites. Documentation for the designation should include at least one of the following: 
1.  National Register of Historical Places. A site application approved by the National Park Service under the National Preservation Act of 1966. 
2.  Preservation Easement. Fully executed in a form acceptable to the Board and recordable in the Hennepin County land records. 
3.  Historical Planning Report. Prepared by a historic preservation consultant whose professional qualifications are satisfactory to the Board. 
B.  Criteria. In considering the designation of a Heritage Preservation Site, the Board shall apply the following criteria regarding the proposed site: 
1.  Its character, interest, or value as part of the development heritage or cultural characteristics of the City of Wayzata or the State of Minnesota; 
2.  Its location as a site of significant historic event; 
3.  Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, period, form or treatment; 
4.  Its identification with a person or persons who have significantly contributed to the culture and development of the City of Wayzata or the State of Minnesota; 
5.  Its identification as work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the City of Wayzata or the State of Minnesota; 
6.  Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural innovation; and 
7.  Its unique location, natural attributes or singular physical characteristic representing an established and at one time or now familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, a community, the City, a region, or the State of Minnesota. 
C.  Planning Commission Review and Hearings. The Board shall make recommendations to the Planning Commission of the proposed designation of a Heritage Preservation Site, including boundaries, and shall work jointly with the Planning Commission with respect to the relationship of the proposed Heritage Preservation Site to the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Wayzata. The Planning Commission shall express its opinions as to the effects of the proposed designation upon the surrounding neighborhood, and upon the City's Comprehensive Plan, and shall submit to the City Council its recommendation of approval, denial, or modifications to the proposed designation. 
The Board's recommendation shall become part of the Planning Commission's official record and shall be submitted by the Planning Commission to the City Council, along with the Planning Commission's recommendations concerning the proposed designation. 
Prior to recommending the designation of a Heritage Preservation Site, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and seek the comments of all concerned citizens. Prior to such hearing the Planning Commission shall cause to be published in the City's official newspaper notice of the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be sent to all owners of the property proposed to be designated a Heritage Preservation Site and to all property owners within 50 feet of the boundary of the area proposed to be designated a Heritage Preservation Site. The notice shall contain an explanation for the proposed designation, a clear description of the property designated, and a short description of the justification for the proposed designation and a time and place for the meeting. 
D.  City Council Action. The City Council, upon request of the Board and the Planning Commission, or at its own instigation, may by resolution designate a Heritage Preservation Site. When the City Council is reviewing a proposed designation, it shall approve, deny, or may make such modifications, changes and alterations based on the recommendations of the Board and Planning Commission or its own findings, and the standards set forth in Subsection 4. 
E.  Voluntary Nature. No Heritage Preservation Site shall be so designated without the voluntary, written consent of the owner of the site at the time of designation. A designation is binding upon all future owners of the property unless the designation is removed as provided in Section 911.06. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Section shall limit the rights of the City to acquire any property by gift, negotiation or eminent domain, and to thereafter designate the property as a Heritage Preservation Site in accordance with this ordinance. 
911.05 - Effect of Designation. 
A.  Identification Plaque. Those sites having been designated as Heritage Preservation Sites by the City Council shall be awarded a numbered plaque to be displayed on the exterior of the site in full public view. The plaque shall remain the property of the City. The Board shall recommend removal of such plaque should the site or structure be so altered as to destroy the historic integrity of the specific criteria that was used to justify the designation of the respective site. 
B.  Filing of Document. The office of the City Clerk shall record the designation/preservation easement of areas, places, buildings, structures, districts, or objects as Heritage Preservation Sites with the Hennepin County Recorder or the Hennepin County Registrar of Titles and shall transmit a copy of the recording document to all appropriate City departments. 
C.  Site Alteration Permit. Once a property has been designated as a Heritage Preservation Site, the owners of said property must apply for a Site Alteration Permit from the City Council in order to make any of the following changes to the site: 
1.  Remodel, alter or repair in any manner, including paint color, which will change the exterior appearance of the Heritage Preservation Site. 
2.  New exterior construction. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  Moving of buildings. 
5.  Demolition in whole or in part. This does not apply to structures required to be demolished in accordance with Minn. Stats. Ch. 463. 
The application for a Site Alteration Permit must be accompanied by detailed plans including a site plan, building elevations, and design details and materials as deemed necessary by City staff to evaluate the request. Besides the Site Alteration Permit the regular City Permits shall be required. 
The Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation as set forth in 36 CFR 67 will be the basis for a Site Alteration Permit application. The Building Official will not issue a Site Alteration Permit if the City Council finds that the change(s) will materially impair the historical integrity of the specific criteria that was used to justify the designation of the respective site. 
The City Planner will review the Site Alteration Permit application and provide comments to the Board who shall make recommendations to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations to the City Council. Prior to such hearing the Planning Commission shall cause to be published in the City's official newspaper notice of the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be sent to all owners of the Heritage Preservation Site, all property owners within 350 feet of the boundary of the Heritage Preservation Site and the President of the Wayzata Historical Society. The notice shall contain a description of the proposed changes to the Heritage Preservation Site. 
When the City Council is reviewing a Site Alteration Permit, it shall approve, deny, or make such modifications, changes and alterations based on the recommendations of the Board and Planning Commission, and its own findings. 
In emergency situations, where immediate repair or demolition is needed to protect the safety of a Heritage Preservation Site or its inhabitants, the Building Official may issue a building or demolition permit without a Site Alteration Permit. In the case of a permit issued pursuant to this Paragraph, the Building Official shall immediately notify the Board, in writing, of its action and specify the facts and conditions constituting the emergency situation. The Board will have 30 days in which to review any emergency repairs and make its recommendations to the Planning Commission as to whether any additional repairs or modifications will be needed in order to bring the Heritage Preservation Site in to compliance with this ordinance. 
Any violation of, or neglect to comply with, the provisions of this Paragraph on the part of any person, or any neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant of any premises to allow said property to be examined as herein provided, and the same to be cleaned, repaired, reconstructed, or abandoned shall be a violation of this Code, and said person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with Chapter 104 of the City Code. In addition, the City Council or its agents reserves the right to either require the property owner to restore the property to its historic state or enter the property to make the necessary changes, and assess the costs to the property owner. 
911.06 - Removal of Designation and Extinguishment of a Preservation Easement. 
A property owner can petition to have the designation as a Heritage Preservation Site removed or a preservation easement extinguished. The property owner must state the reasons for requesting this action and provide information supporting such reasons. The City Council reserves the right to have the property inspected by the City Building Official and/or other consultants to validate these reasons. Reasons for requesting such removal/extinguishment may include, but are not limited to, that the site is no longer historically significant, or that retaining the designation/preservation easement would create an unforeseen economic hardship. In the event unforeseen economic hardship is offered as a reason, the property owner must provide data sufficient to establish such economic hardship and evidence that the site has been advertised for sale for restoration or reuse, and that sale for restoration or reuse is not economically feasible. 
Prior to the removal of a site designation/extinguishment of a preservation easement, the Board shall make recommendations to the Planning Commission and the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and seek the comments of all concerned citizens. The public hearing and publication notice requirements shall be the same as for a Designation Hearing. 
The Board's recommendation shall become part of the Planning Commission's official record along with the Planning Commission's recommendation to the City Council concerning the proposed removal of a site designation/extinguishment of a preservation easement. 
The City Council can choose to approve or deny any proposed removal of a site designation/extinguishment of a preservation easement, as it deems necessary after consideration of: 
A.  The recommendation of the Board and Planning Commission; 
B.  Information supplied by the property owner; 
C.  Other information deemed relevant by the City Council; and 
D.  The public policy and purpose of this Ordinance. Approval for removal of a site designation/extinguishment of a preservation easement requires a simple majority of the City Council. 
911.07 - Limitations. 
The guidelines for limitations of the Board are given below: 
A.  The Board is an advisory committee to the Planning Commission and City Council and therefore shall have no power to bind the City by contract or otherwise. 
B.  The Board shall have no communication or make application to the National Register or to the State of Minnesota, or encourage others to do so, for the designation of a historic site or district without the consent of the City Council. 
CHAPTER 915 - NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS 

915.01 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Section to specify those requirements, circumstances and conditions under which non-conforming buildings, structures, uses, and lots will be operated, maintained, and regulated in their respective zoning districts. It is necessary that all non-conforming buildings, structures, uses, and lots not be allowed to continue without restriction as set forth in this Section. Furthermore, it is the intent of this Section that all non-conforming uses shall be eventually brought into conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance and the City Code. 
915.02 - Provisions. 
A.  Non-Conforming Use. 
1.  Any non-conforming use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be enlarged nor shall buildings or structures associated with such use be enlarged or reconstructed in violation of Section 915.02.A.5, but may be continued at the size and in the manner of operation existing upon such date. 
2.  Normal maintenance of a building, structure or land associated with a non-conforming use is allowed, so long as said maintenance does not physically expand or intensify the non-conforming use. 
3.  No non-conforming building or structure associated with a non-conforming use shall be moved to another lot or to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was constructed or was conducted at the time of this Ordinance adoption unless such movement shall bring the non-conforming use into complete compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the City Code. 
4.  When any lawful non-conforming use of any building, structure or land in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use. 
5.  If at any time a non-conforming building, or structure, associated with a non-conforming use is wholly or partially destroyed by an act of God or fire or other unexpected event (i.e. tornadoes, straight line winds, lightning, flooding, etc.) not intentionally caused by the Owner or person acting on behalf of Owner to the extent of more than 50 percent of its fair market value, (said value to be determined by having an appraisal setting forth the estimated value of the structure immediately before and after the destruction completed by the City through an independent appraiser hired by the City, at the cost of the Owner) then without further action by the Council, the building, structure and the land upon which such non-conforming use is located or maintained shall, from and after the date of said destruction, be subject to all the regulations specified by the zoning regulations for the district in which such land is located. Any building or structure associated with such non-conforming use which is damaged to an extent of less than 50 percent of its value may be restored if it is reconstructed within 18 months after the date of said damage. This subsection shall also apply to non-conforming buildings or structures associated with a non-conforming use which have been destroyed by the ravages of age. The 50 percent destruction calculation shall be determined by calculating the difference between the current market value versus the value of the building or structure had it received reasonable care and maintenance. The date of destruction, in the case of destruction by the ravages of age, shall be considered to be that date upon which the City notifies the owner of its determination that destruction by ravage of age in excess of 50 percent has taken place. 
6.  Whenever a lawful non-conforming use of building, structure or land is either discontinued or abandoned for a period of six months, any future use of said building, structure or land shall be made to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance and the City Code. 
7.  When any building, structure or property associated with a non-conforming use, based upon documented study and evidence, poses a danger and/or threat to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community, the City may do the following: 
a)  Legally declare the building, structure and/or the property a nuisance; 
b)  After the owner of the building, structure and/or property is notified in writing by the City of the nuisance, require the owner to provide the City a documented time schedule and program with rationale to support the proposed termination of the building, structure or property associated with non-conforming property use, which will result in the termination of the non-conforming use. The termination schedule shall be based upon, but not limited to, factors such as the initial investment and the degree of threat or danger being posed. The acceptability of the time schedule shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator with right of appeal to the City Council in accordance with Section 6 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and Lots. 
1.  Non-conforming principal and accessory buildings and structures may be expanded, enlarged or modified, or conforming building and structures can be added, provided that the use of the land is conforming to this Ordinance and the City Code, and provided that the expansion, enlargement or modification meets the current zoning regulations and no other non-conformities are created. 
2.  Except as allowed in Section 915.02.B.5, a non-conforming building or structure may not be removed, razed or demolished and a new building or structure constructed unless the new building or structure is in full compliance with this Ordinance and the City Code. 
3.  Nothing in this Section shall prevent the replacing of a building or structure in safe condition when said building or structure is declared unsafe by the Building Official, providing the use of the building or structure is allowed for that property and provided the non-conformity is not increased beyond the existing conditions upon the lot and no other deviations within this Ordinance and the City Code are created. 
4.  No non-conforming building or structure shall be moved to another lot or to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was constructed unless such movement shall bring the non-conformance into complete compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
5.  If at any time a non-conforming building or structure is wholly or partially destroyed, by an act of God or fire or other unexpected event (i.e. tornadoes, straight line winds, lighting, flooding, etc.) not intentionally caused by the Owner or person acting on behalf of the Owner, said building or structure may be reconstructed so long as the non-conformity is not increased beyond the existing conditions upon the land and no other deviations within this Ordinance or the City Code are created and so long as it is reconstructed within 18 months after the date of said damage. 
6.  Legal Non-Conforming Lots. 
a)  Vacant or Redeveloped Residential Lots. 
1)  Except where sanitary sewer has not been provided to the lot, a lot of record existing as of November 1, 1988, in a Residential District, which does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance as to area or width may be utilized for single family detached dwelling purposes, provided that: 
(a)  In the "R-1A" District, the lot in question is at minimum 40,000 square feet in area and has a minimum frontage at the building setback line of 150 feet; 
(b)  In all other residential districts, the measurements of such lot's area and frontage width are within 80 percent of the requirements of the respective district, as established by this Ordinance. 
2)  The preceding subsection B.6.a)1) is not intended to permit a reduction in front, side and back yard setbacks. 
3)  In the event that the measurements of such lot's area and width do not comply with subsection B.6.a)1) above, then approval for the construction of a single family dwelling may be requested as a conditional use permit, subject to and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. 
b)  Developed Lots. An existing conforming use on a lot of substandard size may be expanded or enlarged if such expansion or enlargement meets all other provisions of this Ordinance. 
c)  Unsafe Conditions. Nothing in this Section shall limit the City's right to declare a building, structure or other condition as unsafe, nor limit the right of City to require immediate action be taken by an Owner to ensure public safety under applicable provisions of the City Code of other applicable laws or regulations. 
CHAPTER 916 - GENERAL BUILDING AND PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

916.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section of the Zoning Ordinance is to establish general development performance standards. These standards are intended and designed to ensure compatibility of uses; to prevent urban blight, deterioration and decay; and to enhance the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the community. 
916.02 - Dwelling Unit Restriction. 
A.  No garage, tent, accessory building, travel trailer or motor home shall at any time be used as living quarters, temporarily or permanently. 
B.  Tents, play houses or similar structures may be used for play or recreational purposes. 
C.  Basements and cellars may be used as living quarters or rooms as a portion of the principal residential dwelling. Energy conserving designs in housing are not prohibited by this provision of the Ordinance, provided that a conditional use permit is approved by the City Council and the structure complies with standards imposed by the State Building Code. 
916.03 - Platted and Unplatted Property. 
A.  Any person desiring to improve property shall submit to the Building Official a survey of said premises and information on the location and dimension of existing and proposed buildings, location of easements crossing the property, encroachments, and any other information which may be necessary to ensure conformance to City Ordinances. 
B.  All buildings shall be so placed so that they will not obstruct future streets which may be constructed by the City in conformity with existing streets, adopted plans, and according to the system and standards employed by the City. 
C.  Substandard lots of record shall be governed by Chapter 915 of this Ordinance. 
D.  Except in the case of planned unit development as provided for in Chapter 933 of this Ordinance, not more than one principal building shall be located on a lot. The words "principal building" shall be given their common, ordinary meaning as defined in Chapter 902 of this Ordinance, in the case of doubt or on any questions or interpretation the decision of the Zoning administrator shall be final, subject to the right to appeal to the Planning Commission and City Council. Except in the C-2 District, shopping centers shall be interpreted as having more than one principal building. 
E.  On a through lot (a lot fronting on two parallel streets), both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying the yard and parking setback regulations of this Ordinance. In addition, no home on a through lot or corner lot in any residential zone shall maintain direct access to any arterial street designated as such by the Comprehensive Plan. 
F.  When a development is proposed which is to be located on two or more lots, and such lots are required to meet the minimum district area and frontage requirement and/or are required to accommodate the use, the lots shall be combined in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance, prior to the issuing of a building permit. 
G.  When two or more lots are located in the same residential district, one or more of which lack adequate area or dimensions to qualify for residential use under the current Ordinance requirements and are contiguous and held in one ownership, they shall be combined for use in order to meet the lot requirements by subdividing the property in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance. 
916.04 - Grading and Drainage. 
A.  No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water runoff causing flooding, erosion, or deposit of minerals on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water course, ponding area, or other public facilities subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer. 
B.  In the case of all residential subdivisions, multiple family, and business developments, the grading and drainage plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and the final drainage plan shall be subject to the Engineer's written approval. In the case of such uses, no modification in grade and drainage flow through fill, erection of retaining walls or other such actions shall be allowed until such plans have been reviewed and received written approval from the City Engineer. 
C.  Except for written authorization of the City Engineer, the top of the foundation and garage floor of all structures shall be one foot above the grade of the crown of the abutting street upon which the property fronts. 
D.  Modifications which serve to alter the average and typical natural grade of an individual lot more than two feet shall require the approval of the City Council. 
916.05 - Traffic Sight Visibility Triangle. 
Except for a governmental agency for the purpose of screening, no wall, fence, structure, tree, shrub, vegetation or other obstruction shall be placed on or extend into any yard or right-of-way area so as to pose a danger to traffic by obscuring the view of approaching vehicular traffic or pedestrians from any street or driveway. Visibility from any street or driveway shall be unobstructed between the height of three feet and six feet, measured from where both street, driveway or railway center lines intersect within the triangle described as beginning at the intersection of the projected curb line of two intersecting streets or drives, thence 30 feet along one curb line, thence diagonally to a point 30 feet from the point of beginning along the other curb line (see attached drawing). The exception to this requirement shall be where there is a tree, planting or landscape arrangement within such area that will not create a total obstruction wider than two feet. These requirements shall not apply to conditions that legally exist prior to the effective date of this Ordinance unless such conditions are determined to constitute a safety hazard by the Zoning Administrator. 
916.06 - Glare. 
Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign or other structure, shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential property, over public water or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding shall not be directed into any adjoining property or over public water. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property or over public water. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property, over public water, or public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one foot candle (meter reading) as measured from the center line of said street. Any light or combination of lights which case light on residential property or over public water shall not exceed four foot candles (meter reading) as measured from said property. 
916.07 - Smoke. 
The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulation APC 7005, as amended. 
916.08 - Dust and Other Particulated Matter. 
The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulated matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulation APC 7005, as amended. 
916.09 - Odors. 
The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulation APC 7005, as amended. 
916.10 - Noise. 
Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NCP 7010, as amended. 
916.11 - Refuse. 
A.  Passenger automobiles and trucks not currently licensed by the State, or which are because of mechanical deficiency incapable of movement under their own power, parked or stored outside for a period in excess of 72 hours, and all materials stored outside in violation of the City Ordinances are considered refuse or junk and shall be disposed of. 
B.  Any accumulation of refuse on any premises not stored in containers which comply with City Code, or any accumulation of refuse including car parts on any premises which has remained thereon for more than one week is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated by order of the City Health Officer, as provided by Minnesota Statutes and the cost of abatement may be assessed on the property where the nuisance was found, as provided by law. 
916.12 - Exterior Storage/Display. 
A.  Exterior Storage. In all zoning districts, all materials and equipment except as specifically noted and as provided for in Chapters 951 through 990 of this Ordinance shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and the public right-of-way, except for the following: 
1.  Clothes line pole and wires. 
2.  Not more than two recreational vehicles and equipment (not including race cars). Refer to Section 920.08.A of the Zoning Ordinance regarding Off-Street-Parking. 
3.  Construction and landscaping material currently being used on the premises. 
4.  Off-street parking of passenger vehicles and non-commercial trucks not exceeding a gross weight of 12,000 pounds in residential areas (both on and off-street). 
B.  Outdoor Display. In C-2 and C-3 Zoning Districts, merchandise which is offered for sale may be displayed beyond the confines of a building, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall not constitute a greater number of square feet than ten percent of the ground floor area of the building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is of a type customarily displayed outdoors. No storage of any type shall be permitted within the one-half of the required setback nearest a street nor within any required interior side yard or rear yard setback. Additional parking spaces shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 920 of this Ordinance for such display space based upon the square footage of the area involved. 
916.13 - Sewage Disposal. 
Once available, all on-site sewage disposal systems shall be connected to the public sanitary system within two years. 
916.14 - Waste Material. 
Waste material resulting from or used in industrial or commercial manufacturing, fabricating, servicing, processing or trimming shall not be washed into the public storm sewer system nor the sanitary sewer system or any public water body, but shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the Minnesota State Fire Marshall, the Pollution Control Agency, and the Department of Natural Resources. 
916.15 - Bulk Storage (Liquid). 
All uses associated with the bulk storage of all gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemical, flammable and similar liquids shall comply with requirements of the Minnesota State Fire Marshall's and Minnesota Department of Agriculture Offices and have documents from those offices stating the use is in compliance. 
916.16 - Radiation Emission. 
All activities that emit radioactivity shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
916.17 - Electrical Emission. 
All activities which create electrical emissions shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications Commission. 
916.18 - Building Security. 
All multiple family buildings shall be provided with security systems subject to comment of the Chief of Police and the Building Official. 
916.19 - Sales in Residential Areas. 
A.  Personal Vehicles. 
1.  Vehicles sold in residential areas shall be the personal property of the occupant. 
2.  Sales of personal vehicles shall be limited to no more than one vehicle per calendar year, unless approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
3.  Vehicles for sale shall not be parked in any portion of the public right-of-way, public boulevard, or required front yard except a designated, improved driveway. 
4.  For sale signs on or in such vehicles shall be limited to two square feet. 
B.  Garage or Rummage Sales. 
1.  Merchandise offered for sale shall be the personal property of the occupant. 
2.  Sales shall be limited to a maximum of four consecutive days and occurring no more than two times within one calendar year per property. 
3.  All goods shall be confined within a building and improved driveway with no display occurring within other portions of the front yard. 
4.  Signs shall be governed by Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
CHAPTER 917 - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES AND EQUIPMENT 

917.01 - Single Family Detached Uses. 
A.  Except as may be specifically provided, no accessory use, building, structure or equipment shall be allowed within a required front yard. With the exception of a garage servicing a residential use, or a guest or caretaker's house in the R-1A Zoning District, no accessory building or equipment may be placed within a front yard. 
B.  Within the R-1A, R-1, R-2A and R-2 Zoning Districts, a garage not exceeding 1,000 square feet shall be considered an integral part of the principal building if it is attached to the principal building or is connected to it by a covered passageway and such garages are exempt from the provisions of this Subsection. 
C.  In those residential zoning districts which are not specified in subsection B above, the total floor area of either an attached garage or a detached garage for a single family detached dwelling shall not exceed 750 square feet of floor area and not exceed the ground coverage of the dwelling, except by conditional use. 
D.  No accessory building, structure, and/or detached garage or combination thereof for a single-family dwelling shall occupy more than 25 percent of the area of the rear yard. 
E.  Except in the R-1A and R-1 Zoning Districts, no building permit shall be issued for more than one detached or attached private garage for each single family dwelling, except by conditional use permit. 
F.  With the exception of the R-1A and R-1 Zoning Districts, no building permit shall be issued for the construction of an accessory building for a single family dwelling when an existing detached garage is located on the same lot, except by conditional use permit. 
G.  With the exception of the R-1A and R-1 Zoning Districts, no permit shall be issued for the construction of more than one accessory building and/or structure, except by conditional use permit. 
H.  Accessory buildings may encroach into the required rear yard setbacks within the rear yard of a lot, except, however, that no such encroachment may occur on required easement, or in a required side yard setback abutting a street in the case of a corner lot. 
917.02 - Garages with Alley Access. 
Private garages having direct access onto an alley shall be setback 20 feet from the alley lot line. In cases where reasonable difficulty is encountered in meeting this requirement, deviations to the setback standard may be approved by conditional use permit. 
917.03 - Size. 
Except in the case of single family detached dwellings, accessory buildings shall not exceed 30 percent of the gross floor area of the principal buildings. In those cases where the standards are exceeded, a planned unit development conditional use permit shall be required. 
917.04 - Setbacks. 
Accessory buildings shall be setback from adjoining lots as prescribed in the applicable district and shall not be located within a utility easement. 
917.05 - Time of Construction. 
No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
917.06 - Building Materials. 
The same or similar quality exterior material shall be used in the accessory building and in the principal building. All accessory buildings shall also be compatible with the principal building on the lot. "Compatible" means that the exterior appearance of the accessory building is not at variance with the principal building from an aesthetic and architectural standpoint as to cause. 
A.  A difference to a degree to cause incongruity. 
B.  A depreciation of neighborhood values or adjacent property values. 
C.  A nuisance. Types of nuisance characteristics include unsightly building exterior. 
917.07 - Trash Receptacles. 
All buildings having exterior trash receptacles shall provide an enclosed area in conformance with the following: 
A.  Exterior wall treatment shall be similar and/or complement the principal building. 
B.  The enclosed trash receptacle area shall be located in the rear or side yard. 
C.  The trash enclosure must be in an accessible location for pick-up hauling vehicles. 
D.  The trash receptacles must be fully screened from view of adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. 
E.  The design and construction of the trash enclosure shall be subject to the approval of the Building Official. 
F.  Recycling space must be provided as required by the State Building Code. 
917.08 - Conditional Use Permits. 
Application for a conditional use permit under this Subsection shall be regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. Such a conditional use permit may be granted, provided that: 
A.  There is a demonstrated need and potential for continued use of the structure for the purpose stated. 
B.  In the case of residential uses, no commercial or home occupation activities are conducted on the property. 
C.  The building has an evident re-use or function related to the principal use. 
D.  Accessory building shall be maintained in a manner that is compatible with the adjacent residential uses and does not present a hazard to public health, safety and general welfare. 
E.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance shall be considered and a determination made that the proposed activity is in compliance with such criteria. 
917.09 - Opt-Out of Minn. Stats.  462.3593. 
Pursuant to authority granted by Minn. Stats.  462.3593, Subd. 9, the City of Wayzata opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stats.  462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings. 
CHAPTER 918 - FENCING/SCREENING 

918.01 - Fence Regulations. 
A.  Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall erect, alter or relocate any fence within the City without first having been issued a permit therefor. 
B.  Permit Fee. A fee as established by City Council resolution shall be charged for a permit issued under this section for new fences, as well as the replacement of fences in the same location. 
C.  Application Procedures. Each application for a permit under this Section shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the City. Each such application shall include. 
1.  A Site plan drawn to scale showing the location of house(s), garage(s), and other improvements on the lot and the location of the fencing to be erected, altered or relocated. 
2.  A sketch or photocopy of the proposed fence. 
3.  Where appropriate, the signature of all side abutting neighbors. 
D.  General Provisions. All fences within the City shall be subject to the following general provisions: 
1.  No fences shall be placed on or extend into public rights-of-way. 
2.  All fences (hedges and plantings excluded) constructed shall require a permit under this Section. Permits may be issued by the Zoning Administrator or designee, if all requirements of this Ordinance have been met. 
3.  That side of any fence considered to be its "face" (i.e., the finished side having no structural supports) shall face abutting property. 
4.  Both sides of any fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance by its owner and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. 
5.  Barbed wire fences are only allowed in the City of Wayzata by conditional use permit. 
6.  No person shall construct or maintain or allow to be constructed or maintained anywhere within the City any fence or metal construction which is charged by or connected with an electrical system. 
7.  No physical damage of any kind shall occur to abutting property. 
8.  All manmade fences located in front of the rear building line shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: decorative masonry, wrought iron or wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use; or wood of proven durability is used, such as cedar or redwood. 
9.  A certificate of survey shall be required for all fences (except hedges and plantings) to be constructed up to or on the property line, unless corner property stakes are located and a survey exists in the property file. 
E.  Specific Fence Standards. Fences may be allowed in the City of Wayzata subject to the following specific standards: 
1.  Except as may be provided herein, manmade fences not exceeding six feet in height and consisting of completely solid matter may be permitted at or behind the rear building line as established by the primary structure on the lot. 
2.  Except as may be provided herein, fences not exceeding 42 inches in height and consisting of no more than 50 percent solid matter may be permitted in front of the front building line as established by the primary structure on the lot. 
3.  Except as may be provided herein, manmade fences may be permitted at or behind the front building line and in front of the rear building line as established by the primary structure on the lot, subject to the following standards: 
a)  Fences not exceeding 42 inches in height may consist of completely solid matter. 
b)  Fences over 42 inches in height, but not exceeding six feet in height, shall consist of no more than 50 percent solid matter for the entire fence. 
4.  Fences not exceeding six feet in height, for uses other than one and two family dwellings, may be permitted in front of the front building line as established by the primary structure on the lot, when required for screening of adjacent property. In such cases, the required front setback for the fence shall be the same as for the use which it is intended to screen. In no case shall a fence exceeding 42 inches in height be set back less than ten feet from the roadway in such instances. 
5.  On corner lots or lots adjacent to railroad rights-of-way, no fence shall be located in a sight visibility triangle unless it is in compliance with the sight clearance requirements for such lots as set forth in the Section 916.05 of this Ordinance. 
6.  Should the rear lot line of a lot in a residential district be common with the side lot line of an abutting lot, that portion of the rear lot line equal to the required front yard setback of the abutting lot shall be fenced in accordance with the provisions of Section 918.01.E.2. 
7.  Fences up to ten feet in height may be permitted to enclose tennis courts where allowed or permitted by conditional use. 
8.  Natural hedges or plantings utilized as fences in the R-1A and R-1 Zoning Districts are allowed with no height restrictions in front, side, and rear yards. 
9.  There are no height restrictions on natural hedges or plantings utilized as fences located behind the rear building line of the principal structure in any residential zoning district. 
F.  Fence Standards Allowed by Conditional Use Permit. In accordance with all conditional use permit procedures set forth in Chapter 904 of this Ordinance, special fencing arrangements may be approved as a conditional use permit by the City. The following fences may be approved by conditional use permit only in accordance with the standards as set forth herein: 
1.  Fences allowed by conditional use permit are as follows: 
a)  Fences generally not exceeding a height of eight feet in locations where fences of up to six feet height are permitted, except for within a side or rear of a required lakeshore setback area. 
b)  Fences consisting of greater than 50 percent solid matter in front of the rear building line up to the front property line and not exceeding a height of eight feet. In no case shall a fence extend into the public right-of-way or be located nearer than ten' feet from the street or roadway. 
c)  Barbed wire fences used to enclose an area of five acres or more, or on the top of security fences where essential to the protection of private goods and property or the public health, safety and welfare as deemed appropriate. 
2.  Standards for evaluating fence conditional use permits are as follows: 
a)  The fence placement, height or design does not create a safety hazard with regard to, from or on a public street or roadway. 
b)  The fence placement, height or design does not create a safety problem or negatively affect adjoining properties or use. 
c)  The provisions of Section 904.02.G of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Non-Conforming Fences. It is the intent of this Ordinance to allow the continuation of such non-conforming fences until they are discontinued as provided herein. However, it is not the intent of this Ordinance to encourage the survival of non-conforming fences and such fences are declared to be incompatible with permitted fences within the City. Such fences shall be regulated by the following provisions: 
1.  No existing fence not permitted by this Ordinance in the district within which it is located, except when required to do so by law or ordinance, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such fence is changed to one permitted in that district. Maintenance of a non-conforming fence will be allowed, however, when this includes necessary repairs and incidental alterations which do not expand or intensify the non-conforming fence. 
918.02 - General Landscaping and Maintenance. 
All exposed ground areas surrounding or within a principal or accessory use, including street boulevards, and not devoted to parking areas, drives, sidewalks, patios or other such uses shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees or other ornamental landscape materials within one year following the date of building occupancy. All landscaped areas shall be kept neat, clean and uncluttered, and where a landscape plan required City approval any plant material which is diseased or dies shall be replaced with like kind of the original size. No landscaped area shall be used for the parking of vehicles or for the storage or display of materials, supplies or merchandise. Fences and/or plantings placed upon utility easements are subject to removal by the City or utility company if required for maintenance or improvement of the utility. Trees on utility easements containing overhead wires shall not exceed 15 feet in height, which it shall be the property owner's responsibility to maintain. 
918.03 - Required Fencing, Screening and Landscaping. 
A.  Fencing and Screening. Where any townhouse, quadraminium, manor home, multiple family or non-residential use (i.e., structure, parking or storage) abuts property zoned for residential use, the higher density residential or the non-residential use shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a non-residential use is across the street from a residential zone, but not on that side of a non-residential use considered to be the front (as determined by the Zoning Administrator). All the fencing and screening specifically required by this Ordinance shall be subject to Section 916.05 and shall consist of either a fence or a green belt planting strip as provided for below. 
1.  A green belt planting strip shall consist of evergreen trees and/or deciduous trees and plants and shall be of sufficient width and density to provide an effective visual screen. This planting strip shall be designed to provide complete visual screening to a minimum height of six feet. Earth mounding or berms may be used but shall not be used to achieve more than three feet of the required screen. The planting plan and type of plantings shall require the approval of the City Council. 
2.  A required screening fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick, wood or metal. Such fence shall provide a solid screening effect of six feet in height. The design and materials used in constructing a required screening fence shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. Fences in excess of height limitations established in Section 918.01 shall require approval pursuant to procedures noted. 
B.  Landscaping-New Residential Subdivisions, Semi-Public and All Income Producing Property Uses. (Excluding residential structures containing less than four dwelling units.) Prior to approval of a building permit, all above referenced uses shall be subject to mandatory landscape plan and specification requirements. Said landscape plan shall be developed with an emphasis upon the boundary or perimeter of the proposed site at points adjoining other property and the immediate perimeter of the structure. All landscaping incorporated in said plan shall conform to the following standards and criteria: 
1.  All plants must be at least equal the following minimum size: 
Potted/Bare Root Balled & Burlapped Shade Trees* 2-inch diameter 2-inch diameter Half Trees (Flowering Crabs, Russian Olive, 
Hawthorn, etc.) 6- to 7-foot high 11/2-inch diameter Evergreen Trees ----- 3- to 4-foot high Tall Shrubs and Hedge 
Material (Evergreen or 
Deciduous) 3- to 4-foot high 3- to 4-foot high Low Shrubs-Deciduous 18- to 24-inch 24- to 30-inch Evergreen 18- to 24-inch potted 24- to 30-inch Spreading Evergreens 18- to 24-inch potted 18- to 24-inch  
Type and mode are dependent upon time of planting season, availability, and site conditions (soils, climate, ground water, manmade irrigation, grading, etc.) 
2.  Spacing. 
a)  Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three feet from the fence line or property line and shall not be planted to conflict with public tings based on the judgement of the Zoning Administrator. 
b)  Where plant materials are planted in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
c)  Where massing of plants or screening is intended, large deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than four feet on center, and/or evergreen shrubs shall not be planted more than three feet on center. 
3.  Types of New Trees. Plantings, suitable trees include. 
Quercus (varieties) Oak Acer platanoides (and varieties) Norway Maple (and Schwedler, Emerald Queen, etc.) Acer saccharum Sugar Maple Celtis accidentalis Hackberry Betula (varieties) Birch Gleditsia triacanthos Honeylocust (Imperial, Majestic Skyline, Sunburst, and Thornless) Little Leaf 
Linden/Redmond Tilia cordata (and 
varieties) Greenspire, etc. Tilia americana Basswood (Am Linden) Fraxinus Pennsylvania lanceolate Green Ash (and Summit, Marshall's) Ginkgo biloba (male tree only) Ginkgo Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffee Tree  
4.  Design. 
a)  The landscape plan shall show site amenities, (i.e., composition of plant materials, and/or creative grading, decorative lighting, exterior sculpture, etc.) which are largely intended for aesthetic purposes. 
b)  All areas within the property lines (or beyond, if site grading extends beyond) shall be treated. All exterior areas not paved or designated as roads, parking, or storage must be planted into ornamental vegetation (lawns, ground covers, or shrubs) unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
c)  Turf slopes in excess of 2.1 are prohibited. 
d)  All ground areas under the building roof overhang must be treated with a decorative mulch and/or foundation planting. 
e)  All buildings must have an exterior water spigot to ensure that landscape maintenance can be accomplished. 
5.  Landscape Guarantee. All new plants shall be guaranteed for two full years from the time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive and in satisfactory growth at the end of the guarantee period or be replaced. 
6.  Existing Trees. With respect to existing trees in new developments, all trees on the site are to be saved which do not have to be removed for street, buildings, parking, utilities, drainage or active recreational purposes. Trees over six inches in diameter that are to remain, are to be marked with a red band, and to be protected with snow fences or other suitable enclosure, prior to any excavation. The City may further require that the developer retain a professional forester to prepare a forest inventory and management plan for the development, in order to control and abate any existing or potential loss. In those instances where trees of over six inches in caliper will be lost due to construction, the City Council may require the planting of new trees in an amount equal to or greater than the total caliper inches which will be removed. 
918.04 - Screening of Mechanical Equipment. 
Mechanical equipment located on the roof of any building and visible from the street level or from neighboring properties shall be screened with a material designed to blend harmoniously with the building's facing materials. Where buildings have exposure to buildings with higher elevation, roof equipment shall be totally screened or enclosed with a material to blend with the roof surface material. 
CHAPTER 919 - GENERAL YARD, LOT AREA AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 

919.01 - Purpose. 
This Section identifies yard, lot area, building size, and building type and height requirements in each zoning district. 
919.02 - Height Requirements. 
A.  A building which actual height from the foundation to the top peak of any portion of the roof exceeds the allowable building height in the applicable zoning district by more than five feet or roof pitches of more than a 45-degree angle for those structures at the building height limitation may be allowed as a conditional use permit, provided that: 
1.  The architectural appearance of the building shall not be so dissimilar to the existing neighboring buildings as to cause impairments in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot. 
2.  For each additional five feet in allowable, actual, roof height as calculated by the Building Code, which is above the maximum building height allowed by the respective zoning district; front and side yard setback requirements shall be increased by one foot. 
3.  The construction does not limit solar access to abutting and/or neighboring properties. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F, Conditional Uses, are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  The building height limits established in each zoning district shall not apply to the following list of items, except that no such structural element may exceed 40 feet in total height or exceed the maximum height of the building by more than five feet, whichever is greater, except by conditional use permit: 
1.  Belfries. 
2.  Chimneys or flues. 
3.  Church spires. 
4.  Cooling towers. 
5.  Communication reception/transmission devices. 
6.  Cupolas and domes which do not contain usable space. 
7.  Elevator penthouses. 
8.  Flag poles. 
9.  Monuments. 
10.  Parapet walls. 
11.  Necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenances. 
C.  Modifications to the site grading of a lot may not be undertaken as a means of achieving increased building height, unless approved by the City Council. 
D.  As may be appropriate, applicants shall be required to submit a detailed survey for all new residential and non-residential structures including topographical information at two-foot contours signed by a licensed surveyor depicting elevations (existing and proposed) at the corners of the building footprint and within a radius of five feet to verify the calculation of the datum point for determination of the building height. 
919.03 - Building Type and Construction. 
A.  No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalum or unfinished aluminum buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to have a corrosive designed finish such as corten steel shall be permitted in any zoning district. 
B.  Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of architectural and aesthetic compatibility with surrounding properties to ensure that they will not adversely impact the property values of the abutting properties or adversely impact the community's public health, safety and general welfare. 
C.  Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: 
1.  Brick. 
2.  Natural stone. 
3.  Decorative concrete block. 
4.  Cast in place concrete or precast concrete panels. 
5.  Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood, cypress. 
6.  Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum (non-structural, non-load bearing), provided such panels are factory fabricated and finished with a durable non-fade surface their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design. 
7.  Glass curtain wall panels. 
8.  Stucco. 
9.  Vinyl. 
10.  Other materials as determined by the Zoning Administrator, but not including galvanized or unfinished metal. 
D.  The additional requirements of the Design Guidelines shall be applied to properties located in the Lake District, Bluff Neighborhood District, and Wayzata Boulevard District, and Wayzata Boulevard as defined in Chapter 909 of this Ordinance. 
919.04 - Yards. 
Except as provided below, no lot, yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such lot, yard or open space less than the minimum required by this Ordinance. No required open space provided about any building or structure shall be included as part of any open space required for another structure. 
A.  The following shall not be considered as encroachments on yard setback requirements: 
1.  Cantilevers up to ten feet in width, chimneys, flues, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters, and the like, provided they do not project more than 21/2 feet into a required yard. 
2.  Terraces, steps, decks, uncovered porches, stoops or similar features provided they do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal structure or to a distance less than five feet from a side yard and rear lot lines, or more than five feet into a required front yard. No encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required drainage and utility easements. 
3.  In rear yards, recreational and laundry drying equipment, arbors and trellises, detached outdoor living rooms, and air conditioning or heating equipment not exceeding established State noise levels, provided they are at a distance of ten feet from any lot line. No encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required drainage and utility easements. 
4.  A one story entrance for a detached single family or duplex dwelling constructed prior to January 1, 1975, may extend into the front yard setback not exceeding five feet subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
B.  Required Front Yard Setback Exceptions. In the case of lots platted prior to the date of this Ordinance, the required front yard setback as established by the respective zoning districts may be reduced, upon the approval of the Zoning Administrator, to a distance equaling the average setback of principal buildings within the block frontage in which the lot is located. In no case shall this distance be less than 15 feet, nor shall a principal structure be placed more than five feet beyond the setback of any principal structure on a directly abutting lot. The Zoning Administrator's approval shall be given as a matter of right if there is compliance with this Ordinance and any other applicable Ordinance. 
C.  Corner Lots. Front yard requirements shall be observed on each street frontage of a corner lot. Where the rear boundary line of a corner lot is part of the side boundary of a residential lot no part of any structure or building on the corner lot shall be nearer its street side lot line than the minimum depth of any front yard required along such side street. In the case of a narrow corner lot where compliance with this requirement should give an impractical depth to a structure or building, the City Council may allow the construction of such structure as near to the street side lot line as will give a practicable depth by approval of a conditional use permit. 
D.  In the case of a residential lot in an R-2A, R-2, R-3A, R-3, R-4A, R-4 and R-5 District siding or backing onto a dedicated limited access highway, a flood plain, a public park or trail, or other such similar publicly reserved and development restricted areas (excluding shorelands or wetlands), the required side and/or rear yard setback may be reduced one foot for each foot of public space, but in no case shall the rear yard requirement be reduced more than ten feet nor the side yard less than five feet. 
E.  Required Side or Rear Yard Reduction. A required yard on a lot may be reduced by a conditional use permit if the following conditions are met: 
1.  The reduction of setback requirements is based upon a specific need or circumstance which is unique to the property in question and which, if appropriate, will not set a precedent which is contrary to the intent of this Ordinance. 
2.  Property line drainage and utility easements as required by the City's Subdivision Ordinance are provided and no building will occur upon this reserved space. 
3.  The reduction will work towards the preservation of trees or unique physical features of the lot or area. 
4.  If affecting a north lot line, the reduction will not restrict sun access from the abutting lots. 
5.  The reduction will not obstruct traffic visibility, cause a public safety problem and complies with Section 916.05 of this Ordinance. 
6.  The conditions of Section 916.05.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
919.05 - Residential Standards in Non-Residential Districts. 
Whenever any single family or two family residential dwelling is proposed to be constructed within an R-4A, R-4, R-5, INS or C-1 District it shall conform with R-3 District standards. Existing single family or two family residential uses within R-4, R-5, INS, C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 Districts also shall conform with R-3 District standards. 
919.06 - Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit. 
A.  Single Family Dwelling Units. Except as otherwise specified in the zoning district provisions or as allowed by conditional use permit, single family homes as classified below shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit: 
Two Bedroom. 960 square feet above grade. 
Three Bedroom. 1040 square feet above grade. 
B.  Multiple Dwelling Units. Except for elderly housing units or as allowed by conditional use permit, living units classified as multiple dwelling shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit: 
Efficiency Units. 500 square feet. 
One Bedroom Units. 700 square feet. 
Two Bedroom Units. 900 square feet. 
More than two bedroom units. An additional 150 square feet for each additional bedroom. 
C.  Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing. Living units classified as elderly (senior citizen) housing units shall have the following minimum floor areas per unit: 
Efficiency Units. 440 square feet. 
One Bedroom Units. 520 square feet. 
More than one bedroom units. An additional 80 square feet for each additional bedroom. 
D.  Two Family, Quadraminiums, Townhouses and Manor Homes. Except as otherwise specified in the zoning district provisions or as allowed by conditional use permit, two family, quadraminiums, townhouses and manor homes, as classified below, shall have the following minimum floor area per one bedroom unit: 
Two Family. 650 square feet first floor above grade, plus 100 additional square feet for each additional bedroom. 
Quadraminiums, Townhouses and Manor Homes. 600 square feet first floor above grade, plus 100 additional square feet for each additional bedroom. 
E.  Efficient Apartments. Except for elderly (senior citizen) housing, the number of efficiency apartments in a multiple dwelling shall not exceed ten percent of the total number of apartments. In the case of elderly (senior citizen) housing, efficiency apartments shall not exceed 30 percent of the total number of apartments. 
919.07 - Minimum Lot Area Per Unit. 
The lot area per unit requirement for two family, townhouses, quadraminiums, manor homes, apartments and planned unit developments shall be calculated on the basis of the total area in the project and as controlled by an individual and joint ownership as per the specific zoning district regulation. Unless approved by conditional use permit, areas qualifying as wetlands pursuant to this Ordinance, shall not be included in the calculation of total area. 
919.08 - Usable Open Space. 
Except in the case of elderly (senior citizen) housing, each multiple family dwelling site shall contain at least 500 square feet of usable space as defined in Section 902.02 of this Ordinance for each dwelling unit contained thereof. 
919.09 - Two Family, Townhouse, Quadraminium, Manor Home, Multiple Family Uses. 
A.  No single townhouse structure shall contain more than five dwelling units. 
B.  Minimum unit lot frontage for townhouses shall be not less than 20 feet. 
C.  Subdivision of Two Family Double Bungalows, Townhouse or Quadraminium Lots. The subdivision of base lots containing two family dwellings, townhouses, or quadraminiums to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling within such a structure is acceptable upon the approval by the City. Approval of a subdivision request is contingent on the following requirements: 
1.  Two family, townhouses, and quadraminiums intended for owner occupancy shall be subdivided on an individual lot basis according to the provisions of Chapter 933 (Planned Unit Development) of this Ordinance. 
2.  Prior to a two family double bungalow dwelling, townhouse or quadraminium subdivision, the base lot must meet all the requirements of the zoning district. 
3.  Except for planned unit developments, there shall be no more than one principal structure on a base lot in all residential districts. The principal structure on the base lot created in a two family, townhouse or quadraminium subdivision will be the portion of the attached dwelling existing or constructed on the platted unit lot. 
4.  Permitted accessory uses as defined by the zoning districts are acceptable, provided they meet all the zoning requirements. 
5.  A property maintenance agreement must be arranged by the applicant and submitted to the City Attorney for review and approval. The agreement shall ensure the maintenance and upkeep of the structure and lots to meet minimum City standards. The agreement is to be filed with the Hennepin County Recorder's Office as a deed restriction against the title of each unit lot. 
6.  Separate public utility service shall be provided to each subdivided unit and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer. 
7.  The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in conformance to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City. 
8.  Structural requirements of the Uniform Building Code at the time of subdivision are complied with. 
D.  Subdivision of multiple family, two family duplex, manor homes and other such units. 
1.  The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in conformance with the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City as applicable. 
2.  The subdivision shall comply with applicable cooperative or condominium laws of the State of Minnesota. 
919.10 - Minimum Lot Area, Unsewered Lots. 
Lot sizes where public sewer is not available shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth below: 
A.  The minimum single family lot size is five acres. This minimum lot size shall not apply to smaller separate parcels of record in separate ownership lawfully existing prior to July 1, 1990, provided that it can be demonstrated by means satisfactory to the City that the small parcels will not result in groundwater, soil or other contamination which may endanger the public health. 
B.  Commercial developments and multiple family dwellings are not allowable uses. 
C.  Subject to the other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance other uses may be allowed by conditional use permit. The minimum lot size for each principal use is five acres. A conditional use permit shall not be granted unless it can be demonstrated by means satisfactory to the City that the use: 
1.  Will not result in groundwater, soil or other contamination which may endanger the public health. 
2.  Will not increase future City utility service demands and expense. 
3.  Will not jeopardize public safety and general welfare. 
919.11 - Single Family Dwellings. 
All single family detached homes shall. 
A.  Be constructed upon a continuous perimeter foundation that meets the requirements of this Ordinance and Uniform Building Code. 
B.  Shall not be less than 30 feet in length and not less than 22 feet in width over that entire minimum length. Width measurements shall not take account of overhang and other projections beyond the principal walls. Dwelling shall also meet the minimum floor area requirements as set out in this Ordinance. 
C.  Have an earth covered, composition, shingled or tiled roof. 
D.  Receive a building permit. The application for a building permit in addition to other information required shall indicate the height, size, design and the appearance of all elevations of the proposed building and a description of the construction materials proposed to be used. The exterior architectural design of a proposed dwelling may not be so at variance with, nor so similar to, the exterior architectural design of any structure or structures already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, nor so at variance with the character of the surrounding neighborhood as to cause a significant depreciation in the property values of the neighborhood or adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare. 
E.  Meet the requirements of the State Uniform Building Code or the applicable manufactured housing code. 
919.12 - Elevator Service. 
Any multiple family dwelling over two stories in height shall be provided with elevator service. 
CHAPTER 920 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

920.01 - Purpose. 
The regulation of off-street parking spaces in these zoning regulations is intended to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles in accordance with the intensity of utilization of the various parcels of land or structures. 
920.02 - Scope of Regulations. 
The off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance shall apply within all zoning districts for uses and structures, except as hereinafter provided. 
920.03 - General Provisions. 
A.  Site Plans. All site plans submitted for a structure requiring parking spaces and/or loading facilities shall show or designate the parking and/or loading area(s), number of parking spaces, and type of surfacing, screening, drainage, curbing, sidewalks and other improvements which may be required to be installed. Said plan shall be a part of the Building Permit for any such structure, and no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all items shown on the plan for parking and loading facilities have been completed, unless an agreement supported by a cash deposit or bond provides for the completion of said plan. 
B.  Change in Use. When there is a change of use, tenancy, or occupancy of a parcel of land or building which requires additional parking or loading spaces, as prescribed in this Section, the minimum parking requirements as prescribed herein shall be met for such use, tenant, or occupant. 
C.  Reduction of Existing Off-Street Parking Space or Parking Lot Area. Off-street parking spaces and loading spaces or parking lot area existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in number or size unless said number or size exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use. 
920.04 - Off-Street Parking Restrictions. 
A.  Boats, fish houses, school buses, house trailers, camping trailers, farm tractors, utility trailers and motor homes may not be parked, stored or otherwise continued on residential property for a period greater than 72 hours, unless placed completely in the rear yard or side yard of said property and are screened from view of abutting properties and the public right-of-way. 
B.  Except where otherwise allowed in a zoning district, trucks of more than 12,000 GVW or greater than 30 feet in length, and contracting or excavating equipment may not be parked, stored or otherwise continued on any property within the City unless being used in conjunction with a temporary service benefiting the residential or commercial premises. 
C.  Junked or inoperable vehicles may not be parked, stored or otherwise continued on any property within the City for a period greater than 72 hours unless placed completely within an enclosed building or garage or screened in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. Said regulations shall also apply to race cars. 
D.  No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with exposed off-street parking facilities, except for minor repairs of vehicles owned by the occupant or resident of the principal use for which the parking space is intended. No exterior storage of car parts are allowed at any time. 
E.  Except where otherwise allowed by zoning district, contractor's supplies and equipment or machinery kept for eventual sale, commercial repair, rental or other commercial purposes may not be stored, kept or otherwise continued on any property within the City. The keeping, storage or otherwise continuing of such materials within the City is prohibited and shall be considered to be a non-conforming use if in existence at the effective date of this Ordinance. 
920.05 - Parking Area Location and Design. 
A.  Construction. All exposed parking areas and driveways shall be surfaced with an all-weather, durable and dust-free surfacing material to be approved by the City Engineer, shall be well drained and landscaped, and shall be maintained in a sightly and well-kept condition. 
B.  Striping and Curbing. All parking areas where four or more spaces are required shall be marked by durable painted stripes designating the parking spaces unless excepted by the City Engineer. A continuous curb shall be provided around the periphery of the paved parking area of the lot, including drives. 
C.  Location. 
1.  Required accessory off-street parking shall be on the same lot under the same ownership as the principal use being served, except as provided for under the provisions of Sections 920.08 and 920.09. 
2.  Except for single, two family, townhouse, quadraminium and manor home dwellings, head-in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a public street, with each stall having its own direct access to the public street, shall be prohibited. 
3.  The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall not be used for parking. 
4.  In the case of single family, two family, townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home dwellings parking shall be prohibited in any portion of the front yard except designated driveways leading directly into a garage or one open, surfaced space located on the side of a driveway, away from the principal use. Said extra space shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous material. 
D.  Setbacks. 
1.  Front, side and rear setbacks of at least ten feet from property lines shall be maintained from parking areas in all zoning districts, except C-4, C-4A and C-4B Districts. Setbacks of five feet in the C-4, C-4A, and C-4B Districts shall apply only to those parking areas adjacent to residentially zoned or residentially used property. 
2.  In addition to the setback requirements, off-street parking must be set back 15 feet from any street surface. 
3.  No area used by motor vehicles other than driveways for ingress to and egress from the site shall be located within the public street right-of-way. 
E.  Design. 
1.  Traffic. Vehicular traffic generated by a use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner which will avoid congestion or interference with other vehicular transportation systems or pedestrian traffic and which will avoid creating traffic hazards or excessive traffic through residential areas. The adequacy of any proposed traffic circulation system to accomplish these objectives shall be determined by the City, which may require such additional measures for traffic control as it may deem necessary, including, but not limited to, the following: directional signalization, channelization, standby turn lanes, sidewalks illumination and other facilities within the site to prevent a backup of vehicles on public streets. 
2.  Parking Stalls. 
a)  All parking spaces, except for parallel spaces and compact car stalls, shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet in length, except a parking stall 18 feet in length with a two-foot overhang beyond the parking surface may be allowed upon approval of the City Engineer. 
b)  Up to 20 percent of the parking spaces in a parking lot of 40 spaces or more may be permanently marked for compact cars only. A compact space shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and 16 feet in length. 
c)  In areas such as parking ramps or similar facilities size requirements may be determined by the City Engineer. 
d)  Parallel parking spaces shall be 23 feet in length. 
3.  Driveway Standards. Except in the case of single family, two family, townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home dwellings minimum driveway and traffic lane widths shall be developed in compliance with the following standards: 
Angle of Pkg. Traffic Flow Min. Width 90 Degree Two Way 24 ft. 60 Degree One Way 18 ft. 45 Degree One Way 14 ft.  
4.  Within Structure. The off-street parking requirement may be furnished by providing fee free space so designed within the principal building or structures attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no building permit shall be issued to convert said parking structure into a dwelling unit or living area or other activity until other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this Code. In creating other provisions on-street parking shall not be used. 
5.  Streets Not Used. Except in the case of single, two family and townhouse dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley. Except in the case of single, two family and townhouse dwellings, parking area design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited. Parking spaces in a public right-of-way cannot be utilized in meeting required off-street parking standards. 
6.  Curb Cut Proximity to Intersection. No curb cut or other driveway access shall be located less than 40 feet from the intersection of two or more street rights-of-way. This distance shall be measured from the intersection of lot lines, not curb lines. 
7.  Curb Cut Maximum. No curb cut access shall exceed 24 feet in width except upon approval by the City Engineer. 
8.  Curb Cut Spacing Minimum. Curb cut openings shall be located at a minimum of ten feet from the side yard lot line in all districts, except for the C-4, C-4A and C-4B Districts where such setbacks shall apply only to those parking areas adjacent to residentially zoned or residentially used property. 
9.  Curb Cut Separation. Driveway access curb openings on a public street except for single, two family and townhouse dwellings shall not be located less than 40 feet from one another except on approval by the City Engineer. 
10.  Parking Area Grades. The grade elevation of any parking area or portion thereof shall not exceed five percent. 
11.  Driveway Access Minimum. Each property shall be allowed one driveway access for each 125 feet of street frontage. All property shall be entitled to at least one driveway access. Single family uses shall be limited to one driveway access per lot, except when the property exceeds the required street frontage per zoning district requirements a second driveway access may be allowed by approval of the City Engineer. The access of driveways onto arterial and collector streets is discouraged. However, when such a use is necessary or approved by the City, a minimum number of driveways shall be promoted by encouraging joint access through the use of shared curb cuts and access easements. 
12.  Street Access. Except in the case of a planned unit development, each lot shall have access directly onto an abutting, improved and City accepted public street. 
13.  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting residential uses and public rights-of-way and be in compliance with Section 916.06 of this Code. 
14.  Signs. No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking lot. All signs shall be in conformance with Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
15.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided from apartment parking areas, and loading zones to the entrance of the building. 
920.06 - Screening and Landscaping. 
All exposed parking areas of four or more required spaces shall be landscaped on all sides. Such screening shall be in conformance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance and be approved in advance by the City. Landscaping shall consist of a wall or fence and plantings or surfacing material shall be provided in all areas bordering the parking area. No landscaping or screening shall interfere with the drive or pedestrian visibility for vehicles entering or exiting the premises. 
920.07 - Maintenance. 
A.  It shall be joint and several responsibility of the owner of the principal use (or Lessee, if there is one ), to use and to maintain in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, access way, striping, landscaping, required fences and snow removal. 
B.  Snow Storage in Parking Stalls. Provision shall be made in the parking area for adequate snow storage or removal in order to ensure that the required number of spaces are available at all times during the year. 
C.  Use of Required Area. Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, or storage, of inoperable vehicles. 
920.08 - Off-Street Parking Facilities Provided on a Site Elsewhere Than the Principal Use. 
A.  When parking is provided on a site other than the lot or tract upon which a principal use is located, said parking area shall be in the ownership of and remain in the possession of the owner of the principal use for which it is designated. No authorization for separate parking facilities shall be given until such time as the City Council is reasonably certain that the ownership and use of the parking area will continue and that the site will be well maintained. Off-site parking facilities may only be allowed by conditional use permit and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Ordinance Compliance. Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all requirements and standards of this Ordinance. 
2.  Access. Reasonable improved access from off-street parking facilities to the use being serviced shall be provided. 
3.  Proximity to Multiple Residence. Off-site parking for multiple family dwellings shall not be located more than 100 feet from any normally used entrance of the principal use serviced. 
4.  Proximity for Non-Residential Uses. Off-site parking for non-residential uses shall not be located more than 300 feet from the main entrance of the principal use being served. No more than one main entrance shall be recognized for each principal building. 
920.09 - Joint Facilities. 
A.  Off-Site Joint Use of Parking. The City Council may, after receiving a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, approve a conditional use permit for one or more uses to provide the required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one or more sites where the total number of spaces provided are less than the sum of the total required for each use should they provide them separately. When considering a request for such conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall not recommend that such permit be granted except when the following conditions are found to exist: 
1.  Entertainment Uses. Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required for a theatre, bowling alley, or bar may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by types of uses specified as primarily daytime uses in Section 920.13, Subd. A below. 
2.  Night Time or Sunday Uses. Up to 50 percent of the off-street parking facilities required for any use specified under Section 920.13, Subd. A below as primarily day time uses may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following night time or Sunday uses; auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, theatres, bars, excluding ones with restaurants or food services, or apartments. 
3.  Schools, Auditorium and Church Uses. Up to 80 percent of the parking facilities required by this section for a church or an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified under Section 920.13, Subd. A below as primarily daytime uses. 
4.  Daytime Uses. For the purpose of this section the following uses are considered as primarily day time uses. banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, restaurants, service shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses. 
5.  Office, Restaurant, Retail, Government, and Multiple Family Residential Uses. The minimum parking requirement for joint facilities that include office, restaurant, retail, government and/or multiple family residential uses are determined by the following calculation: 
a)  Multiply the minimum parking required for each individual use, by the appropriate percentage for each of the six designated time periods, as outlined in the following table: 
Land Use Weekday Weekend 12:00 Midnight 
-7.00 a.m. 7.00 a.m.- 
6.00 p.m. 6.00 p.m.-12:00 Midnight 12:00 Midnight 
-7.00 a.m. 7.00 a.m.- 
6.00 p.m. 6.00 p.m.-12:00 Midnight Office 5% 100% 5% 0% 10% 0% Restaurant 10% 70% 100% 20% 70% 100% Retail 0% 90% 60% 0% 100% 60% Government 0% 100% 40% 0% 40% 25% Multiple Family 
Residential 100% 60% 100% 100% 75% 100%  
b)  Add the resulting sums for each of the six designated time periods. 
c)  The minimum parking requirement shall be the highest sum among the six designated time periods. 
6.  Additional Criteria for Joint Parking. In addition to the preceding requirements, the following conditions are required for joint parking usage: 
a)  Proximity. The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within 300 feet of such parking facilities. 
b)  Conflict in Hours. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
c)  Written Consent and Agreement. A legally binding instrument, executed by the parties concerned, for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to title of grantors or lessors, and form and manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded with the Hennepin County Recorder or Registrar of titles, and a certified copy of the recorded document shall be filed with the City within 60 days after approval of the joint parking use by the City. 
920.10 - Truck Loading Areas, Design and Maintenance. 
A.  Design. Fifty percent of the required number of truck berths shall be 50 feet in length. All berths shall be no less than 12 feet in width and 14 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space. All loading areas shall consist of a maneuvering area in addition to the berth and shall not use any of that portion of the site containing parking stalls. Maneuvering areas shall be of such size as to permit the backing of truck tractors and coupled trailers into a berth, without blocking the use of other berths, drives or maneuvering areas or on public right-of-way. The construction and setback standards listed in Section 920.09 also shall apply to all loading areas. 
B.  Landscaping and Screening of Loading Berths. Loading berths shall be screened from all property lines. Said screening shall be accomplished by a solid wall or fence and shall be so designed as to be architecturally harmonious with the principal structure and in conformance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. Screening plantings may be substituted, provided such plantings are in conformance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
C.  Location. 
1.  Off-Street. All required loading berths for a non-residential use shall be off-street and located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. 
2.  Distance from Intersection. All loading berth curb cuts shall be located at minimum 50 feet from the intersection of two or more street rights-of-way. This distance shall be measured from the property line. 
3.  Distance from Residential Use. No loading berth for a non-residential use shall be located closer than 100 feet from a residential district unless completely within a structure, except on approval by the City Council. 
a)  Pedestrians. Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement. 
b)  Visibility. Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from off-street parking access. 
c)  General Compliance. Loading berths shall comply with all other requirements of this section. 
4.  Traffic Interference. Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will cause the least interference with traffic. 
5.  Accessory Use; Parking and Storage. Any space allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the terms of these zoning regulations shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or snow and shall not be included as part of the space requirements to meet off-street parking requirements. 
920.11 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
A.  Calculating Space. 
1.  Floor Area. The term "floor area" for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined based on the Gross Floor Area minus ten percent, except as may be hereinafter modified. 
2.  Computation. When in the process of determining the required number of off-street parking spaces, there occurs a fraction of a space, such fraction shall be deemed as the requirement for an additional parking space. Parking spaces shall not be counted toward meeting a parking requirement when they are sufficiently inconvenient to be of questionable use. 
3.  Places of Public Assembly. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 18 inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements. 
4.  More than One Use. Except for a shopping center, should a structure contain two or more types of uses, the Gross Floor Area of each use shall be calculated and a ten percent reduction shall be made for non-productive space. The resulting net usable floor space figure shall be utilized to determine the off-street parking requirement. 
B.  Minimum Number of Spaces. The minimum number of off-street parking and loading spaces for each use shall be as follows: 
Use Number of Parking Spaces Required Off-St. Loading Spaces Required 1. Animal Hospitals or Kennels Six spaces plus one for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area over 10,000 sq. ft. One space per structure 2. Auditoriums, Theaters, Religious 
Institutions One space for each three permanent seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall. Facilities as may be provided in conjunction with such buildings or uses shall be subject to additional requirements which are imposed by this Code. One space for each structure with over 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area 3. Automobile Car Washes Shall be determined by the type of car wash plus recommended stacking spaces as determined under 920.11.B.4 of this Section One space per facility 4. Automatic Drive Through Service Two spaces for each bay plus stacking equivalent to five spaces for each bay. One space per facility 5. Self-Service Car Wash Four spaces per bay. One space per facility 6. Motor Fuel Station Car Wash One space in addition to that required for the station. N.A. in addition to that required for the station. 7. Automobile Service Stations Five spaces plus three spaces for each service stall. Those facilities designed for sale of other items than strictly automobile products, parts or service shall be required to provide additional parking in compliance with other applicable sections of this Code. One space 8. Beauty of Barber Shops Two spaces for each working station, plus two spaces for each three employees. N.A. 9. Boat and Marine Sales One space for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area for the first 25,000 sq. ft., plus one space for each 600 sq. ft. thereafter. One space, plus one additional space for each 25,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area 10. Boating Marinas and Yacht Clubs Seven spaces for each ten boat or mooring spaces. One space for each 20,000 square feet. 11. Bowling Alleys Five spaces for each lane or alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses contained within the principal structure. One space for each structure with over 20,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area 12. Community Center, Physical Culture Studio, Libraries, Museums Ten spaces plus one space for each 150 square feet in excess of 2,000 sq. ft. of floor area in the principal structure. One space for each structure with over 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 13. Drive-in Convenience Food 
Establishment One space for each 15 sq. ft. of service floor area, one space for each 80 sq. ft. of kitchen floor area and one space for each 40 sq. ft. of seating floor area, but not less than 15 spaces, plus two spaces per drive-thru window. One space 14. Drive-in Banks One space for every 350 sq. ft. of floor area plus stacking requirements determined under 715.31 of this section. One space for buildings between 30,000 sq. ft. and 100,000 sq. ft. in gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 100,000 sq. ft. 15. Furniture Sales One space for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area for the first 25,000 sq. ft., plus one space for each 600 sq. ft. thereafter. One space plus one additional space for each 25,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 16. Group Day Care Centers One space for each employee, plus one space for each four children. One space 17. Housing for the Elderly One space for each 1.5 dwelling units. One space 18. Manufacturing One space for each employee on the major shift or one space for each 300 sq. ft., whichever is greater. One space for each 50,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 19. Medical or Dental Offices or Clinics Six spaces for each doctor or dentist One space per building 20. Motels, Hotels, Lodging or Boarding 
Houses One space per Lodging unit, plus spaces equal to 25 percent capacity of any club or lodge. One space per building 21. Multiple Family Dwellings, Townhouses Two fee free spaces for each living unit, of which one is to be enclosed. One space for each multiple family building over four units. 22. Nursing Homes, Rest Homes One space for each four beds. One space plus one additional space each 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 23. Office Buildings and Professional 
Offices, Other than Any Area for Doctors or Dentists; Banks, Public Administration Offices. Three spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area. One space for buildings between over 10,000 sq. ft. and 100,000 sq. ft. in gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 100,000 sq. ft. 24. Private or Private Non-Profit Baseball Fields, Stadiums One space for each eight seats of design capacity. One space for each structure with over 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 25. Restaurants, Private Clubs, Lodges, Food Dispensing Establishments 
(Except Drive-In Restaurants) 15.2 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area One space for each 10,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 26. Retail Commercial Uses, Except as Prescribed Herein. Three spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area One space for the first over 10,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 50,000 sq. ft. 27. Retail Sales and Service Business With (50 percent or More of Gross Floor Area Devoted to Storage, Warehouses and/or Industry Eight spaces or one space for each 200 sq. ft. devoted to public sales or service plus one space for each 500 sq. ft. of storage area. One space for the first over 10,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 50,000 sq. ft. 28. School, Elementary and Junior High, (Public or Private) One space for each classroom plus one space for each 50 student capacity. Adequate space shall be allowed for the dropping off and/or picking up of students as determined by the City Council. One space for each structure with over 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 29. School, High School (Public or Private) One space for each five students based on design capacity. Adequate space shall be allowed for the dropping off and/or picking up of students as determined by the City Council. One space for each structure with over nd 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 30. Shopping Center One space for each 150 sq. ft. of floor area. One space or the first 10,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable area plus one space for each additional 50,000 sq. ft. or part thereof. 31. Single Family, Two-Family Dwellings Two spaces per family unit. N.A. 32. Warehousing One space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area. That space which is solely used as office shall comply with the office use. Determined by the Zoning Administrator 33. Micro-production Facility One space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 34. Taproom/Tasting Room One space for each 40 sq. ft. of floor area. 35. Brewpub One space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of Micro-brewing production floor area; one space for each 40 sq. ft. of floor area of dining and bar area; and one space for each 80 sq. ft. of floor area of kitchen area.  
C.  Non-Specified Uses. For uses not specifically listed above, off-street parking and loading requirements shall be computed by the Zoning Administrator on the same basis as required for the most similar listed uses. (N.A. = Not Applicable). 
920.12 - C-4, C-4A and C-4B Parking Requirements. 
A.  Within the C-4, C-4A and C-4B Zoning Districts, the City may approve development and uses which do not comply with the required number of parking spaces as a conditional use permit, provided that: 
1.  A development agreement running with the land is completed in which it is agreed that the property in question is financially responsible for its proportionate share of the City sponsored and provided parking space construction, maintenance, and parking site acquisition for new on-street, lot and/or ramp parking. Said responsibility shall be determined on the basis of the property's parking space shortage based upon ordinance requirements, in relationship to the total parking space shortage, as defined by Chapter 920 for a defined service and benefit area. The "service and benefit area" shall include all properties which benefit from the available public parking serving a particular retail and commercial neighborhood or district. 
2.  The amount of parking provided on the property in question is the maximum amount possible, taking into account the use and design objectives of the C-4, C-4A and C-4B Districts as outlined by this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The parking shortages created by the development are not premature or in excess of the supply which can be provided by the City through a public parking system on a long term basis. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
920.13 - Space Reductions. 
A.  If warranted by unique characteristics or documented parking demand, the City may allow reductions in the number of parking spaces actually constructed at the time of site development or occupancy of a building, as long as the property owner provides a proof of parking plan. The proof of parking plan must provide the location for all minimum required parking spaces in conformance with this Ordinance. The City may require installation of the additional parking spaces in the proof of parking plan whenever the need arises. 
B.  Subject to the review and processing of a variance as regulated by Chapter 905 of this Ordinance, the City may reduce the number of required off-street parking spaces and/or loading spaces when the use can demonstrate in documented form a need which is less than required. In such situations, the City may require land to be reserved for parking development should use or needs change. 
CHAPTER 921 - BUILDING RELOCATION 

921.01 - Review Process. 
The relocation of any building or structure on a lot or onto another lot within the City shall be subject to review and approval through the conditional use permit process. 
921.02 - Performance Standards. 
A.  Upon relocation, the building shall comply with the applicable requirements of the State Building Code. 
B.  The proposed relocated building shall comply with the character of the neighborhood in which it is being relocated as determined by the City Council. 
C.  The relocated use will not result in a depreciation of neighborhood or adjacent property values. 
D.  The relocated structure shall be similar to the market valuation of adjacent principal structures as determined by the City Assessor. 
921.03 - Occupancy. 
The relocated structure shall be ready for occupancy within eight months from the date of location on the site. 
921.04 - Performance Security. 
A performance security shall be provided to the City as specified in Section 904.07 of this Ordinance. 
CHAPTER 922 - SITE/BUILDING PLAN REVIEW 

922.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to establish a formal plan review procedure and provide regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site design and construction standards as agreed to by the contractor through his officially submitted plan documents. 
922.02 - Plan Required. 
In addition to other plan requirements outlined in this Ordinance, site and construction plans will be require and shall be submitted to and approved by the Building Official prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
922.03 - Plan Review/Approval. 
Except in the case of individual single-family uses and minor projects, additions or alterations as determined by the Zoning Administrator and all building and site plans as specified by Chapter 909 of this Ordinance shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council. 
922.04 - Plan Agreements. 
All site and construction plans officially submitted to the City shall be treated as a formal agreement between the building contractor and the City. Once approved, no changes, modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan detail, standard or specifications without prior submission of a plan modification request to the Building Official for his review and approval. 
922.05 - Enforcement. 
The Building Official shall have the authority to order the stopping of any and all site improvement activities, when and where a violation of the provisions of this Section has been officially documented by the Building Official. 
CHAPTER 923 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

923.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to maintain the character and integrity of residential areas and to provide a means through the establishment of specific standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted in residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health, safety and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. In addition, this Section is intended to provide a mechanism enabling the distinction between permitted home occupations and special or customarily "more sensitive" home occupations, so that permitted home occupations may be allowed through an administrative process rather than a legislative hearing process. 
923.02 - Application. 
Subject to the non-conforming use provision of this Section, all occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the provisions of this Section. 
923.03 - Procedures and Permits. 
A.  Permitted Home Occupation. Any permitted home occupation as defined in this Ordinance shall require a "permitted home occupation permit." Such permits shall be issued subject to the conditions of this Section, other applicable City Ordinances and State law. This permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator or his agent based upon proof of compliance with the provisions of this Section. Application for the "permitted home occupation permit" shall be accompanied by a fee as adopted by the City Council. If the Zoning Administrator denies a permitted home occupation permit to an applicant, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council, which shall make the final decision. The permit shall remain in force and effect until such time as there has been a change in conditions or until such time as the provisions of this Section have been breached. At such time as the City has reason to believe that either event has taken place, a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission. The City Council shall make a final decision on whether or not the permit holder is entitled to the permit. 
B.  Special Home Occupation. Any home occupation which does not meet the specific requirements for a permitted home occupation as defined in this Section shall require a "special home occupation permit" which shall be applied for, reviewed and disposed of in accordance with the procedural provisions of Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. 
C.  Declaration of Conditions. The Planning Commission and City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a special home occupation permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section. 
D.  Effect of Permit. A "special home occupation permit" may be issued for a period of one year after which the permit may be reissued for periods of up to three years each. Each application for permit renewal shall, however, be processed in accordance with the procedural requirements of the initial "special home occupation permit." 
E.  Transferability. Permits shall not run with the land and shall not be transferable. 
F.  Lapse of Special Home Occupation Permit by Non-Use. Whenever within one year after granting a permit the use as permitted by the permit shall not have been initiated, then such permit shall become null and void unless a petition for extension of time in which to complete the work has been granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the Zoning Administrator at least 30 days before the expiration of the original permit. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to initiate the use. Such petition shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a decision. 
G.  Reconsideration. Whenever an application for a permit has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for a permit affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six months from the date of its denial unless a decision to reconsider such matters is made by not less than 4/5 vote of the entire City Council. 
H.  Renewal of Permits. An applicant shall not have a vested right to a permit renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. In applying for and accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees that his monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized over the life of the permit and that a permit renewal will not be needed to amortize the investment. Each application for the renewal of a permit will be considered de novo without taking into consideration that a previous permit has been granted. The previous granting or renewal of a permit shall not constitute a precedent or basis for the renewal of a permit. 
923.04 - Requirement-General Provisions. 
All home occupations shall comply with the following general provisions and according to definition, the applicable requirement provisions: 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  No home occupation shall produce light glare, noise, odor or vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property. 
2.  No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create electrical interference to surrounding properties. 
3.  Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises, should not change the residential character thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding residential uses. 
4.  No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations. 
5.  There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation, except personal automobiles used in the home occupation may be parked on the site. 
6.  The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes. 
7.  There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception of directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
8.  All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City Nuisance Ordinance. 
9.  No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10.00 p.m. and 7.00 a.m. unless said occupation is contained entirely within the principal building and will not require any on-street parking facilities. 
10.  No commodity shall be sold on the premises. 
11.  Not over 25 percent of any one story can be used for a home occupation. 
B.  Requirements-Permitted Home Occupations. 
1.  No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises shall be employed. 
2.  The general public shall not come to the premises in question for purposes pertaining to the conduct of the home occupation. 
3.  All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling and may not be conducted in accessory building. 
C.  Requirements-Special Home Occupation. 
1.  No person other than a resident shall conduct the home occupation. 
2.  Special home occupations shall be limited to only those activities of a non-residential nature which are specified as allowed by state statute or regulation such as day care group nursery. 
3.  Special home occupations may be allowed to accommodate their parking demand through utilization of on-street parking. In such cases where on-street parking facilities are necessary, however, the City Council shall maintain the right to establish the maximum number of on-street spaces permitted and increase or decrease that maximum number when and where changing conditions require additional review. 
923.05 - Non-Conforming Use. 
Existing home occupations lawfully existing on the date of this Ordinance may continue as non-conforming uses. They shall, however, be required to obtain permits for their continued operation. Any existing home occupation that is discontinued for a period of more than 30 days, or is in violation of the Ordinance provisions under which it was initially established, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this Section. 
923.06 - Inspection. 
The City of Wayzata hereby reserves the right upon issuing any home occupation permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Section or any conditions additionally imposed. 
CHAPTER 924 - DAY CARE NURSERY FACILITIES 

924.01 - Purpose. 
The regulation of day care nursery facilities in these zoning regulations is to establish standards and procedures by which day care facilities can be conducted within the City without jeopardizing the health, safety and general welfare of the day care participants and/or the surrounding neighborhood. This Section establishes the City's minimum requirements for the establishment of a day care facility which are not defined as permitted uses by State Statute or which are operated in uses other than single family homes. Day care facilities other than those defined permitted uses by State Statutes which operate in a single family dwelling as an accessory use shall be subject to Chapter 923 of this Ordinance and processed as a home occupation. 
924.02 - Application. 
Day care nursery facilities shall be considered a conditional use within all the zoning districts of the City and shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. In addition to the City regulation, all day care facility operations shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Minnesota Department of Welfare regulations, as may be amended. 
924.03 - Declaration of Conditions. 
The Planning Commission and Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a day care facility conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section. 
924.04 - Site Plan Drawing Necessary. 
All applications for a day care facility conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned, displaying the information required by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. 
924.05 - General Provisions. 
Day care facilities shall be allowed as a principal use or as an accessory use, provided that the day care facilities meet all the applicable provisions of this Section. 
A.  Lot Requirements and Setbacks, Principal Use. The proposed site for a day care facility as a principal use shall have a minimum lot area as determined by the Minnesota Department of Welfare. The City Council may increase the required lot area in those cases where such an increase is considered necessary to ensure compatibility of activities and maintain the public health, safety and general welfare. The day care facility shall meet the setback requirements of the respective zoning district. 
B.  Lot Requirements and Setbacks, Accessory Use. The site of the proposed day care facility as an accessory use shall meet all area and setback provisions of the respective zoning district in which the facility is to be located. 
C.  Sewer and Water. All day care facilities shall have access to municipal sewer and water or have adequate private sewer and water to protect the health and safety of all persons who occupy the facility. 
D.  Screening. Where the day care facility is in or abuts any commercial or industrial use or zoned property, the day care facility shall provide screening along the shared boundary of such uses. All of the required fencing and screening shall comply with the fencing and screening requirements of Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
E.  Parking. 
1.  There shall be adequate off-street parking which shall be located separately from any outdoor play area and shall be in compliance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. Parking areas shall be screened from view of surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  When a day care facility is an accessory use within a structure containing another principal use, each use shall be calculated separately for determining the total off-street parking spaces required. 
F.  Loading. One off-street parking space in compliance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance shall be provided. 
G.  Signage. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
H.  Compliance with State Requirements. The structure and operation shall be in compliance with State of Minnesota, Department of Human Services Regulations and be licenses accordingly. 
924.06 - Non-Conforming Use. 
Existing day care facilities lawfully existing on the effective date of this Ordinance may continue as non-conforming uses. They shall, however, be required to obtain permits for their continued operation. Any existing day care facility that is discontinued for a period of more than 180 days, or is in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance under which it was initially established, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this Section. 
924.07 - Inspection. 
At any and all reasonable hours, with or without notice, the City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any day care facility conditional use permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Section or any conditions additionally imposed. 
CHAPTER 925 - BED AND BREAKFAST AND INN ESTABLISHMENTS 

925.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to establish performance standards for Bed and Breakfast Establishments and Inn Establishments that provide temporary accommodations on an ongoing basis within residential and commercial areas. 
925.02 - Provisions of Bed and Breakfast Establishments. 
A.  Bed and Breakfast Establishment District Application. Bed and Breakfast Establishments shall require conditional use permit approved in accordance with Chapter 904 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments shall be limited to the following zoning districts: 
1.  R-1 Low Density Single Family District. 
2.  R-1A Low Density Single Family Estate District. 
3.  R-2 Medium Density Single Family District. 
4.  R-2A Single Family Residential District. 
5.  R-3 Single and Two Family Residential District. 
6.  R-3A Single and Two Family Residential District. 
B.  Conditions of Approval for a Bed and Breakfast Establishment. In addition to the standards and criteria provided in Chapter 904 of this Ordinance, the following additional standards shall apply to Bed and Breakfast Establishments: 
1.  Guest stays shall be limited to 14 consecutive days. 
2.  No food preparation or cooking facilities shall be conducted within any of the guestrooms. 
3.  The Establishment operator shall carry liability insurance, and shall provide proof of such insurance to the City annually. 
4.  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single family design. 
5.  Bed and Breakfast Establishments in residential zoning districts shall be located at least 600 feet apart. 
6.  The Establishment shall have a State issued license for lodging and food service, and comply with and maintain all health safety, building, and fire codes as may be required or applicable. 
7.  The primary owner-occupant shall be in residence of the residential property or on an adjacent property proposed for the Bed and Breakfast Establishment. 
8.  All Bed and Breakfast units shall be established within the principal structure, or the principal and accessory structures in the case of a property zoned R-1 or R-1A. 
9.  Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the general public, but shall be used exclusively by the registered guests and residents, or guests of a meeting or event held at the Establishment. 
10.  Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the Establishment plus one for each Bed and Breakfast unit. Parking areas shall be screened and landscaped and no parking space shall be located in the front yard of the property, other than on an existing driveway. The parking areas shall be improved with a dust-free surface. 
11.  No more than one exterior identification sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be located on the premises. The sign must match the architectural features of the structure. No window signage shall be allowed for Bed and Breakfast Establishments. 
12.  Adequate lighting shall be provided between the principal structure and the parking area for the safety of guests. All external lighting shall be regulated by conditional use permit and shall be downward-facing to reduce glare to adjacent properties. 
13.  The Establishment shall maintain a guest register open to inspection by the City. 
14.  All Bed and Breakfast conditional use permits shall be reviewed annually by the Building Inspection and Planning Departments. If violations of City ordinances, Building Code, or conditions of approval are found, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing of the Planning Commission to consider the conditional use permit and conditions. Upon a Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council may make modifications to or cancel the conditional use permit. 
15.  The Planning Commission and the City Council reserve the right to review the conditional use permit annually and either continue or modify the conditions of the permit, for at least a period of five years after approval. 
16.  The Planning Commission and the City Council reserve the right to terminate the conditional use permit any time the owner fails to adhere to the standards or conditions established by this section or contained in the conditional use permit. 
17.  All Bed and Breakfast Establishments shall obtain a bed and breakfast license from the City of Wayzata prior to commencing operation. Licenses shall be renewed annually to ensure that all provisions of initial approval are satisfied. 
18.  All Bed and Breakfast Establishments shall be inspected annually by the City Building Inspections Department and shall conform with all applicable sections of the State Building Code. 
19.  The provisions of Chapter 904 of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
20.  A maximum of five bed and breakfast units may be established within a principal residential structure. The following lot size criteria determines the number of guestrooms allowed: 
Original Number of Bedrooms Max. Number of Guestrooms Permitted Max. Number of Guest Rooms Permitted If Owner Lives Adjacent to Structure Min. Zoning Lot Area in Square Feet 2 1 2 Up to 9,000 3 2 3 9,000-14,999 4 3 4 15,000-24,999 5 4 5 25,000-39,999 6 5 6 40,000 and greater  
925.03 - Provisions of Inn Establishments. 
A.  Inn Establishment District Application. Inn Establishments shall require a conditional use permit approved in accordance with Chapter 904 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Inn Establishments shall be limited to the following zoning districts: 
1.  R-5 Average Density Multiple Residential District 
2.  C-1 Office and Limited Commercial District 
3.  C-1A Neighborhood Office and Limited Commercial District 
4.  C-2 Shopping Center Business District 
5.  C-3 Service District 
6.  C-4 Central Business District 
7.  C-4A Limited Central Business District 
8.  C-4B Central Business District 
9.  INS Institutional District 
B.  Conditions of Approval for an Inn Establishment. In addition to the standards and criteria provided in Chapter 904 of this Ordinance, the following additional standards shall apply to Inn Establishments: 
1.  No food preparation or cooking facilities shall be conducted within any of the guestrooms. 
2.  The Establishment operator shall carry liability insurance, and shall provide proof of such insurance to the City annually. 
3.  Inn Establishments in all zoning districts shall be located at least 600 feet apart. 
4.  The Establishment shall have a State issued license for lodging and food service, and comply with and maintain all health safety, building, and fire codes as may be required or applicable. 
5.  All Inn units shall be established within the principal structure. 
6.  Dining and other facilities may be open to the general public. 
7.  Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the Establishment plus one for each Inn unit. Parking areas shall be screened and landscaped and no parking space shall be located in the front yard of the property, other than on an existing driveway. The parking areas shall be improved with a dust-free surface. 
8.  No more than one exterior identification sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area may be located on the premises. The sign must match the architectural features of the structure. No window signage shall be allowed for Inn Establishments. 
9.  Adequate lighting shall be provided between the principal structure and the parking area for the safety of guests. All external lighting shall be regulated by conditional use permit and shall be downward-facing to reduce glare to adjacent properties. 
10.  The Establishment shall maintain a guest register open to inspection by the City. 
11.  All Inn conditional use permits shall be reviewed annually by the Building Inspection and Planning Departments. If violations of City ordinances, Building Code, or conditions of approval are found, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing of the Planning Commission to consider the conditional use permit and conditions. Upon a Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council may make modifications to or cancel the conditional use permit. 
12.  The Planning Commission and the City Council reserve the right to review the conditional use permit annually and either continue or modify the conditions of the permit. 
13.  The Planning Commission and the City Council reserve the right to terminate the conditional use permit any time the owner fails to adhere to the standards or conditions established by this section or contained in the conditional use permit. 
14.  All Inn Establishments shall obtain Inn Operations license from the City of Wayzata prior to commencing operation. Licenses shall be renewed annually to ensure that all provisions of initial approval are satisfied. 
15.  All Inn Establishments shall be inspected annually by the City Building Inspections Department and shall conform with all applicable sections of the State Building Code. 
16.  The provisions of Chapter 904 of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
17.  A maximum of ten Inn units may be established within a principal structure. 
CHAPTER 927 - SIGNS 

927.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to protect and promote the general welfare, health, safety and order within the City through the establishment of a comprehensive and impartial series of standards, regulations or symbols serving as visual communicative media. The provisions of this Section are intended to encourage creativity, a reasonable degree of freedom of choice, an opportunity for effective communication, and a sense of concern for visual amenities on the part of those designing, displaying or otherwise utilizing needed communicative media of the types regulated by this Section, while at the same time assuring that the public is not endangered, annoyed or distracted by the unsafe, disorderly, indiscriminate or unnecessary use of such communicative facilities. 
927.02 - Permit Required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person shall erect, maintain, repair, or alter or relocate within the City any sign as defined herein without first having been issued an appropriate permit therefore and having paid the appropriate permit fee. 
927.03 - Permit Fees. 
The fees which shall be charged for permanent and temporary signs and for sign repair or copy replacement under this Section shall be in accordance with the fee schedule as determined by resolution of the City Council. 
927.04 - Application Procedures. 
Each application for a permit under this Section shall be submitted to the City Manager or designee on forms provided by the City and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the person for whom the sign is being erected, plus the name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the property owner. 
B.  The location and dimensions of the building, structure or lot to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached or erected. 
C.  A site plan showing the positioning and height of the sign(s) or other advertising structures in relation to all nearby existing or proposed buildings, structures and property lines, lighting details, a table of the proposed gross sign area for each sign and the total proposed sign area. 
D.  Two blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications for the sign, its method of construction and its attachment to the building or in the ground. 
E.  When a, monument or free-standing sign is to exceed ten feet in height, two certified and sealed sets of stress sheets and calculations shall be submitted by a structural engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota attesting that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction as required to meet sound engineering principles. 
F.  The name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the structure. 
G.  Such other information as the City Manager or designee requires to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the City. 
H.  If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed within six months after the date of its issuance, said permit shall become null and void. 
927.05 - General Sign Provisions. 
All signs within the City of Wayzata shall be subject to the following general regulations: 
A.  Sign owners shall be required to maintain the appearance of the ground around all signs detached from buildings and to landscape where possible. 
B.  Sign owners at the direction of the City Building Official, shall be required to repair or remove any sign which becomes unsafe, insecure, unsightly, defaced or a danger to the public. Sign maintenance shall be the responsibility of the underlying fee owner. 
C.  The property owner shall be required to correct/remove a sign upon change of occupancy with the correct information. In no event shall a property owner maintain an incorrect or non-current sign message beyond a one month period. 
D.  No sign or sign structure shall be placed on or extend into the public right-of-way or protrude over any sidewalk, except for wall, canopy, awning, projecting, and marquee signs. All signs located over such areas shall be in accordance with the awning regulations provided in Chapter 315 of the Wayzata City Code. 
E.  The top edge of any wall or building mounted sign or object intended as an attention attracting device shall not extend above the roof line, parapet, or facade of the building to which it is attached. 
F.  The construction of all signs permitted under this Section, unless otherwise stated herein, shall be in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Sign Code published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 1997 Edition which is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Section. 
G.  The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the State's Electrical Code. Electrical service to freestanding signs shall be underground. 
H.  No sign shall be artificially illuminated in such a way that produces a broadcast of glare or light beyond the sign. In no case shall a shadow exist producing an outline of the sign on the ground or against a building either on or off-site. All illumination of identification signs in residential districts shall be indirect. Artificially illuminated signs shall also be shielded to prevent lights from being directed at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of the driver. Nor shall such signs interfere with or obscure an official traffic sign or signal. This includes indoor signs which are visible from public streets. 
I.  Signs shall not create a hazard to the safe, efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No private sign shall contain words which might be construed as traffic controls, such as "stop," "caution," "warning," unless the sign is intended to direct traffic on the premises. 
J.  No signs, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or maintained on rocks, fences or trees nor interfere with any electric light, power, telephone or telegraph wires or the supports thereof, nor be located within a drainage or utility easement. 
K.  No sign or sign structure shall be erected or maintained that prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign or sign structure shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
L.  No sign shall be attached to or be allowed to hang from any building until all necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the City Building Official. 
M.  No sign shall be placed in a sight visibility triangle unless it is in accordance with the regulations as established in this Ordinance. 
N.  Except for civic and holiday events as authorized by the City Council, the use of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, search lights and any other similar devices designed and utilized primarily to draw attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business shall require a temporary permit not to exceed a period of three days, except for banners and posters which shall not exceed a period of two weeks. This permit may be granted by the City Manager, or designee, no more than three times during any 12-month period. Lighter-than-air, inflatable devices and/or balloons shall not be permitted. A copy of the owner's insurance certificate shall be required prior to issuance of a temporary permit. The additional gross sign area of such devices, where applicable, and when added to the existing sign area, shall not exceed 110 percent of the total allowable sign area. For shopping centers, these provisions apply to the entire center as a complex and not to the tenants on an individual basis. 
O.  The use of a temporary and portable sign shall be limited only to charitable, non-profit or civic organizations and shall require a temporary permit not to exceed a period of ten days. This permit may be granted by the City Manager, or designee, no more than three times during any 12-month period per organization. Portable and temporary signs may not exceed 32 square feet in area unless first approved by Council and shall not be illuminated with any flashing device. Any temporary electrical connections to such devices shall be made by an approved cord in proper condition from an approved GFI receptacle outlet in accordance with the National Electric Code. Temporary and portable signs shall not be permitted in any residential district. 
P.  At least one address sign identifying the correct property number as assigned by the City Manager or designee shall be required on each principal building in all districts. The number shall be at least three inches in height, but no larger than 12 inches in height. Said sign shall be excluded from the total allowable sign area calculation. No permit shall be required for such address sign. 
Q.  Public directory signs intended to identify a group of businesses, an organization or a public or quasi-public entity may be located upon public property only when first approved by the City Council. Public directory signs shall be required to comply with the provisions of this Section except where, due to unusual and unique conditions that may exist, such as in the East Lake Street area, a special exception may be granted by the City Council to achieve a desired public purpose. 
R.  The design and construction of all signs within the City shall be done with the highest quality materials and workmanship to promote safety and a quality sign appearance. All signs located in residential and commercial areas shall be aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed and shall relate harmoniously to the terrain, site circulation and existing or proposed buildings that have a visual relationship to the proposed signing. 
S.  Where permitted, internally illuminated signs shall be permitted if only the text or logo portion of the sign is lighted. Back lighting of awnings is prohibited. 
927.06 - Prohibited Signs. 
The following signs shall be prohibited within the City: 
A.  Any sign which does or would interfere with the ability of drivers or pedestrians to see any traffic sign or signal or any crosswalk or which otherwise would constitute a public hazard. 
B.  Revolving beacons, revolving, swinging, moving signs or signs with moving parts, zip flashers, flashing signs or similar devices, excepting time and temperature information. In the case of allowed time and temperature signs, the message depicted shall be reasonably accurate or the message shall be removed until it is repaired. 
C.  Signs which are tacked, posted, painted or otherwise affixed on trees, fences, utility poles or other such accessory structures or landscape features. 
D.  Signs which contain any indecent or offensive picture or written matter. 
E.  Advertising signs. 
F.  Pylon signs are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
G.  Portable signs, except as provided for under Section 907.05.O. 
927.07 - Allowable Signs. 
The following signs shall be allowed without a permit in accordance with the height requirements of the corresponding zoning district under Section 927.08 of this Chapter: 
A.  Free-standing, temporary political signs, which may remain for a period of not more than eight weeks prior to an election and five days after an election, provided that such signs are no more than six square feet in area and are placed with permission of the property owner or lessee, except during August 1 and ten days following the general election in any State general election year pursuant to Minn. Stats.  211B.045., which does not place any size restrictions on non-commercial signs during that time period. 
B.  Signs located on, above or beside entrances or exits to buildings or driveways which direct pedestrians (e.g. "employees entrance," "exit only," "rest rooms"), provided that such signs are no more than four square feet in area. 
C.  Temporary signs denoting an architect, engineer or contractor, when placed upon work under construction, provided that each such sign is no more than 16 square feet in area and is removed upon the completion of construction. There shall be a maximum of one sign per company and not more than four of these signs allowed per property. 
D.  Memorial signs or tablets and integral signs not exceeding nine square feet in area. 
E.  At least one address sign identifying the correct property number as assigned by the City Manager or designee shall be required on each principal building in all districts. The number shall be at least three inches in height, but no larger than 12 inches in height. Said sign shall be excluded from the total allowable sign area calculation. No permit shall be required for such address sign. 
F.  Governmental traffic control signs, non-commercial municipal signs, legal notices and temporary "danger" or "emergency" signs. 
G.  Temporary advertising signs painted on or attached to the interior of a display window for commercial and retail businesses, provided they do not exceed 50 percent of the area of the individual window. 
H.  One flag per government unit or agency with a pole height not exceeding 40 feet in residential districts and 60 feet in height for all other districts. The vertical height of the flag(s) where attached to the pole shall not occupy more than 20 percent of the pole height. All additional flags shall be subject to permit requirements and applied toward the total allowable sign area for a property and shall not exceed 40 square feet in area or 20 feet in pole height. There shall be no setback requirements for flag poles. 
I.  Real estate signs, including banners, on a temporary basis, for the purpose of selling or leasing individual lots or buildings, provided that each such sign is no more than eight square feet in area for single family detached residential uses and 32 square feet for any other use, not exceeding eight feet in height. Such a sign shall be located only on the premises involved, and it shall be removed immediately upon sale or lease of the property or within 12 months, whichever is sooner. Real estate signs shall be allowed independent of the allowable sign area and limitations of the subject property. 
J.  Rummage (garage) sale signs only on private property not exceeding six square feet in area and displayed only during the time of the sale. 
K.  Holiday signs or displays which are displayed for a period not to exceed 75 days in any calendar year, and shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
L.  Exterior private directory signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area. 
M.  Non-illuminated identification signs for home occupations not exceeding two square feet in area attached to the dwelling. 
927.08 - Permitted Signs. 
In the following zoning districts as noted on the following page and as established within this Ordinance for the City of Wayzata, the corresponding signs and standards are herein established as the regulations governing new sign construction, installation or alteration from the effective date of this Section forward. A sign permit in accordance with Sections 927.02, 927.03, and 927.04 shall be required under this Section prior to any sign construction, installation or alteration. The following Sign Table shall be interpreted as providing for sign usage by right where standards are indicated for gross surface area and prohibited where blank. A Conditional Use Permit (CUP) may be requested for a sign where indicated. Conditional Use Permit requests shall be processed in accordance with Conditional Use Permit procedures established within Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. 
927.09 - Additional Sign Performance and Standards. 
The following standards shall apply to all signs permitted under Section 927.08: 
A.  No sign, sign structure or other apparatus prohibited in any residential district which exceeds eight feet in height shall be set back less than 21/2 times the sign height in distance from any such residential zoning districts. The sign shall also be positioned so that the copy is not visible from existing or potential residential uses within said districts along adjoining side and rear yard property lines. 
B.  Standards for signs allowed by Conditional Use Permit shall be applied to applicable districts as provided for at time of approval. In addition to the criteria for approval as specified within the procedures for Conditional Use Permits by this Ordinance, the following standards shall also be taken into account: 
1.  The sign placement, height or design does not create a safety hazard with regard to, from or on a public street or roadway. 
2.  The sign placement, height or design does not create a safety problem or negatively affect adjoining properties or use. 
3.  Consideration shall be given to the possible adverse effects of the proposed Conditional Use Permit and satisfactorily address any additional requirements that may be necessary to reduce such adverse effects. The City's judgement shall be based upon (but not limited to) the following factors: 
a)  Relationship to area plans. 
b)  The geographical area involved. 
c)  Whether such Conditional Use Permit will depreciate the area in which it is proposed. 
d)  The character of the surrounding area. 
e)  The demonstrated need for such Conditional Use Permit. 
f)  Whether such Conditional Use Permit would inherently lead to or encourage disturbing influences in the neighborhood. 
C.  In C-3 Commercial Zoning Districts where a public frontage road separates a fronting property from the freeway, the following provision shall apply. In those cases where there is a grade difference of more than four feet between the proposed location of the sign and the higher grade of the freeway towards which the property fronts and the sign is oriented, the City Council may grant an increase in sign height to allow adequate visibility of the sign. In no case shall the sign height exceed 30 feet above the grade of the freeway or exceed a total of 40 feet. 
D.  Time and/or temperature signs fronting on Wayzata Boulevard in all commercial districts shall be excluded from the maximum sign area limits allowed per sign, provided that: 
1.  Time and/or temperature signs on Wayzata Boulevard shall not be closer than 2,000 feet from another time and/or temperature sign. 
2.  The principal structure has a minimum floor area of 40,000 square feet. 
3.  For freestanding signs, the sign conforms with the eight and location requirements in this Ordinance. 
4.  Should the sign be attached to a wall, with the exception of size, the sign shall conform with wall sign requirements. 
5.  The time and/or temperature sign shall be limited to a maximum total area of 50 square feet exclusive of the principal signage allowed for that property. 
6.  The sign conforms with illumination requirements except that the lights may be on 24 hours a day. 
7.  The message depicted is contained in one statement and not a continuing sentence or flow of information. 
E.  Where a building, group of attached buildings on the same block or center contains more than one business, the allowable sign area for any single business shall be its portion of the gross square footage of the building or center applied as a percentage to the allowable sign area of the entire building or center. 
F.  Ground, monument, or freestanding signs exceeding five feet in height, where permitted, shall be limited to one per commercial establishment. Multi-establishment buildings are herein considered a single commercial establishment. In the event that a shopping center or other type of commercial establishment desires more than one monument or free-standing sign exceeding five feet in height, then a Conditional Use Permit may be requested in accordance with all Conditional Use Permit procedures as set forth in Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. 
G.  Independent of the total allowable sign area for individual businesses, one identification sign for a shopping center or other commercial center may be permitted per arterial street frontage. 
H.  Where there are two walls of a principal building, with each having primary frontage on a principal streets, both frontages may be calculated on an individual basis with the total allowable wall sign area applied to the respective street frontage. 
I.  In no circumstances, shall more than a 15-foot building height be used in the calculation of a principal wall frontage. 
J.  All artificial illumination of signs in non-residential districts adjacent to or within 200 feet of residential districts or uses shall be turned off at the close of business or by 10.00 p.m., whichever occurs later. This requirement may also be applied to other appropriate locations as deemed necessary by the Wayzata City Council for the protection of certain areas as may be provided through approved policies contained within the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
K.  So as not to create a double exposure or increase sign size limitations, there shall be a maximum separation angle of 45 degrees for signs which are back to back. In all residential districts, double-faced signs shall be parallel. 
L.  For ground/low profile and monument signs, the copy or graphic area shall not exceed 50 percent of the potential maximum gross surface area, unless approved as a conditional use permit. 
M.  Where there are special approved design features on a building such as cupolas, steeples, domes, chimneys, etc., a wall sign may be erected on such an architectural feature subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with all Conditional Use Permit procedures as set forth in this Section and this Ordinance. In no case shall the sign exceed the gross or total allowable sign area permitted. 
N.  Independent of the total allowable sign area for individual residences in the R-1A, R-1, R-2A, R-2, R-3A, and R-3 Zoning Districts, two ground/low profile or monument project identification signs for residential areas with six or more lots may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit for each entrance to a unified project area consistent with the following provisions: 
1.  New subdivisions. 
a)  Each sign structure may not exceed a total of 32 square feet in area. 
b)  Signs are to be located on outlots of sufficient size and area to accommodate them or within a dedicated permanent sign easement. A homeowners or neighborhood association is required for the area identified by the signs which shall own and be responsible for the upkeep, perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities, and other costs associated with the sign(s) and their property. The association rules or by-laws shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities will be delegated and paid for. City staff shall review the proposed by-laws to ensure that they specify the aforementioned responsibilities. 
c)  Outlots or easements for signs are to be considered and planned for at the time of preliminary plat application and will be included in the final plat. The development contract between the City and the developer shall specify the designated use of the outlot or easements, its ownership and the respective home owners association responsibilities regarding the proposed improvements. 
d)  Project identification signs as provided for herein, shall be limited to a unified and definable project area. 
e)  Lighting of signs may be allowed. The electric costs and maintenance of such lighting shall be the responsibility of the homeowners association or neighborhood association of the area identified by the sign(s) and shall be clearly noted in the association's rules or by-laws. 
f)  The area around the sign is to be landscaped and maintained in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission. 
g)  The design and construction of residential area identification signs shall be done with the highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. Residential area identification signs are to be aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The signs shall be compatible with nearby or potential homes and other structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and a materials list shall be included with the Conditional Use Permit application. 
h)  The City reserves the right to require the removal, at the owner's expense, of any sign when the requirements of this Section and this Ordinance are not completely followed and adhered to or if the sign is not properly maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The City shall not have any obligation or liability to replace any sign or nearby landscaping when removed by the City. 
2.  Existing Subdivisions. A low profile identification sign may be allowed, subject to the procedures set forth in and regulated by this Section and other applicable City ordinances, for existing residential area plats. If no outlots or easements are designated for signs, the plat may be amended, in accordance with the minor subdivision section of the Wayzata Subdivision Ordinance, to provide for such a proposal and shall meet the same criteria and requirements as set forth for new subdivisions. 
O.  Independent of the total allowable sign area for residential dwellings in the R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-6 or Residential Planned Unit Development Districts, two project monument identification signs may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit for each entrance to an area consistent with the following provisions: 
1.  If the monument signs are to be located in a development which includes individual ownership parcels, then the provisions established for individual residences in Section 927.09.N above shall apply. 
2.  If the monument signs are to be located in a development which do not include individual ownership parcels, then all other provisions of this Section shall apply. 
927.10 - Non-Conforming Signs. 
A.  Permanent signs which lawfully exist on the effective date of this Ordinance and which do not meet the requirements of this Section, except for advertising and billboard signs, and except for pylon and monument signs which exceed the maximum gross surface area and height which were required to be removed by November 18, 1987, shall be allowed to continue. These non-conforming signs shall not be altered, rebuilt or relocated, unless destroyed by natural or other causes uncontrollable by the owner, lessor or agent of the property, other than for routine maintenance, repair or to change the copy or message thereon without being brought into compliance with the requirements of this Section. 
B.  After a non-conforming sign has been removed, it shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign. Whenever the use of a non-conforming sign has been discontinued for a period of one month, such use shall not be resumed thereafter unless the sign meets the requirements of this Section. Within a one month period of the sign or business discontinuance, the sign owner shall remove the non-conforming sign. 
C.  Non-Conforming Uses. When the principal use of land is legally non-conforming under this Section, all existing or proposed signs in conjunction with that land shall be considered conforming if they are in compliance with the provisions of this Section for the most restrictive zoning district in which the principal use is allowed, or the C-1 zoning district, whichever provision is the most restrictive. 
927.11 - Abatement. 
If the Zoning Administrator or his designee finds that any sign has been erected without the necessary approvals or any sign is being maintained in violation of any provision of this Section, he may give written notice of such violation to the installer of said sign, to the permit holder and/or to the owner, lessee or manager of said property. If after receiving said notice such person fails to remove or alter said sign so as to comply with the provisions of this Section, the sign shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be abated by the City under Minn. Stats. Ch. 429. The cost of such an abatement, including administrative expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees, may be levied as a special assessment against the property upon which the sign is located. 
Section 27 Sign Table 
Zoning District Sign Type and Maximum Gross Surface Area Total Allowable Sign Area Sign Type and Maximum Height in Feet Identification Wall Awning/ 
Canopy/ 
Marquee Ground/ 
Monument Freestanding Roof Projecting Identification Ground/ 
Monument R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3A 6 SF - CUP CUP -- - - 6 SF 5 FT 5 FT R-4, R-5 20 SF (20 or less units) 32 SF (21 or more units) 6 SF 6 SF 4 SF 4 SF 35 SF 40 SF 12 SF 12 SF - - 35 SF 50 SF 8 FT 10 FT 8 FT 10 FT INS 60 SF - 20 SF 60 SF 35 SF - - lesser of 15% or 150 SF 20 FT 12 FT C-1, C-1A 60 SF 15% 20 SF 35 SF 35 SF 15% 10 SF lesser of 15% or 150 SF 20 FT 12 FT C-2, C-3 150 SF* 15% 20 SF 60 SF 35 SF - - lesser of 15% or 150 SF 20 FT 12 FT C-4, C-4A, C-4B 40 SF 15% 20 SF 35 SF CUP 15% 10 SF lesser of 15% or 150 SF 20 Ft 12 FT  
Notes: 
* shall only apply to a shopping center 
Additional Sign Standards: 
1.  For properties located in any of the Design Standards Districts, additional sign standards as set forth in the Design Standards shall apply. 
2.  Roof signs are only allowed on pitched-styled buildings and shall not extend above the roof line, parapet, or fapade of the building. 
3.  Buildings shall be allowed either a wall sign or roof sign (where applicable). 
4.  A comprehensive signage plan shall be submitted for all proposed structures except single-family dwellings. 
5.  The use of pylon signs is prohibited in all zoning districts within the City of Wayzata. 
6.  Wall signs on storefront-type buildings shall be placed within the sign band immediately above the storefront. 
CHAPTER 928 - ESSENTIAL SERVICES 

928.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the installation of essential services such as telephone lines, pipelines, electric transmission lines and substations in such a manner that the health, safety and welfare of the City will not be adversely affected. Essential services should also be installed in cognizance of existing and projected demands for such services. 
928.02 - Special Permit Required. 
All underground telephone lines, pipelines for local distribution, underground electric transmission lines, and overhead utility lines and electric transmission lines and substations less than 33 KV, when installed in any public right-of-way in any zoning district, shall require a special permit approved by the City Engineer. 
928.03 - City Approval Required. 
All underground telephone lines, pipelines for local distribution, underground transmission lines, and overhead utility lines and electric transmission lines less than 33 KV, which are extended to serve more than one parcel and are proposed to be installed at locations other than in public right-of-way, shall require a special permit issued by the City after approval by the City Engineer. Approval by the City Engineer shall be based upon the information furnished in the following procedural requirements: 
A.  Prior to the installation of any of the previous essential services, the owner of such service shall file with the Zoning Administrator, all maps and other pertinent information as deemed necessary for the City Engineer to review the proposed project. 
B.  The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the map and accompanying information to the City Engineer for review and approval regarding the project's relationship to the Comprehensive Plan and parts thereof and/or City Code provisions. 
C.  The City Engineer shall report in writing to the Zoning Administrator the findings as to the compliance of the proposed project with the Comprehensive Plan and City Code provisions. 
D.  In considering applications for the placement of essential services, as regulated in this Section, the aforesaid City staff shall consider the effect of the proposed project upon the health, safety and general welfare of the City, as existing and as anticipated; and the effect of the proposed project upon the Comprehensive Plan. 
E.  Upon receiving the approval of the City Engineer, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit for the installation and operation of the applicant's essential services. If the Engineer's report recommends the denial of said permit causing the Zoning Administrator to deny its issuance, the applicant may appeal said decision to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments under the rules and procedures as set forth in Chapter 906 of this Ordinance. 
928.04 - Conditional Use Permit Required. 
All transmissions pipelines (i.e., pipelines not required for local distributing network), and overhead transmission and substation lines in excess of 33 KV shall be a conditional use in all districts subject to the following procedural requirements: 
A.  Prior to the installation of any of the previous essential services, the owner of such service shall file with the Zoning Administrator, all maps and other pertinent information as deemed necessary for the Planning Commission to review the proposed project. 
B.  The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the map and accompanying information to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendations regarding the project's relationship to the Comprehensive Plan and parts thereof. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall hold the necessary public hearings as prescribed by this Section for conditional uses. 
D.  The Planning Commission shall report in writing to the Council its findings as to compliance of the proposed project with the Comprehensive Plan. 
E.  In considering the applications for the placement of essential services, as regulated by this Section, the City Council shall consider the advice and recommendations of the Planning Commission and the effect of the proposed project upon the health, safety and general welfare of the City, existing and anticipated; and the effect of the proposed project upon the Comprehensive Plan. 
CHAPTER 929 - MODEL HOMES 

929.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the erection of model homes in new subdivisions without adversely affecting the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods or creating a general nuisance. As model homes represent a unique temporary commercial use, special consideration must be given to the peculiar problems associated with them and special standards must be applied to ensure reasonable compatibility with their surrounding environment. 
929.02 - Procedure. 
The erection of a model home(s) shall require approval of the City Council. 
929.03 - Special Requirements. 
A.  Temporary parking facilities equal to four spaces per model home dwelling unit shall be provided. The overall design, drainage, and surfacing of the temporary parking facility shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
B.  Access from a temporary parking facility onto a local, residential street shall be discouraged. Where this requirement is physically impractical, access shall be directed away from residential neighborhoods to the greatest extent possible. 
C.  No model home shall incorporate outside lighting which creates a nuisance due to glare or intensity, as provided for in Section 916.06 of this Ordinance. 
D.  All model home signage shall comply with the sign regulations as contained in Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
E.  All criteria for conditional use consideration but not procedural requirements as contained in Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance shall be considered and satisfactorily met. 
CHAPTER 930 - ANIMALS 

930.01 - Keeping Animals. 
The following animals may be kept in the City: 
A.  Domestic animals are allowed in all zoning districts. 
B.  Horses are an allowed accessory use per district regulations. 
C.  Farm animals are not allowed in the City. 
D.  Animals being kept as part of the Minnesota Zoological Gardens, St. Paul Como Zoo, or similar institutional docent programs are an allowed use in all zoning districts. Before such animals are allowed, however, the participant in the program must notify the City Manager in writing of their participation in the program and identify the animal being kept. 
E.  With the exception of animals allowed by subsections A, B, C and D above, no other animals are allowed except by conditional use permit. 
F.  Animals may only be kept for commercial purposes if authorized in the zoning district where the animals are located. 
G.  Animals may not be kept if they cause a nuisance or endanger the health or safety of the community. 
H.  Dog kennels shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 904 of this Ordinance and shall be subject to other applicable sections of the City Code. 
CHAPTER 931 - COMMERCIAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AND RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES 

931.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this section is to establish objective and balanced regulations for the siting, screening and operation of wireless telecommunication facilities and equipment in order to accommodate Wireless Communication systems within the City while minimizing any adverse impacts on the City's natural resources, aesthetics, public spaces, surrounding neighborhood property values, and the general health, safety and public welfare, all as allowed under applicable Federal law. This section recognizes that these wireless communication systems provide a valuable service to the public but that they are not a public utility. The specific purposes of this section are to. 
A.  Specify allowed locations of commercial Telecommunication Facilities and Towers in the City; 
B.  Protect residential, recreational and park areas from encroachment by commercial operations, including, but not limited to, Telecommunication Facilities and Towers; 
C.  Minimize adverse visual impacts of Telecommunication Facilities and Towers through careful design, optimum siting, appropriate landscaping, innovative camouflaging techniques and stealth poles; 
D.  Require, where possible, the co-location of Telecommunications Towers and Antennas support structures on Towers or existing structures as a primary option rather than construction of multiple single-use Towers; 
E.  Require utilization of technological designs that either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new Tower structures to support Telecommunications Facilities; 
F.  Minimize potential damage to property caused by Telecommunication Facilities and Towers by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound; 
G.  Ensure that Telecommunication Facilities and Towers are compatible with surrounding land uses; 
H.  Provide development standards for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities that are consistent with the requirements of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended, or other applicable Federal, State and local laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations; 
I.  Encourage consistent, high quality telecommunications services throughout the City. 
931.02 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the terms below have the meaning given to them, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
A.  "Accessory Equipment" means the wires, cables, generators, air conditioning units, and other equipment or facilities that are used in conjunction with Telecommunication Facilities and Telecommunication Equipment 
B.  "Applicant" means any person or entity who files an application for any permit or is party to any lease agreement required by this Ordinance for the construction, replacement, installation, or alteration of wireless communication facility or any component thereof. 
C.  "Antenna" means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a Tower, Monopole, building, or other structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communications signals. "Antenna" does not include a lightning rod. 
D.  "Antenna Support Structure" means any new or existing Telecommunications Tower, building, water tower, or electric transmission tower carrying over 200 kilo volts of electricity that can be used for the location of Antennas without increasing the height or mass of the existing structure. 
E.  "Engineer" means a radio, electrical, structural, or mechanical engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota. 
F.  "Equipment Shelter" means an enclosed structure at the base of or near a Telecommunication Facility, Tower, or Antenna within which are housed, among other things, batteries, generators, air conditioning units, wireless communications or electrical equipment, or other Accessory Equipment, which may be connected to the Telecommunications Facility, Tower or Antenna by cable. 
G.  "Co-Location" means the sharing of structures by two or more wireless service providers on a single support structure or otherwise sharing a common location. 
H.  "Monopole" means a slender self-supporting Tower used to support Antennas and Accessory Equipment. 
I.  "Permit Holder" means a person or entity who holds a permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance for a Telecommunications Facility. 
J.  "Public Utility Structure" means a structure which is owned by a governmental agency or utility company and which is used to support illumination devices or lines and other equipment carrying electricity or communications. 
K.  "Residential Accessory Communication Devices" means any satellite dishes, television Antennas, radio Antennas, amateur (ham) radio Antennas, and similar communication transmission/reception devices and associated Accessory Equipment that are a permitted accessory use within a residential district. 
L.  "Small Wireless Facility" means: 
1.  a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
a)  each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and 
b)  all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or 
2.  a "Micro Wireless Facility" defined as a small wireless facility that is no larger than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
M.  "Stealth Design" means state-of-the-art design techniques used to blend the object into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual impact as much as reasonably possible. Examples of stealth design techniques include architecturally screening roof-mounted Antennas and Accessory Equipment; integrating Telecommunications Facilities into architectural elements; nestling Telecommunications Facilities into the surrounding landscape so that the topography or vegetation reduces their view; using the location that would result in the least amount of visibility to the public, minimizing the size and appearance of the Telecommunications Facilities; and designing Towers to appear other than as Towers, such as light poles, power poles, flag poles, and trees. 
N.  "Telecommunications Equipment" means Antennas and Accessory Equipment. 
O.  "Telecommunications Facilities" means any facility or location maintained by a commercial enterprise where a Small Wireless Facility, Telecommunications Equipment or a Telecommunications Tower is located. 
The following shall not be considered Telecommunication Facilities: 
1.  Licensed amateur (ham) radio Antennas, regulated under Section 931.11 below. 
2.  Television Antennas and satellite dish Antennas for reception within individual homes or businesses, regulated under Section 801.31.11 below. 
3.  Temporary Telecommunication Facilities placed in service during an emergency declared by a government agency or for special events requiring wireless service capacity or coverage that is not available from existing Telecommunication Facilities. 
P.  "Telecommunications Tower" or "Tower" means any of the following. a ground or roof mounted pole; spire; free standing, self-supporting lattice or monopole structure; or combination thereof taller than 25 feet, including, but not limited to, supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an Antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade (except amateur radio Antennas). 
Q.  "Wireless Communications" means any personal wireless services as defined in the Federal Communications Act of 1996, including FCC licensed commercial wireless Telecommunications services including, but not limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), global system of mobile communication (GSM), paging and similar services that currently exist or may be developed. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
931.03 - Existing Telecommunications Equipment. 
A.  Existing Telecommunications Equipment located on or attached to an existing Antenna Support Structure, prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, are regulated by the provisions of the zoning district for each such parcel containing said Antenna Support Structure. Once the leases for existing Telecommunications Equipment expire or are otherwise terminated, the owner of the Telecommunication Equipment shall apply for a Telecommunication Facilities Permit or Conditional Use Permit as outlined in Section 931.04 of this Ordinance, and the existing Telecommunications Equipment shall be required to conform to all requirements of this Ordinance for new Telecommunication Facilities. The City may, among other remedies, require relocation of Telecommunications Equipment, at the owner's expense, to permitted areas under this Ordinance. 
B.  Eligible Facilities Request. Notwithstanding the above, nothing in this Section 3 shall be read to allow the City to prohibit a Telecommunication Facilities Permit based solely upon a request by the owner/operator for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station and is otherwise an "eligible facilities request" under 47 USC 1455(a) and 47 CFR 1.40001(c), as the same may be amended. 
931.04 - Building and Design Standards, Allowed Locations for Telecommunications Facilities, and Required Permits. 
All Telecommunications Facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards. 
A.  Telecommunication Facilities Permit. Prior to the construction or operation of the following types of Telecommunications Facilities, the owner and operator of the Telecommunications Facility must obtain a permit for the Telecommunications Facilities according to the provisions of this Ordinance, termed a "Telecommunications Facilities Permit." 
1.  New Telecommunications Equipment may be located on a Telecommunications Tower allowed under Section 931.04.B.1 that has an approved Conditional Use Permit only if the Applicant complies with the following requirements. 
a)  The Applicant shall provide documentation and/or an analysis prepared by a radio or electrical engineer demonstrating that the proposed location of the Telecommunications Equipment is necessary to meet the coverage and capacity needs of its system. The Applicant shall provide a network map describing all of the Applicant's Telecommunications Facilities which provide any coverage within the City's limits. The documentation and/or analysis shall also show the Telecommunications Equipment would not cause interference with other existing or approved Telecommunications Equipment. The Applicant shall also pay the reasonable expenses of a radio or electrical engineer retained by the City, at the City's option, to review this analysis; 
b)  The Telecommunications Equipment shall use as many Stealth Design techniques as reasonably possible and include non-proprietary information on Stealth Design technology. Economic considerations or hardships shall not be the sole justification for failing to provide Stealth Design techniques. 
B.  Conditional Use Permit. Telecommunication Facilities, except for Small Wireless Facilities, which are subject to Section 315 of this Code, may not be located on any locations other than those that are designated in Section 931.04.A unless the Applicant first obtains a Conditional Use Permit for the Telecommunications Facility. The Telecommunications Facility must comply with the provisions of this section, and the provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
1.  Telecommunications Towers shall be located only on the following parcels owned and/or controlled by the City of Wayzata. 
Property Name Property Identification Number City of Wayzata Public Works Facility 01-117-23-22-0004 Wayzata West Middle School 06-117-22-22-0008  
a)  The Telecommunications Tower and Antenna, including attachments other than lightning rods, shall not exceed 150 feet in height, measured from grade. The City Council may, but shall not be required to, increase this height up to 190 feet if the Council finds the increase in height would not have a significant visual impact, would not have a negative property value impact on surrounding properties because of proximity, topography or screening by trees or buildings or would accommodate two or more users. The City Council may waive this height limitation for a Telecommunications Tower and/or Antenna if used wholly or partially for essential public services, such as public safety. 
b)  The Telecommunications Tower shall use as many Stealth Design techniques as reasonably possible and include non-proprietary information on stealth design technology. Economic considerations or hardships shall not be the sole justification for failing to provide Stealth Design techniques. 
2.  Telecommunications Facilities or Equipment meeting the definition of "Small Wireless Facility" may be attached to an existing Public Utility Structure or otherwise installed within a right of way in accordance with Chapter 315 of this Code. Telecommunications Facilities or Equipment not meeting the definition of a "Small Wireless Facility" may be attached to an existing Public Utility Structure within a right of way according to the following standards: 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
a)  The Antenna shall not extend more than 15 feet above the top of the existing Public Utility Structure. 
b)  The Antenna shall be no larger than three cubic feet and has no individual surface larger than four feet. 
c)  The Antenna shall not extend outward from the utility structure by more than three feet. 
d)  There shall be no ground mounted equipment as long as the existing Public Utility Structure is available for the mounting of such equipment. 
e)  There shall be no interference with public safety communications or with the original use of the Public Utility Structure. 
f)  The Applicant shall agree that the Telecommunications Equipment must be removed and relocated, at the Applicant's expense, if the road authority requires the removal and relocation of the Public Utility Structure. 
3.  Telecommunications Equipment may be attached to an existing building according to the following standards. 
a)  The Applicant shall provide documentation and/or an analysis prepared by a radio or electrical engineer demonstrating that the proposed location of the Telecommunications Equipment is necessary to meet the coverage and capacity needs of its system. The Applicant shall provide a network map describing all of the Applicant's Telecommunications Facilities which provide any coverage within the City's limits. The documentation and/or analysis shall also show the Telecommunications Equipment would not cause interference with other existing or approved Telecommunications Equipment. The Applicant shall also pay the reasonable expenses of a radio or electrical engineer retained by the City, at the City's option, to review this analysis; 
b)  The Telecommunications Equipment shall use as many Stealth Design techniques as reasonably possible. Economic considerations or hardships shall not be the sole justification for failing to provide Stealth Design techniques; 
c)  The building upon which the Antenna is attached to, shall be located on a parcel of land zoned C-1 Office and Limited Commercial District, C-3 Service District, or PUD Planned Unit Development, and the building upon which the Antenna is to attached to must be located within 300 feet of the Wayzata Blvd East right-of-way. 
The City Council may, at its sole discretion, consider other sites if the Applicant demonstrates that all other sites that comply with the zoning district and distance requirements above have been considered and deemed infeasible to provide adequate coverage and/or capacity to a significant portion of the City of Wayzata. CUPs for other sites may be approved only after the Applicant demonstrates that there is no other location that complies with the zoning district and distance requirements above that the Telecommunications Equipment could be located on, and provide substantially the same coverage. In no case can Telecommunications Equipment be located in any residential zoning district, or on parcels of land guided in the Comprehensive Plan for Parks or Public Open Space. 
d)  The Antenna shall be attached to the facade of the building or attached on or within a rooftop screening wall (i.e., Section 909.10). A facade mounted Antenna shall not extend above the cornice line and a rooftop or screening wall mounted Antenna shall not extend more than 15 feet above the screening wall. Facade and screening wall mounted Antenna shall, as closely as possible, match the color of the underlying building material. 
e)  Accessory Equipment shall be entirely located within an existing structure or within rooftop parapet screening walls whenever possible. If a new equipment building is necessary, it shall be situated to the rear or side of the principal use and shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate. If a new equipment building is necessary, the building shall be constructed of materials and color scheme compatible with the principal building. 
C.  Eligible Facilities Request. Notwithstanding the above, nothing in this Section 4 shall be read to allow the City to prohibit any approval under this Section based solely upon a request by the owner/operator for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station and is otherwise an "eligible facilities request" under 47 USC 1455(a) and 47 CFR 1.40001(c), as the same may be amended. 
931.05 - General Standards for Telecommunication Facilities. 
All Telecommunications Facilities must comply with the following standards (although nothing in this Section 5 shall be read to allow the City to prohibit a Telecommunication Facilities Permit based solely upon a request by the owner/operator for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station and is otherwise an "eligible facilities request" under 47 USC 1455(a) and 47 CFR 1.40001(c), as the same may be amended). 
A.  Vertical Projection on Antenna Support Structures. Antennas mounted on an existing Antenna Support Structure shall not extend more than 15 feet above the height of the structure to which they are attached. Wall or facade-mounted Antennas shall not extend above the cornice line and shall be constructed of a material or color that matches the exterior of the building. 
B.  Horizontal Projection. Antennas shall not project out from the side of the existing Antenna Support Structure, Telecommunications Tower, or wall or facade by more than three feet. 
C.  Fall Zone Analysis. The Applicant must submit a fall zone analysis report completed by a qualified and licensed engineer that shows the Telecommunications Facilities do not pose a threat to general health, safety and welfare of the City. 
D.  Setbacks. Telecommunications Facilities shall meet the building setback that is established for the zoning district where it is to be located, and the following additional standards. 
1.  A Telecommunications Tower shall be set back from all residential property lines at least one foot for each foot in height, but shall have a minimum setback of at least 100 feet. The Tower setbacks may be increased by the City Council dependent on the results of the engineered fall zone analysis report submitted by the Applicant as part of the permit application. 
2.  Towers and Telecommunications Equipment shall not encroach upon any easements unless written permission is obtained from the underlying property owner burdened by the easement and the beneficiary of the easement. 
3.  The required setbacks may be reduced or the location in relation to a public street modified, at the sole discretion of the City Council, when the Telecommunications Equipment is integrated into an existing or proposed structure such as a building, light or utility pole. 
E.  Height. The height of an Antenna and/or Telecommunications Tower shall be the minimum necessary to meet the Applicant's coverage and capacity needs, as verified by an electrical engineer or other appropriate professional. Any new or replacement Tower and Antenna, including attachments other than lightning rods, shall not exceed 150 feet in height, measured from grade. The City Council may, but shall not be required to, increase this height up to 190 feet if the Council finds: 
1.  The increase in height would not have a significant visual impact; 
2.  Would not have a negative property value impact on surrounding properties because of proximity, topography or screening by trees or buildings; or 
3.  Would accommodate two or more users. 
F.  Exterior Surfaces. Towers and Antennas shall be painted a non-contrasting color consistent with the surrounding area such as blue, gray, green, brown, or silver, or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual impact. Metal Towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosion-resistant material. 
G.  Ground-Mounted Equipment. Ground-mounted Accessory Equipment and/or equipment storage facilities shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment, including the principal structure and/or shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and compliments the character of the surrounding neighborhood. No more than one Equipment Shelter or accessory building is permitted for each Tower. Equipment Shelters or accessory buildings shall be designed to accommodate additional space needed for the co-location of additional Antennas at the site. The additional space must either be built within the first shelter/building or that shelter/building must be designed to allow for future expansions and/or additions. Design of the building or equipment cabinet, screening, and landscaping are subject to applicable Design Standards criteria under Chapter 909 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. The Applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the structure in a high-quality condition. If the Applicant abandons or vacates the structure, it shall be forfeited to the City or torn down by the Applicant at their expense, at the discretion of the City Council. 
H.  Construction. Telecommunications Facilities shall be in compliance with all buildings and electrical code requirements. All applicable federal, state and local agency licenses and/or permits shall be obtained. A Telecommunications Tower shall be designed and certified by a licensed structural engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the building code. Structural design, mounting and installation of the Telecommunications Facilities shall be in compliance with the manufacturer's specifications. If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a Tower or other portion of a Telecommunications Facility fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the Telecommunication Facility or Tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such Tower or Telecommunication Facility into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such Tower or Telecommunication Facility into compliance with such 30-day period shall constitute grounds for the removal of the Tower or Telecommunication Facility at the owner's expense. 
I.  Interference with Public Safety Telecommunications. No Telecommunications Tower or Telecommunications Facility shall interfere with public safety Telecommunications. All Towers and Telecommunication Facilities shall comply with FCC regulations and licensing requirements. 
J.  Security Fencing and Screening. Telecommunication Facilities and Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than the height of the equipment located therein and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. Fencing within 100 feet of a residential or parking property shall be constructed of a well-designed fence of wood or other environmentally sound material, and be compatible with the surrounding character of the area. The Telecommunication Facilities and Towers shall also include a landscape screen, at least six in height, around the perimeter of equipment area, as approved by the City Council. 
K.  Other Protections. The City may require shields to protect from ice falling from Towers, anti-climbing devices to prevent unauthorized persons from climbing Towers, or other appurtenances necessary to protect life and property. 
L.  Noise. If the proposed Telecommunications Facility includes equipment that causes significant sound levels, sound buffers may be required including, but not limited to, baffling, barriers, enclosures, walls and plantings. The Applicant shall submit an acoustical analysis (measured to the property line) and report prepared by a licensed and/or accredited sound engineer certifying that the noise to be generated from the proposed Telecommunication Facility shall not impact adjacent properties. Said report shall include, without limitation, a written description of all noise generated by the Facility, including retractable monopole motors, Antenna rotators, power generation, heating or air conditioning, and related equipment, and shall include the estimated times, frequency, duration and decibel levels of the noise. All equipment shall conform to Minnesota Pollution Control Agency decibel standards. 
M.  Sensitive Habitats. No Telecommunication Facility shall be located in environmentally sensitive habitats, including, but not limited to, wetlands, shorelines, established animal habitats, conservation districts, and significant tree groups, unless mitigation measures can be adopted which would reduce potential impacts to levels of non-significance. 
N.  Radio Frequency Emissions. Telecommunications Facilities shall comply with Federal Communication Commission standards for radio frequency emissions and interference. 
O.  Interference. No Telecommunication Facility shall be permitted that causes interference with commercial or private use and enjoyment of other legally operating telecommunications devices including, but not limited to, radios, televisions, personal computers, telephones, personal communications devices, garage door openers, security systems, and other electronic equipment and devices in violation of any Federal Communication Commission standards relating to radio frequency interference. Unless otherwise prohibited by Federal Communication Commission standards, an Applicant shall furnish a state registered engineer's certification that no such interference shall occur, or identify what interference may occur and how the Applicant shall mitigate any potential interference that may occur. 
P.  Risk of Danger. Telecommunications Facilities and Towers shall not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials. Telecommunication Facilities, Towers, Antennas, and Accessory Equipment shall be subject to state and federal regulations pertaining to non-ionizing radiation and other health hazards related to such Facilities. If new, more restrictive standards are adopted, the Facilities shall be made to comply or continued operations may be restricted by the City Council. The cost of verification of compliance shall be borne by the Applicant. 
Q.  Maintenance. All Telecommunication Facilities and Towers shall at all times: 
1.  Be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person; and 
2.  Allow sufficient access for service vehicles and personnel. Maintenance of equipment shall be scheduled for between 7.00 a.m.-6.00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless in case of emergency or otherwise agreed to by the City. Service vehicles for equipment maintenance shall be parked on city streets, unless paved and screened off-street is available at the site. In the case of maintenance of Telecommunication Facilities on the City Water Tower, service vehicles shall park on the service entrance of the City Water Treatment Plant, whenever possible. 
R.  Co-Location Opportunity. The Applicant, the Tower owner, the landowner, and their successors and assigns shall allow the shared use of the Tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, shall submit a dispute over the potential terms and conditions to binding arbitration, and shall sign the Conditional Use Permit agreeing to these requirements. The City Council may waive these co-location requirements if necessary to implement stealth design. 
1.  All Telecommunications Facility providers shall cooperate with each other in co-locating Telecommunication Facilities and shall exercise good faith in co-locating with other licensed carriers and in the sharing of sites, including the sharing of technical information necessary to evaluate the feasibility of collocation. In the event a dispute arises as to a co-location issue, the City may require a third-party technical study to evaluate the feasibility of co-locating at the expense of each wireless telecommunications providers involved in the third-party study; 
2.  All proposed new Telecommunications Towers shall be designed to accommodate both the Applicant's Antennas and Antennas for as many other licensed carriers as can be technically located thereon, but not less than one additional; 
3.  All new Telecommunications Facilities and Towers owned by a telecommunications provider shall be made available for use by the owner or initial user thereof, together with as many other licensed carriers as can be technically located thereon, but not less than one additional; 
4.  All proposed new Telecommunications Towers shall be designed to allow for future rearrangement of Antennas or Tower modifications, and to accept Antennas mounted at varying heights unless the City otherwise agrees in order to accommodate Stealth Design techniques; 
S.  Successors and Assigns. Any Permit or lease for a Telecommunications Facility shall run with the Property, and shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties, their respective successors, personal representatives, and assigns. 
T.  External Messages. No advertising message or identification signs, other than warning or equipment information signs as legally required, shall be affixed to the Telecommunications Facilities. 
U.  Lighting. Telecommunications Facilities or Towers shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by law or by a governmental agency to protect the public's health and safety or unless necessary to facilitate service to ground-mounted equipment. Any lighting or artificial illumination utilized shall be shielded and not cast glare onto adjacent properties. All lighting shall be measured to the property line. 
V.  On-Site Employees. There shall be no employees on the site at a Telecommunications Facility on a permanent basis. Occasional or temporary repair and service activities are allowed. 
W.  Advances in Stealth Technology. Whenever an applicant proposes to install and/or replace antennas or other telecommunications equipment, the Applicant shall submit a report describing all available technology for installation or replacement. The report shall include the purpose of equipment to be installed (expand coverage, expand capacity, expand bandwidth, etc.) and the performance specifications and physical dimensions of the equipment. The report conclusions must provide an analysis of performance versus visual impacts and/or stealth technology. The City retains the right to evaluate the reports analysis and perform a third party technical review at the applicants cost. The City shall have the ability to require the stealth or lower visual profile equipment based on the third party technical recommendation. 
X.  Removal. After 120 days' notice from the City to the Permit Holder all Telecommunications Facilities, Antennas, or Towers shall be required to be removed at the Permit Holder's expense, if such improvement is found to be in violation of any portion of this Ordinance by the City and such violation is not cured within such 30-day time period. Obsolete or unused Telecommunications Facilities and all related equipment shall be removed within six months after cessation of their use at the site, unless an exemption is granted by the City Council. Telecommunications Facilities and related equipment that have become hazardous shall be removed or made not hazardous within 30 days after written notice to the current Permit Holder and to any separate landowner, unless an exemption is granted by the City Council. Notice may be made to the address listed in the application, unless another one has subsequently been provided, and to the taxpayer of the property listed in the Hennepin County tax records. Telecommunications Facilities and all related equipment that are not removed within this time are declared to be public nuisances and may be removed by the City. The City may assess its costs of removal against the Property. 
Y.  No Recourse Against the City. Every permit shall provide that, without limiting such immunities as the City or other persons may have under applicable law, an Applicant/Permit Holder shall have no monetary recourse whatsoever against the City or its elected officials, boards, commissions, agents, employees or volunteers for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this Ordinance or because of the enforcement or lack of enforcement of this Ordinance or the City's exercise of its authority pursuant to this Ordinance, a permit, a lease, or other applicable law, unless the same shall be caused by criminal acts or by willful gross negligence. Nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver of sovereign immunity. 
931.06 - Applications for Telecommunications Facilities. 
A.  An application for a Telecommunications Facility Permit for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station shall include information sufficient to demonstrate that the modification meets the standards set forth in 47 CFR 1.40001. 
B.  For all other applications for Telecommunications Facilities, including Telecommunication Facilities Permit or Conditional Use Permit, the following requirements apply. In addition to an Applicant's name, address, certificate of survey, grading and landscaping plans, and other such similar information, an application for a permit under this Section shall include the following. 
1.  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed Telecommunication Facility, Tower, or Antenna, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed equipment and any structures, topography, parking and any other information deemed by the City Staff to be necessary to assess compliance with this Section. 
2.  A visual simulation of the proposed Telecommunication Facility Tower or Antenna. Visual simulation shall consist of either a physical mock-up of the Telecommunication Facility Tower or Antenna, balloon simulation, computer simulation, photo simulation, or other similar simulation. In instances where the proposed Telecommunications Facility Tower or Antenna is located near a residential area, photo simulations shall be submitted of the proposed Telecommunication Facility Tower or Antenna from the nearest residential neighbors unless the owners of such residential property refuse to allow the required photo to be taken. 
3.  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which. 
a)  Demonstrates that the Telecommunication Facility, Tower, Antenna and/or Accessory Equipment comply with the structural and electrical standards of this Section. 
b)  Describes the Tower height, if utilized. 
c)  Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-locating Antennas and the minimum separation distance between Antennas. 
d)  Describes the Tower's capacity, if utilized, including the number and type of Antennas it can accommodate. 
e)  A network map describing all of the Applicant's Telecommunications Facilities which provide any coverage within the City's limits. 
f)  Documents what steps the Applicant shall take to avoid interference with established public safety Telecommunications. 
g)  Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number. 
4.  A written statement acknowledging that failure to comply with this Section and the conditions of permit approval shall result in the revocation of the permit and removal of the Telecommunications Facility, Antenna, and/or Tower; 
5.  Documentation that the Applicant has applied for and/or obtained any licenses and/or approvals that are required by federal and state agencies. 
6.  A written statement indicating that the expenses incurred by the City to review and process the application, and to enforce the provisions of the permit shall be reimbursed by the Applicant. 
7.  A written statement which requires the Applicant to utilize the procedures established by the Federal Communications Commission to resolve any complaints received relating to interference allegedly caused by the Telecommunications Facility, Antenna, and/or Tower. 
8.  A written statement indicating that the Applicant shall cooperate in good faith and fair dealing in co-locating Telecommunications Facilities, Antenna and/or Towers. 
9.  A written statement indicating that the Telecommunications Facility, Antenna, and/or Tower shall be maintained in good and safe condition and its original appearance and concealment, disguise or camouflage elements incorporated into the design at the time of approval shall be preserved. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, repair of equipment, and maintenance of landscaping. 
10.  A written statement authorizing the City to conduct periodic inspections to determine that the Telecommunications Equipment complies with the provisions of this Section, any conditions of approval and all safety and building codes and permits issued. This statement shall give the City the right to conduct such inspections at any time upon a reasonable notice of five business days to the Applicant, and that all expenses related to such inspections shall be borne by the Applicant. 
11.  A written statement indicating that the Applicant understands that Telecommunications Facilities, Antennas, and/or Towers which have not been used for six months shall be deemed abandoned, and shall be removed pursuant to this Section. 
12.  A written statement requiring the Applicant or current Permit Holder to notify the City that the Telecommunications Facility, Antenna, and/or Tower continue to be in operation. The notice of continuing operation shall be sent to the City Manager annually by certified mail within the last two weeks of the month of December. The City shall provide written notice of failure to provide the required statement with a requirement that such statement be provided within 14 days from the date of such notice. 
C.  Telecommunications Facilities Permit. The Zoning Administrator may review an application for a Telecommunication Facilities Permit, according to the following procedures. 
1.  Standards of Review. The review of a Telecommunications Facilities Permit is subject to the standards outlined in Section 931.04 for the type of Telecommunications Facility being proposed, and the General Standards for Telecommunication Facilities outlined in Section 931.05. 
2.  Decision. The Zoning Administrator will render a decision of approval or denial within 60 days, and serve a copy of the decision to the Applicant by mail. 
3.  Term of Approval. If approved by the Zoning Administrator, the work authorized under a Telecommunications Facility Permit must be completed within six months after the date of its issuance, or the permit shall become null and void. 
4.  Appeal. At any time within 30 days after a written order, requirement, determination or final decision has been made by the Zoning Administrator or other official interpreting or applying this Section, except for actions taken in connection with prosecutions for violations thereof, the Applicant or any other person affected by such action may appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions Chapter 906 of this Ordinance. 
D.  Conditional Use Permit. The City shall process all applications for Conditional Use Permits in a timely manner and in accordance with established procedures and City Code Chapter 904. 
931.07 - Revocation of Permit. 
A material breach of any terms and conditions of a permit issued for a Telecommunication Facility under this Section and the Zoning Ordinance may result in the revocation of the permit by the City. Penalties for a violation of a permit or this Section may include fines and removal of the Telecommunication Facility, Tower, or Antenna at the Applicant's/Permit Holder's expense. 
931.08 - No Recourse Against the City. 
Every application for and issued permit shall provide a written acknowledgement, agreement and release from the Applicant and Permit Holder that, without limiting such immunities as the City or other persons may have under applicable law, an Applicant and Permit Holder shall have no monetary recourse whatsoever against the City or its elected officials, boards, commissions, agents, employees or volunteers for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this Ordinance or because of the enforcement or lack of enforcement of this Ordinance or the City's exercise of or failure to exercise its authority pursuant to this Ordinance, a permit, a lease, or other applicable law, unless the same shall be caused by criminal acts or by gross negligence. Nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver of sovereign immunity. 
931.09 - Indemnification. 
Each permit issued pursuant to this Section shall have as a condition of the permit, a requirement that the Applicant indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, agents, and employees from actions or claims of any description brought on account of any injury or damages sustained by any person or property resulting from the issuance of the permit and conduct of the activities authorized under said permit. 
931.10 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Section is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Section. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Section and each section, subsection, sentence, clause , and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be declared invalid. 
931.11 - Residential Accessory Uses. 
Residential Accessory Communication Devices are a permitted accessory use within residential districts provided they meet the following conditions. 
A.  Use. They are for use by residents upon whose property the Residential Accessory Communication Devices are located. 
B.  Height. A ground mounted Residential Accessory Communication Device height shall not exceed 15 feet unless approved as a Conditional Use Permit by the City Council. 
C.  Yards. The Residential Accessory Communication Device shall not be located within the required front yard setback, a required side yard or any side yard abutting a street. Communication devices shall be located five feet or more from rear lot lines and shall not be located within a utility easement. 
D.  Roofs. The Residential Accessory Communication Device may be placed on the roof of any authorized structure on the premises. The height of the Residential Accessory Communication Device shall not exceed 61/2 feet above the peak of the roof, unless approved by a Conditional Use Permit by the City Council. 
E.  Neighboring Property Impact. In cases where no building permit is required, the Residential Accessory Communication Device shall be so located that in the event it falls, it shall not fall on adjoining property. 
F.  Building Permits. A building permit shall be required for the installation of any Residential Accessory Communication Device which requires a Conditional Use Permit, or for any device which has a structural surface exposure of greater than nine square feet. Building permit applications shall be accompanied by a site plan and structural components data for the Residential Accessory Communication Device, including details of anchoring. The Building Official shall approve the plans before installation. 
G.  Color/Content. Residential Accessory Communication Devices shall be of a neutral color and shall not be painted with scenes or contain letters or messages. 
H.  Lightning Protection. Each Residential Accessory Communication Device shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City of Wayzata. 
I.  Electrical Code. Residential Accessory Communication Device electrical equipment and connections shall be designed and installed in conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City of Wayzata. 
J.  Effective Date. The provisions of this Section shall be applicable to all communication reception/transmission devices erected after January 5, 2016. All such structures existing prior to this date shall be addressed as legal non-conforming uses. 
K.  Conditional Use Permit. Residential Accessory Communication Devices not qualifying as a permitted accessory use may be considered and approved through conditional use standards established by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. 
CHAPTER 932 - PUBLIC PROPERTY/RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

932.01 - Coverage. 
The erection and/or placement of any structure in the public right-of-way or on City property by any person, or group other than the City of Wayzata, Hennepin County, Metropolitan Public Agency or the State of Minnesota, shall require the processing of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. 
932.02 - Liability. 
As a condition of approval for the erection or placement of a structure in the public right-of-way, or on City property by any party other than a governmental unit, the applicant shall be required to sign a contract with the City that holds harmless the City of Wayzata for any potential liability and shall demonstrate to the City proof of adequate liability insurance. 
CHAPTER 933 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

933.01 - Purpose. 
This Section is established to provide comprehensive procedures and standards designed to all greater flexibility in the development of neighborhoods and/or non-residential areas by incorporating design modifications as part of a PUD conditional use permit or a mixture of uses when applied to a PUD District. The PUD process, by allowing deviation from the strict provisions of this Ordinance related to setbacks, lot area, width and depth, yards, etc., is intended to encourage. 
A.  Innovations in development to the end that the growing demands for all styles of economic expansion may be met by greater variety in type, design, and placement of structures and by the conservation and more efficient use of land in such developments. 
B.  Higher standards of site and building design through the use of trained and experienced land planners, architects, landscape architects and engineers. 
C.  More convenience in location and design of development and service facilities. 
D.  The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural topography and geologic features and the prevention of soil erosion. 
E.  A creative use of land and related physical development which allows a phased and orderly development and use pattern. 
F.  An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets thereby lower development costs and public investments. 
G.  A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the Wayzata Comprehensive Plan. (PUD is not intended as a means to vary applicable planning and zoning principles.) 
H.  A more desirable and creative environment than might be possible through the strict application on zoning and subdivision regulations of the City. 
933.02 - Requirements, Conditions and Standards for Approving PUD Permits. 
A.  General Standards. 
1.  Review. In its review of any application under this Section, the City Council shall consider comments on the application of those persons appearing before the Council, the report and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the recommendations of the Design Review Board and any staff report on the application. The Council also shall evaluate the effects of the proposed project upon the health, safety and welfare of residents of the community and the surrounding area and shall evaluate the project's conformance with the overall intent and purpose of this Section. If the Council determines that the proposed project will not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of residents of the community and the surrounding area and that the project does conform with the overall intent and purpose of this Section, it may approve a PUD permit, although it shall not be required to do so. 
2.  Ownership. An application for a PUD District or conditional use permit approval must be filed by the land owner or jointly by all land owners of the property included in a project. The application and all submissions must be directed to the development of the property as a unified whole. In the case of multiple ownership, the approved Final Plan shall be binding on all owners. 
3.  Comprehensive Plan Consistency. The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan. 
4.  Sanitary Sewer Plan Consistency. The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the City Comprehensive Sewer Plan and shall not create a discharge which is in excess of the City's assigned regional limitations. 
5.  Common Open Space. Common private or public open space and facilities at least sufficient to meet the minimum requirements established in the Comprehensive Plan and such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the PUD shall be provided within the area of the PUD development. 
6.  Operating and Maintenance Requirements for PUD Common Open Space Facilities. Whenever common private or public open space or service facilities are provided within the PUD, the PUD plan shall contain provisions to ensure the continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service facilities to a predetermined reasonable standard. Common private or public open space and service facilities within a PUD may be placed under the ownership of one or more of the following, as approved by the City Council. 
a)  Dedicated to public, where a community-wide use is anticipated and the City Council agrees to accept the dedication. 
b)  Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated. 
c)  Property Owners Association, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
1)  Prior to the use or occupancy or sale or the execution of contracts for sale of an individual building unit, parcel, tracts, townhouse, apartment, or common area, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent document or a document such as specified by Laws 1963, Chapter 457, Section 11 and a set of floor plans such as specified by Laws 1963, Chapter 457, Section 13 shall be filed with the City of Wayzata, said filing with the City to be made prior to the filings of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of the County. 
2)  The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or equivalent document shall specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses, or apartments shall subject said properties to the terms of said declaration. 
3)  The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an owner's association or corporation shall be formed and that all owners shall be members of said association or corporation which shall maintain all properties and common areas in good repair and which shall assess individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney. The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of the individual owner through establishing private control. 
4)  The declaration shall additionally amongst other things, provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to maintain properties in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the City of Wayzata or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due and in the event the said City of Wayzata incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and regulations, which said expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association or corporation, then the City of Wayzata shall have the right to assess each property its prorate share of said expenses. Such assessments, together with interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each property against which each such assessment is made. 
5)  Membership must be mandatory for each owner, and any successive buyer. 
6)  The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a given period of years. 
7)  The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of the open space facilities deeded to it. 
8)  Property owner must pay their prorate share of the cost of the association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association which meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes. 
9)  The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. 
7.  Staging of Public and Common Open Space. When a PUD provides for common private or public open space, and is planned as a staged development over a period of time, the total area of common or public open space or land escrow security in any stage of development shall, at a minimum, bear the same relationship to the total open space to be provided in the entire PUD as the stages or units completed or under development bear to the entire PUD. 
8.  Density. 
a)  The maximum allowable density in a PUD District shall be determined by standards negotiated and agreed upon between the applicant and the City. In all cases, the negotiated standards shall be consistent with the development policies as contained in the Wayzata Comprehensive Plan. Whenever any PUD is to be developed in stages, no such stage shall, when averaged with all previously completed stages, have a residential density that exceeds 125 percent of the proposed residential density of the entire PUD. 
b)  There shall be no density variation from the standards applied in an applicable zoning district for PUD conditional use permits. 
9.  Utilities. In any PUD, all utilities, including telephone, electricity, gas and telecable shall be installed underground. 
10.  Utility Connections. 
a)  Water Connections. Where more than one property is served from the same service line, individual unit shut off valves shall be provided as required by the City Engineer. 
b)  Sewer Connections. Where more than one unit is served by a sanitary sewer lateral which exceeds 300 feet in length, provision must be made for a manhole to allow adequate cleaning and maintenance of the lateral. All maintenance and cleaning shall be the responsibility of the property owners association or owner. 
11.  Roadways. All streets shall conform to the design standards contained in the Wayzata Subdivision Regulations unless otherwise approved by the City Council. 
12.  Landscaping. In any PUD, landscaping shall be provided according to a plan approved by the City Council, which shall include a detailed planting list with sizes and species indicated as part of the Final Plan. In assessing the landscaping plan, the City Council shall consider the natural features of the particular site, the architectural characteristics of the proposed structure and the overall scheme of the PUD plan. 
13.  Setbacks. 
a)  The front, rear and side yard restrictions on the periphery of the Planned Unit Development site at a minimum shall be the same as imposed in the underlying districts, if a PUD condition use permit, or the previous zoning district, if a PUD District. 
b)  No building shall be located less than 15 feet from the back of the curb line along those roadways which are part of the internal street pattern. 
c)  No building within the project shall be nearer to another building than one-half the sum of the building heights of the two buildings. 
d)  In PUD Districts that were zoned commercial prior to PUD and exceed 13 acres, the allowable setbacks shall be as negotiated and agreed upon between the applicant and the City. 
14.  Height. 
a)  The maximum building height within a PUD District shall be 35 feet and three stories, whichever is lesser. 
b)  There shall be no deviation from the height standards applied within the applicable zoning districts for PUD conditional use permits. 
c)  In PUD Districts that were zoned commercial prior to PUD and exceed 13 acres, the maximum allowable height shall be as negotiated and agreed upon between the applicant and the City. 
933.03 - Residential Area Standards. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish standards for single family, multiple family, institutional and other residential PUD District and conditional use permit projects, in addition to those standards contained elsewhere in this Ordinance for all PUD projects. All residential PUD projects shall be developed in accordance with the following residential area standards. 
1.  Minimum Lot Area. There shall be no minimum lot or area size required for a tract of land for which a PUD District project is proposed. There shall be no minimum lot or area size imposed for a PUD conditional project except for standards applicable within the zoning district in which it is utilized. 
2.  Minimum Frontage. There shall be no minimum frontage on a public street required for a tract of land for which a PUD project is proposed. 
3.  The tract of land for which a PUD project is proposed shall have municipal water and sewer available to it. 
4.  It is the City's policy to discourage private roadways within a residential PUD project. Regardless if roads are private or dedicated to the public, they shall be designed to right-of-way widths and constructed to standards imposed by the Wayzata Subdivision Regulations. 
5.  For single family residential PUD District projects, the normal standards of either the R-1A, R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning districts shall apply to each project, excepting usage standards, as determined by the City Council and as provided above in Section 933.02. 
6.  For multiple family residential PUD District projects, the normal standards of either the R-4 or R-5 Zoning Districts shall apply to each project, excepting usage standards, as determined by the City Council and as provided above in Section 933.02.A. 
7.  In addition to the above standards, the City Council may impose such other standards for a residential PUD project as are reasonable and as the Council deems are necessary to protect and promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community and the surrounding area. 
933.04 - Non-Residential Project Standards. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish standards for non-residential projects, in addition to those standards contained elsewhere in this Ordinance for all PUD projects. All non-residential PUD projects shall be developed in accordance with the following area standards. 
1.  Minimum Lot Area. There shall be no minimum lot or area size required for a tract of land for which a PUD District project is proposed. There shall be no minimum lot or area size imposed for a PUD conditional project except for the standards applicable within the zoning district in which it is to be utilized. 
2.  Minimum Frontage. There shall be no minimum frontage on a public street required for a tract of land for which a PUD project is proposed. 
3.  The tract of land for which a non-residential PUD project is proposed shall have municipal water and sewer available to it. 
4.  Off-street parking and loading facilities for a non-residential PUD project shall be provided in accordance with Section 20 of this Ordinance. 
5.  In addition to the above standards, the City Council may impose such other standards for a non-residential PUD project as are reasonable and as the Council deems are necessary to protect and promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community and the surrounding area. 
6.  For non-residential PUD District projects that include residentially zoned properties, the normal standards of either the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-4A, C-4B, INS, RD and BW zoning classifications shall apply to each project, excepting usage standards, unless the Council determines that another standard is more appropriate, reasonable and consistent with the overall purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and will not have a negative impact on the general health, safety and welfare of the community and the surrounding area. 
933.05 - Concept Plan. 
A.  In cases of single stage PUDs or for projects of limited size and scope, the applicant may, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, submit the General Plan of Development for the proposed PUD simultaneously with the submission of a Concept Plan. The applicant shall comply with all provisions of this section applicable to submission of General Plan of Development. The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider such plans simultaneously and shall grant or deny a General Plan of Development in accordance with the provisions of Section 933.06. hereof. 
B.  Application Procedure. 
1.  As the first step in the application procedure for a PUD permit, an applicant shall complete and submit to the City an application form for concept approval, together with a fee as determined by City Council resolution. The applicant shall submit with his application such information as is required by the City and such other information as he deems necessary to explain the general intent of the application. Should concept approval be granted for a PUD project, this approval in no way shall bind the City to subsequent approval of a General Plan of Development. 
2.  Once an application for concept approval is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall refer it to the Planning Commission for a public hearing. All property owners within 350 feet (public right-of-way shall not be included in such measurement) of the subject property shall be notified of this hearing, as listed in the records of the City Assessor, although the failure of any property owner to receive such notification shall not invalidate the proceedings. Notification shall be by mail to all such property owners, shall be given at least ten days in advance of the hearing, and may include a larger geographic area if deemed advisable by the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  The Concept Plan of development submitted for a PUD project shall include as applicable, but not limited to, the following information, which information shall be submitted to the City before the first day of the preceding month of Planning Commission hearing. 
1.  General Information. 
a)  The landowner's name and address and his interest in the subject property. 
b)  The applicant's name and address if different from the landowner. 
c)  The names and addresses of all professional consultants who have contributed to the development of the PUD plan being submitted, including attorney, land planner, engineer and surveyor. 
d)  Evidence that applicant has sufficient control over the subject property to effectuate the proposed PUD including a statement of all legal, beneficial, tenancy and contractual interests held in or affecting the subject property and including an up-to-date certificate of title, abstract of title, or registered property report, and such other evidence as the City Attorney may require to show the status of title or control of the subject property. 
2.  Present Status. 
a)  Address and legal description of subject property. 
b)  Existing zoning classification and present use of subject property and all lands within 1,000 feet of subject property. 
c)  A map depicting existing development of subject property and all land within 1,000 feet thereof and locations of existing streets, property lines, easements, water mains and storm and sanitary sewers, with invert elevations on and within 100 feet of subject property. 
3.  A written statement generally describing the proposed PUD and the market which it is intended to serve and the market demand. The statement is also to demonstrate the proposed PUD's relationship to the City's Comprehensive Plan and how the proposed PUD is to be designed, arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable regulations of the City. 
4.  Site Conditions. Graphic reproductions of the existing site conditions at a scale of 100 feet. 
a)  Contours-minimum two-foot intervals. 
b)  Location, type and extent of tree cover and vegetation. 
c)  Slope analysis. 
d)  Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands and streams and floodplains within 300 feet of the subject property. 
e)  Significant rock outcroppings. 
f)  Existing drainage patterns. 
g)  Vistas and significant views. 
h)  Soil conditions as they affect development. 
i)  All of the graphics should be the same scale as the final plan to allow each cross-reference. The use of overlays is recommended for clear reference. 
5.  Schematic drawings of the proposed development concept including, but not limited to, the general location of major circulation elements, public and common open space, buildings, structures, and other land uses, and buffering and screening. 
6.  A statement of the estimated total number of dwellings units or square feet of developed land use activities proposed for the PUD and a tabulation of the proposed approximately allocations of land use expressed in acres and as a percent of the total project area, which shall include at least the following as applicable. 
a)  Area devoted to residential uses. 
b)  Area devoted to residential use by building type. 
c)  Area devoted to common open space. 
d)  Area devoted to public open space. 
e)  Approximate area devoted to streets. 
f)  Approximate area devoted to and number of off-street parking and loading spaces and related access. 
g)  Approximate area, and floor area, devoted to commercial uses. 
h)  Approximately area, and floor area, devoted to industrial or office use. 
7.  When the PUD is to be constructed in stages during a period of time extending beyond a single construction season, a schedule for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate beginning and completion date for each such stage or unit and the proportion of the total PUD public or common open space and structures/units to be provided or constructed during each such stage and the overall chronology of development to be followed from stage to stage. 
8.  When the proposed PUD includes provisions for public or common open space or service facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be made for the care and maintenance of such open space or service facilities. 
9.  General intents of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to property included in the proposed PUD. 
10.  Schematic utilities plans indicating placement of water, sanitary and storm sewers. 
11.  The Planning Commission may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or document required in this stage, which it finds to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal for PUD approval. 
12.  The Planning Commission may require the submission of any additional information or documentation which it may find necessary or appropriate to full consideration of the proposed PUD or any aspect or stage thereof. 
13.  Action by the Planning Commission. 
a)  The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing on an application for concept approval at its first regular meeting following appropriate legal notice as outlined above. The petitioner and/or his representative shall appear before the Planning Commission at this hearing to answer questions regarding the proposed project. 
b)  Within 60 days following the public hearing on any such application, the Planning Commission shall forward a report on the application to the City Council, and it shall recommend approval of the application as submitted, approval of the application subject to certain modifications or conditions therein, or disapproval of the application. If no action on an application is taken by the Planning Commission within 60 days, and there has been no delay caused or requested by the applicant, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council without comment. 
c)  Within the permitted period of time while an application is under consideration by the Planning Commission an applicant shall be allowed to make such amendments to his proposal as are requested by the City staff or the Planning Commission or as the applicant himself may desire to effect. An applicant may request a delay in the proceedings before the Planning Commission in order to modify or amend his proposal, but in no event shall any such delay continue the proceedings for a period greater than 120 days from the date of the initial public hearing thereon. 
14.  Action by the City Council. 
a)  Once an application under this Chapter has been forwarded to the City Council the applicant shall present his proposal before the Council in an open meeting, and questions or comments on the application shall be allowed from any person required to be notified of the application or claiming to have an interest therein. If in the Council's opinion a proposal has been substantially amended in proceedings before the Planning Commission the Council may hold a new public hearing on the application. 
b)  Within 60 days of its initial meeting on an application, the City Council shall approve the application as originally submitted or as amended, shall approve the application with certain modifications or conditions therein, shall deny the application, shall request amendment of the application, shall refer the application back to the Planning Commission for further review. At this time, the Council also shall indicate the controlling standards to be used in further evaluation and planning of the project, in accordance with Section 933.05 hereof. If an application is referred back to the Planning Commission, final Council action thereon shall be taken within 60 days of the date of referral. The affirmative majority vote (three of five) of the Council shall be required for approval of a Concept Plan, except when the proposed PUD would change the existing zoning from residential to commercial where a two-thirds majority vote (four of five) of the City Council is required. 
933.06 - General Plan of Development. 
A.  If a request for concept approval of a PUD project has been approved by the City Council, as the next step in the application procedure, an applicant shall submit to the City a General Plan of Development for the proposed project as required herein, together with a fee as determined by City Council resolution. 
B.  A general plan of development for the proposed project shall be submitted within six months of approval of the concept plan unless a time extension is approved by the City Council. 
C.  The General Plan of Development stage submissions should depict and outline the proposed implementations of the General Concept Plan stage for the PUD. Information from the General Concept stage may be included for background and to provide a basis for the submitted plan. The General Plan of Development stage submissions shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Present and possible new zoning classifications required for development stage submission and any other public decisions necessary for implementation of the proposed plan. 
2.  Preliminary plans, drawn to scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet (or scale requested by the City Manager) containing at least the following information: 
a)  Proposed name of the development (which shall not duplicate nor be similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the County). 
b)  Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and any significant topographical or physical features of the property. 
c)  The location, size, use and arrangement, including height in stories and feet and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area, of proposed buildings, including model homes, and existing buildings which will remain, if any. Also all required setback lines shall be depicted. 
d)  Location, dimensions of all driveways, entrances, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles, and all other circulation elements including bike and pedestrian; and the total site coverage of all circulation elements. 
e)  Location, designation and total area of all common private open space and facilities. 
f)  Location, designation and total area proposed to be conveyed or dedicated for public open space, including parks, playgrounds, school sites and recreational facilities. 
g)  Proposed lots and blocks, if any, and numbering system. 
h)  The location, use and size of structures and other land uses on adjacent properties. 
i)  A detailed, drawn to scale, landscape plan and planting specifications showing the areas to be sodded and the location, size and species of all trees and shrubbery to be planted. 
j)  General grading and drainage plans for the developed PUD. 
k)  A detailed plan illuminating size, location and structural specifications for exterior signing and lighting. 
l)  Any other information that may have been required by the City staff, Planning Commission or City Council in conjunction with the approval of the General Concept Plan. 
3.  An accurate legal description of the entire area within the PUD for which final development plan approval is sought. 
4.  Where applicable, a tabulation indicating the number of residential dwellings units and expected population. 
5.  Where applicable, a tabulation indicating the gross square footage, if any, of commercial and industrial floor space by type of activity (e.g. drug store, dry cleaning, supermarket). 
6.  Preliminary architectural "typical" plans indicating use, floor plan, elevations and exterior wall finishes of proposed building, including model homes. 
7.  A detailed site plan, suitable for recording, showing the physical layout, design and purpose of all streets, easements, rights-of-way, utility lines and facilities, lots, block, public and common private open space, general landscaping plan, structure, including model homes, and uses. 
8.  A traffic flow plan and analysis. 
9.  A solid waste disposal procedures and provisions. 
10.  Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustrating changes to existing topography and natural site vegetation. The plan should clearly reflect the site treatment and its conformance with the approved Concept Plan. 
11.  A preliminary plat prepared in accordance with the Wayzata Subdivision Regulations. 
12.  An environmental impact analysis and soil erosion control plan acceptable to the Watershed District, Department of Natural Resources, Soil Conservation Service, or any other agency with review authority clearly illustrating erosion control measures to be used during construction and as permanent measures. 
13.  A statement summarizing all changes, which have been made in any document, plan data or information previously submitted, together with revised copies of such document, plan or data. 
14.  Such other and further information as the City staff, Planning Commission, or Council shall find necessary to a full consideration of the entire proposed PUD or any stage thereof. 
15.  The Planning Commission may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or document required in this Section which it finds to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal for PUD approval. 
D.  Once an application for a General Plan of Development is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall refer it to the Planning Commission for a public hearing. The same notification procedure for this hearing shall be followed as was followed with respect to the applicant's Concept Plan, outlined in Section 933.05. 
1.  Action by the Planning Commission. 
a)  The same review procedure by the Planning Commission shall be followed for a General Plan of Development as was followed with respect to the applicant's Concept Plan, outlined above in Section 933.05. 
2.  Action by the City Council. 
a)  The same review procedure by the City Council shall be followed for a General Plan of Development as was followed with respect to the applicant's Concept Plan, outlined above in Section 933.05. 
b)  The affirmative majority vote (three of five) of the Council shall be required for approval of a General Plan of development, except when the proposed PUD would change the existing zoning from residential to commercial, where a two-thirds majority vote (four of five) of the City Council is required. The approval of a General Plan of Development shall constitute the approval of a PUD permit. 
933.07 - Final Plan Stage. 
The same 60-day procedure as outlined in Section 904.02.K of this Zoning Ordinance is required under State law for PUDs. After approval of a Concept Plan for the PUD and approval of a General Plan of Development Plan for all or a section of the proposed PUD, the applicant will submit the following material for review by the City staff prior to issuance of a building permit(s). 
A.  Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to sale of any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance of any public or common open space or service facility. 
B.  All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land and recording of documents. 
C.  Final architectural working drawings of all structures. 
D.  A final plat and final engineering plans and specifications for streets, utilities and other public improvements, together with a Community/Development Agreement for the installation of such improvements and financial guarantees for the completion of such improvements. 
E.  Any other plan, agreements or specifications necessary for the City staff to review the proposed construction. All work must be in conformance with the Minnesota State Building Code. 
933.08 - PUD Progress Evaluation. 
If periodic review of a PUD project is included as a condition to the approval of a PUD permit, such a project shall be reviewed by the City Council. The Council may at its discretion call a public hearing as part of its review. Notice of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as outlined in Section 933.05 for review of a Concept Plan. 
933.09 - Amendment of a PUD Permit. 
A.  Application Procedures. Any deviation or modification from the terms or conditions of an approved PUD permit or any alteration in a project for which a PUD permit has been approved shall require an amendment of the original permit. An application for amendment of the original PUD permit specifying the proposed variance or alteration shall be submitted to the City, together with a fee established by City Council resolution and such information as is required by the City or as the applicant deems necessary to fully explain his application. Should the applicant request an amendment of a PUD permit to erect an additional building or buildings, the applicant fee therefor shall be established by City Council resolution. In either case, the applicant also shall pay, as an additional fee, any consulting expenses which are incurred by the City in review of the application. The same application and hearing procedure for an amendment of a PUD permit shall be followed as was followed with respect to the applicant's Concept Plan, as outlined in Section 933.05. 
B.  Action by the Planning Commission and City Council. The same review procedure by the Planning Commission and City Council shall be followed for an amendment of a PUD permit as was followed with respect to the applicant's Concept Plan, outlined in Sections 933.05 and 933.06. The affirmative majority vote (three of five) of the City Council shall be required for approval of an amendment of a PUD permit. 
933.10 - General Requirements. 
A.  Records. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all PUD permits issued by the City, including information on a project's permitted uses, all pertinent project plans, any conditions imposed on a project by the City Council, and such other information as the Zoning Administrator may deem appropriate. 
B.  Withdrawal of an Application. Any application under this Section may be withdrawn by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior to final City Council action thereon. 
C.  Resubmission of an Application. Once an application for a PUD permit has been denied by the City Council, that application may not be resubmitted for a period of six months from the date of such denial. 
D.  Cancellation of a PUD Permit. Physical implementation of any approved PUD project must begin within 12 months following City Council approval of the PUD permit for that project, unless in granting such a permit the Council shall specify a different period of time for project implementation. Failure to initiate project implementation within the appropriate time period automatically shall cancel the PUD permit for a project unless an extension of said permit is approved by the Council prior to the date of cancellation. An application for extension of a PUD permit shall be administered in the same manner as outlined in Section 904.06.B of this Ordinance for extension of a conditional use permit. An existing PUD permit also shall be cancelled if any rezoning or other action by the City shall occur which supersedes the permit. 
E.  Qualifications of an Applicant. Any application under this Section shall be made only by the owner of the property covered in the application or by his duly authorized representative; provided, however, that an option-holder or a contract-holder also may submit such an application if it is accomplished by a fully executed agreement or document from the property owner stating that he has no objections to the proposed project and that he is in fact joining in said application as his interest may appear. 
F.  Financial Security to Ensure Compliance. In order to ensure that all improvements contained in a General Plan of Development are completed in accordance with said Plan and to ensure that an applicant fully complies with all conditions of a PUD permit, the applicant may be required to post a corporate surety bond, cash bond or letter of credit guaranteeing the faithful performance of such work and compliance with such conditions. Such security shall be in a form satisfactory to the City, shall be in an amount established by the City Council, and shall cover each segment of each phase of a PUD project as outlined in the General Plan of Development. However, the amount of said security may be reduced or a portion of said bond may be released as specific segments of each phase of development have been completed, upon approval by the City Council. 
G.  Platting of a PUD Project. In the event that any approved PUD project is to be subdivided into lots or parcels for the purpose of separate ownership, such a project first shall be platted under the platting procedures of the City and Hennepin County in effect at that time. The plat shall be processed according to standards contained in the Wayzata Subdivision Regulations and in conjunction with the General Plan of Development as outlined in Section 933.06. 
H.  Conveyance of Property Within a PUD Project. In the event that any real property within an approved PUD project is conveyed in total or in part, the buyer(s) thereof shall be bound by all provisions of the PUD permit and the General Plan of Development for that project. However, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as to make such conveyed property non-conforming with regard to normal zoning standards as long as the conveyed property conforms with the approved PUD permit and the General Plan of Development for a project. 
I.  Issuance of Building Permits. Following approval by the City Council of a PUD permit and a building permit for the proposed structures within a PUD project, the Building Official shall issue a building permit for such structures in compliance with this Ordinance. 
J.  Compliance with Overall Plan. Following Final Plan approval of a PUD, or a stage thereof, the City Building Official, shall at least annually until the completion of development, review all permits issued and construction undertaken and compare actual development with the approved development schedule. 
If the City Building Official finds that development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved schedule, or that it fails in any other respect to comply with the PUD plans as finally approved, he shall immediately notify the Council. Within 30 days of such notice, the Council shall either by ordinance or resolution as may be applicable, revoke the PUD and the land shall thereafter be governed by the regulations applicable in the district in which it is located, or shall take such steps as it shall deem necessary to compel compliance with the Final Plan as approved; or shall require the land owner or applicant to seek amendment of the Final Plan. 
CHAPTER 934 - INTERIM USES 

934.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is: 
A.  To allow a use for a brief period of time, not in excess of one year, until a permanent location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction. 
B.  To allow a use that is presently acceptable, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future. 
C.  To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change to an area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
934.02 - Procedure. 
A.  Existing Uses. Uses defined as interim uses which presently exist and which were legally established within a respective zoning district shall be considered approved. 
B.  New Uses. Uses defined as interim uses which do not presently exist within a respective zoning district shall be processed according to the standards and procedures for a conditional use permit as established by Section 801.04. 
934.03 - General Standards. 
An interim use shall comply with the following: 
A.  Existing Uses. Shall be in conformance with zoning and building standards in effect at the time of initial construction and development and shall continue to be governed by such regulations in the future. 
B.  New Uses. 
1.  Conforms to all zoning regulations as otherwise applicable. 
2.  The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty. 
3.  The existence of the use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the future; and 
4.  The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deems appropriate for permission of the use. 
C.  Existing Uses and New Uses. 
1.  Shall maintain harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and with the architectural character and design standards of existing uses and development. 
2.  Conforms with all performance standards contained in the Zoning Ordinances (i.e., parking, loading, noise, etc.). 
3.  Shall have no detrimental effect upon the property values or the general health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding uses and property owners. 
4.  Traffic generated by the use does not overburden or exceed the capabilities of streets and other public services and facilities, including parks, schools, streets and utilities serving the area. 
934.04 - Termination. 
An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs: 
A.  The date stated in the permit or ordinance. 
B.  Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued. 
C.  Upon change in the City's zoning regulations which render the use non-conforming. 
D.  The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning district. 
CHAPTER 935 - ADULT USES 

935.01 - Purpose. 
The nature of adult uses is such that they are recognized as having adverse secondary characteristics, particularly when they are accessible to minors and located near residential property or related residential uses such as schools, day care centers, libraries or parks. Furthermore, the concentration of adult uses has an adverse effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. The nature of adult uses requires that they not be allowed within certain zoning districts, or within minimum distances from each other or residential uses. Special regulation of adult uses is necessary to ensure that the adverse secondary effects would not contribute or enhance criminal activity in the area of such uses nor will it contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding property and lessening of its value. 
935.02 - Adult Use-General. 
Adult uses as defined in this Ordinance shall be subject to the following general provisions: 
A.  Activities classified as obscene under Minnesota State law are not permitted and are strictly prohibited. 
B.  Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes. 
C.  Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place which is also used to dispense or consume alcoholic beverages. 
D.  An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as an adult use-principal. 
935.03 - Adult Uses-Principal. 
A.  Adult use-principal shall be located at least 200 radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the building or actual leased space of the adult use-principal to the property line of: 
1.  Residentially zoned property. 
2.  A licensed day care center. 
3.  A public or private educational facility classified as an elementary, junior high or senior high. 
4.  A public library. 
5.  A public park. 
6.  An on-sale liquor establishment. 
B.  Adult use-principal shall be located at least 250 radial feet from one another, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the building or actual leased space of each adult use principal. 
C.  The use shall be located within a building or actual leased space of a building within the area allowable for adult use-principal uses. Buildings or leased space intersected by a line representing the allowable area will be considered permissible only for that portion of the building or leased space that is within the allowable area. 
D.  Adult use-principal activities, as defined by this Ordinance, shall be classified as one use. No two adult uses-principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same property and each use shall be subject to Section 935.02.B and C. 
E.  Adult use-principal shall adhere to the following signing regulations: 
1.  Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the type of business which is being conducted; and 
2.  Shall not contain material classified as advertising; and 
3.  Shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the district in which they are located. 
F.  Adult use-principal activities shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical, or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are permitted. 
935.04 - Adult Uses-Accessory. 
A.  Adult use-accessory shall: 
1.  Comprise no more than ten percent of the floor area, or in the case of vertical or suspended type displays, an amount that would be equivalent to ten percent of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located. 
2.  Comprise no more than 20 percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation. 
3.  Not involved or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise. 
B.  Adult use-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general public access. 
1.  Movie Rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation or controlled in some other effective manner which meets with the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall not be accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the publication title. 
3.  Other Use. Adult uses-accessory not specifically cited shall comply with the intent of this section subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  Adult use-accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products. 
D.  Adult use-accessory activities shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are admitted. 
CHAPTER 936 - TREE PRESERVATION 

936.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
The Wayzata City Council finds it is in the best interest of the City to protect, preserve, and enhance the natural environment of the community and to encourage a resourceful and prudent approach to the development and alteration of wooded areas. In the interest of achieving these objectives, the City has established the comprehensive tree preservation regulations herein to promote the furtherance of the following: 
A.  Protection and preservation of the environment and natural beauty of the City; 
B.  Assurance of orderly development within wooded areas to minimize tree and habitat loss; 
C.  Evaluation of the impacts to trees and wooded areas resulting from development; 
D.  Establishment of minimal standards for tree preservation and the mitigation of environmental impacts resulting from tree removal; 
E.  Provision of incentives for creative land use and environmentally compatible site design which preserves trees and minimizes tree removal and clear cutting during development; and 
F.  Enforcement of tree preservation standards to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
936.02 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "City Forester" means that person appointed as City Forester in Section 710.02(b). 
B.  "Coniferous Tree" means a woody plant bearing seeds and cones oftentimes, but not always, retaining foliage throughout the year. 
C.  "Construction Area" means any area in which movement of earth, alteration in topography, soil compaction, disruption of vegetation, change in soil chemistry, or any other change in the natural character of the land occurs as a result of site preparation, grading, building construction or any other construction activity. 
D.  "Critical Root Zone" means the area around a tree measured from the trunk of the tree with a radius that is equal to 1.5 feet for each one inch of DBH of the tree. For example, if a tree's DBH is ten inches, then its critical root zone radius is 15 feet (10 x 1.5 = 15). 
E.  "Deciduous Tree" means a woody plant which has a defined crown, and which loses leaves annually. 
F.  "Diameter of Tree at Breast Height" or "DBH" means the diameter of a tree as measured 41/2 feet 54 inches above the ground. Trees that branch near or below 41/2 feet from the ground will be measured at the narrowest point below 41/2 feet. Trunks that originate from the ground shall be considered separate trees. The City Forester shall have the final determination in the DBH calculation if there is a question of how it is to be measured. 
G.  "Hardwood Deciduous Tree" means a Deciduous Tree recognized as hardwoods by the City Forester, including ironwood, catalpa, oak, maple (hard), walnut, ash, hickory, birch, black cherry, hackberry, locust and basswood. 
H.  "Healthy Tree" means the average or better condition and vitality for the area as determined by the City Forester. 
I.  "Heritage Tree" means a Healthy Softwood Deciduous Tree that is 30 inches or greater in DBH, a Healthy Hardwood Deciduous Tree that is 25 inches or greater in DBH, or a Healthy Coniferous Tree that is 25 inches or greater in DBH. 
J.  "Landscape Architect" means a person licensed by the State of Minnesota as a landscape architect. 
K.  "Nursery Stock Dealer" or "Nursery Stock Grower" means a person licensed by the State of Minnesota as a nursery stock dealer or a nursery stock grower. 
L.  "Public Infrastructure" means the construction or maintenance of: 
1.  Collector or arterial roads as defined by the City Transportation Plan; 
2.  Public recreational trails; 
3.  Stormwater infrastructure; 
4.  Installation or maintenance of trunk utility infrastructure as described in the Comprehensive Sewer or Water Plans; or 
5.  Any essential service or public improvement. 
M.  "Removal" or "Tree Removal" means: 
1.  Manual, mechanical, chemical, or abiotic or biotic (fire, water, insects or inoculation) methods which results in the physical removal of a tree; 
2.  Grading impact, compaction, or other damage up to 40 percent of a tree's Critical Root Zone; 
3.  Excessive pruning that severely impacts the long term survivability of the tree; or 
4.  Any other impact to a tree that comprises the long term health or structural stability of a tree. 
N.  "Significant Tree" means a Healthy Deciduous Hardwood Tree that is six inches or greater in DBH, a Healthy Softwood Deciduous Tree that is 12 inches or greater in DBH, or a Healthy Coniferous Tree that is 12 feet or greater in height or 12 inches or greater in DBH. 
O.  "Site Plan" means the site plan established and described in this Chapter. 
P.  "Softwood Deciduous Tree" means a Deciduous Tree recognized as softwoods by the City Forester, including cottonwood, poplar/aspen, box elder, willow, silver maple and elm. 
Q.  "Tree Preservation Plan" means the tree preservation plan established and described in this Chapter. 
R.  "Tree Preservation Zone" means the tree preservation zone established and described in this Chapter. 
936.03 - Establishment of Tree Preservation Zone. 
A Tree Preservation Zone is hereby established in order to aid in the stabilization of soil by the prevention of erosion and sedimentation; reduce stormwater runoff and the costs associated therewith and replenish ground water supplies; aid in the removal of carbon dioxide and generation of oxygen in the atmosphere; provide a buffer and screen against noise pollution; provide shade and the significant environmental benefit of counteracting the so-called "heat-island" effect; provide protection against severe weather; aid in the control of drainage and restoration of denuded soil subsequent to construction or grading; protect and increase property values; conserve and enhance the City's physical and aesthetic environment; provide a haven for birds, animals and flora to thrive; and generally protect and enhance the quality of life and the general welfare of the City. 
The Tree Preservation Zone shall be applied to and superimposed upon all property within the City of Wayzata. The regulations and requirements imposed within the Tree Preservation Zone shall be in addition to the zoning districts within the existing and amended text and map of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, and the Floodplain, Shoreland, and Wetland regulations and requirements. In cases where there is a conflict between regulations applicable within such zones, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
936.04 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this Section shall apply to the following: 
A.  Subdivision, Public Infrastructure, Construction of Single-Family Home. The following tree removal thresholds apply to Subdivision applications, Public Infrastructure projects, and construction of a single-family home on a vacant lot. 
1.  Heritage Trees. Heritage Trees are valued and special trees for the City of Wayzata due to their size and age. All possible measures must be taken to preserve Heritage Trees. Heritage Tree removal may occur only when there is not a practical alternative. There shall be a zero percent removal threshold of Heritage Trees, meaning every DBH inch of Heritage Tree removed requires full replacement in accordance with the standards within Section 936.08, in addition to any other requirements hereunder. 
2.  Significant Tree Removal by Developers. Although the City encourages preservation of the maximum amount of trees possible, the City recognizes that a certain amount of Significant Trees removal is sometimes necessary during development. Accordingly, 25 percent of the existing DBH inches of Significant Trees can be removed pursuant to a Tree Preservation Plan without obligation of replacement. Any tree removal beyond 25 percent will require replacement in accordance with the standards of Section 936.08. 
3.  Public Infrastructure. The City Council may waive the tree replacement requirements of this Section for Public Infrastructure projects if the City Council makes a finding that the tree replacement requirements hereof would create an undue financial or other burden on the project, and the public benefits of the Public Infrastructure project outweigh the benefits of the required tree replacement hereof. 
B.  Land Disturbance Permits, Design Review, and Expansions to Single-Family Homes. The following tree removal thresholds apply to projects that require a Land Disturbance Permit under City Code Section 409.05, projects that require Design Review under City Code Section 909.04.B, and expansions or additions to an existing single-family home: 
1.  Heritage Trees. Heritage Trees are valued and special trees for the City of Wayzata due to their size and age. All possible measures must be taken to preserve Heritage Trees. Heritage Tree removal may occur only when there is not a practical alternative. There shall be a zero percent removal threshold of Heritage Trees, meaning every DBH inch of Heritage Tree removed requires full replacement in accordance with the standards within Section 936.08 in addition to any other requirements hereunder. 
2.  Significant Tree Removal. The City recognizes that additional tree removal may occur after the construction of new houses or commercial developments, or the expansion of existing homes or commercial developments, but to a lesser degree than the original development. Therefore, ten percent of the existing DBH inches of trees can be removed without obligation of replacement. Any removal beyond ten percent will require replacement in accordance with the standards within Section 936.08. 
C.  Trees Exempt From Replacement Requirements. The following types of trees shall not be included as part of the tally of tree removals for purposes of calculating replacement in accordance with the standards within Section 936.08: 
1.  Dead, Diseased, Dying, or Hazard Trees as determined by the City Forester; or 
2.  Trees that are transplanted from the site to another appropriate location within the City as approved by the City Forester; or 
3.  Trees that were planted as part of a commercial business such as a tree farm or nursery; or 
4.  Trees that are structurally unstable and pose a risk to people or permanent structures, as deemed by a certified arborist with a Tree Risk Assessment Qualification and the City Forester. 
936.05 - Process. 
A.  Construction of or Expansion to Single-Family Homes and Land Disturbance Permits. For construction of a single-family home, expansion to an existing single-family home, or a project that requires a Land Disturbance Permit, a Site Plan must be submitted to the City prior to any proposed tree removal. The Site Plan must include the following information: 
1.  Identify the Significant and Heritage Trees on the property. 
2.  Identify the Significant and Heritage Trees removed due to grading or construction. 
3.  Identify the Mandatory Protection measures in Section 936.06 that will be used to protect the preserved trees during grading or construction. 
4.  Comply with the City's tree replacement procedure and requirements set forth in this section. 
The Site Plan must receive the approval of the City Forester. Any denial of a Site Plan by the City Forester may be appealed to the City Council. 
B.  Subdivision, Public Infrastructure, and Design Review. Unless otherwise determined by the City Council, the following process for preserving trees shall be required for Subdivision applications, Public Infrastructure projects, and projects that require Design Review: 
1.  Prepare a Tree Preservation Plan that is incorporated on the grading plan, which meets the requirements of Section 936.05. 
2.  Implement the Tree Preservation Plan prior to and during site development. 
3.  Submit a financial guarantee for compliance with the approved Tree Preservation Plan in accordance with Section 936.09. 
4.  Comply with the City's tree replacement procedure and requirements set forth in this section. 
5.  The Tree Preservation Plan must be certified by a Forester, Landscape Architect, Nursery Stock Dealer or a Nursery Stock Grower. 
936.06 - Tree Preservation Plan. 
When a Tree Preservation Plan is required, an applicant is responsible for implementing the approved Tree Preservation Plan prior to and during site grading and plan development. The Tree Preservation Plan will be reviewed by the City Forester and any other relevant City staff to assess the best overall tree design for the project involved, taking into account the preservation, renewal and health of Significant and Heritage Trees, and ways to enhance the efforts to mitigate damage to the trees on the property and the natural environment. The applicant is encouraged to meet with City staff prior to submission of a Subdivision application, Public Infrastructure project, or Design Review application to determine the placement of buildings, parking, driveways, streets, storage and other physical features which result in the fewest Significant and Heritage Trees being destroyed or damaged. The Tree Preservation Plan must include the following items: 
A.  The name(s) and address(es) of property owners and applicants. 
B.  Delineation of the buildings, structures, impervious surfaces, utilities, and other site improvements situated thereon or contemplated to be constructed thereon. 
C.  Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of land disturbance, including the contouring of all areas to be graded. 
D.  Size, species, location and condition of all Significant and Heritage Trees located on the property as well as on adjacent properties where the Critical Root Zones of the trees are within the proposed Construction Area. The size of Deciduous Trees must be recorded in DBH and the size of Coniferous Trees must be recorded both in DBH and approximate height. 
E.  Identification of all Dead, Diseased, Dying and Hazard Trees. 
F.  The Critical Root Zone of all Significant and Heritage Trees proposed to be preserved. 
G.  Identification of all Significant and Heritage Trees proposed to be removed within the Construction Area. 
H.  Identification of all Significant and Heritage Trees on all individual lots. The Developer must submit a list of all lot and block numbers identifying those lots. 
I.  Measures to protect Heritage and Significant Trees as outlined in Section 936.06. 
J.  Size, species, and location of all replacement trees to be planted on the property in accordance with the tree replacement requirements. 
K.  Signature of the person preparing the plan and statement which includes acknowledgment of the fact the trees to be used as replacements are appropriate species with respect to survival of the replacement trees. 
936.07 - Tree Protection. 
The following tree protection measures are required: 
A.  Mandatory Protection. Measures to protect Significant and Heritage Trees must include: 
1.  Installation of snow fencing, silt fence, or polyethylene laminate safety netting placed at the Critical Root Zone of Significant and Heritage Trees to be preserved on or adjacent to the property being developed. 
2.  Identification of any oak trees requiring pruning between April 1 and July 15; any oak trees so pruned are required to have any cut areas sealed with an appropriate, non-petroleum based tree wound sealant, such as shellac. 
B.  Discretionary Protection. Measures to preserve or protect Significant and Heritage Trees which may be required by the City include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Installation of retaining walls or tree wells to preserve trees by eliminating the filling or cutting of soil within Critical Root Zones of Significant and Heritage Trees on or adjacent to the lot being developed. 
2.  Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the Critical Root Zone of Significant and Heritage Trees, or use of tunneled installation. 
3.  Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuels or paints. 
4.  Use of tree root aeration, fertilization, and irrigation systems when appropriate. 
5.  Transplanting of Significant Trees into a protected area for later moving into permanent location within the Construction Area. 
6.  Safety pruning for people working within the construction limits and for the trees involved. 
936.08 - Tree Replacement. 
A.  Tree Replacement Formula. Replacement of removed or disturbed trees in excess of the percentage allowed by this section shall be according to the following ratios. 
1.  For any removal that exceeds the percentage of allowable removal of Significant Trees as set in Section 936.07, all Significant Trees shall be replaced at the ratio of one caliper inch per one inch of DBH removed. 
2.  All Heritage Trees must be replaced at the ratio of two caliper inches per one inch of DBH removed. 
B.  Size, Types and Diversification of Replacement Trees. Unless an approved Tree Preservation Plan sets forth a different requirement, all replacement trees must be of a similar species to those that are removed. A Tree Replacement plan must include a diversity of tree species that are suitable for the property given soil conditions, hydrology, topography, and tree pathogens. Replacement trees must be no less than the following sizes. 
1.  Deciduous Trees shall be no less than 21/2 caliper inches; and 
2.  Coniferous Trees shall be no less than six feet in height. 
C.  Recommended Tree Replacement Species. In order to encourage a diverse tree canopy in the City, the following list of tree species are recommended for planting as part of a tree replacement plan: 
Arborvitae. 
Black cherry. 
Butternut. 
Cedar. 
Elm (disease resistant). 
Fir. 
Hackberry. 
Hickory. 
Hemlock. 
Kentucky Coffee. 
Linden/Basswood. 
Maple (except Silver Maples). 
Oak. 
Pine. 
Spruce (except Colorado Blue). 
Tamarack. 
Walnut. 
D.  Prohibited Tree Replacement Species. The tree replacement plan may not include any tree species included in the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources Terrestrial Invasive Species List. 
E.  Other Replacement Tree Requirements. Choice of replacement trees species and location of the trees should also take into account the following information: 
1.  Soil Composition. Comparisons should be made between soil conditions and the ecology of the proposed species to make sure they are compatible. 
2.  Spatial Requirements. The potential height and crown spread of the proposed replacement trees should be known. Generally, half of the adult tree crown diameter is the amount of distance a tree should be planted from any aboveground objects. 
3.  Pathogen Problems. Appropriate replacement choices shall also consider insect and disease problems that may be common with particular species in the part of the state in which the City of Wayzata is located. 
F.  Fee-In-Lieu of Tree Replacement or Replacement Trees Planted in Public Areas. The City recognizes that there may be instances where the total amount of tree replacement required under this section cannot occur on site. In those instances, the City may, at its option, accept a fee-in-lieu of tree replacement or allow the planting of replacement trees in public areas. Tree replacement is encouraged to happen on site as much as possible and fee in lieu-of-tree replacement should be used only when replacement on site is not feasible. The amount of fee-in-lieu of tree replacement will be determined annually by the City Council through the City fee schedule. 
936.09 - Financial Guarantee. 
A.  Financial Guarantee. The City may, at its option, withhold a certificate of occupancy or require cash escrow or a letter of credit satisfactory to the City in the amount of 110 percent of the value of the tree replacement, securing the full performance of Tree Preservation Plan and the tree replacement plan. The amount of such security shall be calculated by the fee-in-lieu of tree replacement schedules. The financial security shall be sufficient to cover the costs of the replacement trees planted, including any needed replacement of the trees over a three-year period. 
B.  Use of Financial Guarantee. If the property owner does not implement the approved Tree Preservation Plan or Site Plan, including the tree replacement plan, in accordance with the City Council or City Forester approval, the City may use the financial guarantee to correct or complete the work. 
C.  Release of Financial Guarantee. At least once annually, the City Forester shall review the financial securities, inspect the applicable trees, and release the financial securities as necessary. The financial security shall be released based on the following schedule: 
1.  Upon installation of a healthy tree: 50 percent of the financial guarantee for that tree shall be released. 
2.  First year inspection determining the installed tree is still healthy: 15 percent of the financial guarantee for that tree shall be released. 
3.  Second year inspection determining the installed tree is still healthy: 15 percent of the financial guarantee for that tree shall be released. 
4.  Third year inspection determining the installed tree is still healthy: 20 percent of the financial guarantee for that tree shall be released. 
936.10 - Penalties. 
A.  Intentional or Deliberate Damage. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to intentionally damage, destroy or adversely alter any living tree, deciduous or coniferous, on private land within the limits of the City of Wayzata in violation of this Section. Minn. Stats.  561.04 strictly prohibits intentional damage to trees on public property in any form and provides that whoever willfully and without lawful authority injures any tree, timber or shrub on City property is liable for treble the amount of damages which may be assessed therefore. The City Forester and other City Staff shall not make any claims related to the structural integrity of any tree, and any assessments made related to a tree may not be relied upon by the property owner. 
B.  Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of the City Code including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this Section. The term "misdemeanor" shall be as defined in Minn. Stats.  609.02, Subd. 3. 
It shall also be a misdemeanor for any person to attempt to commit a misdemeanor or to cause, aid, assist, counsel or advise another to commit misdemeanor. Any person who commits a misdemeanor, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties therefore established by State Statute. Unless expressly provided otherwise, each act in violation of the City Code, including this Chapter, shall constitute a separate offense, and each and every day that such a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 950 - GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS 

950.01 - Establishment of Districts. 
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trade and industry and the location of buildings designated for specific uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, recreation and open space within and surrounding such buildings, the City of Wayzata is hereby divided into zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations shall be uniform in each district, and said districts shall be known as: 
R-1A Low Density Single Family Estate District R-1 Low Density Single Family Residential District R-2A Low to Medium Density Single Family Residential District R-2 Medium Density Single Family Residential District R-3A High Density Single Family Residential District R-3 Single and Two Family Residential District R-4A Low Density Multiple Residential District R-4 Medium Density Multiple Residential District R-5 Average Density Multiple Residential District INS Institutional District C-1 Office and Limited Commercial District C-1A Neighborhood and Limited Commercial District C-1B Mixed Use Residential District C-2 Shopping Center Business District C-3 Service District C-4 Central Business District C-4A Limited Central Business District C-4B Central Business District R-D Research and Development District B-W Business Warehousing District PUD Planned Unit Development District S Shoreland Overlay District W Wetland System FP Floodplain District  
950.02 - Zoning District Boundaries. 
Zoning district boundary lines of this Ordinance generally follow lot lines, the centerlines of railroad right-of-way lines, street rights-of-way, water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date of this Ordinance. 
A.  Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning district boundary line shall be heard by the Council serving as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
B.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. 
C.  All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property in the most restrictive classification immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways or railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street, alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. 
D.  All areas within the corporate limits of the City which are under water and which are not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins such water area. If such water area adjoins two or more zones the boundaries of each zone shall be construed to be extended into the water area in a straight line until they meet the other district at the half-way point and/or to the corporation limits. 
E.  For the purpose of adult uses, as specified in Chapter 935, if a building or leased space is intersected by the allowed area boundary, then only that portion of the building or leased space within the allowed area will be permissible for adult use principal. 
950.03 - Zoning Map. 
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this text are hereby set forth on the Zoning Map entitled "Zoning Map of Wayzata." Said map shall be on file with the Zoning Administrator, and hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map." Said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and thereby made a part of this Ordinance by reference. 
950.04 - Annexations. 
All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Wayzata which is not shown on the Zoning Map shall automatically upon annexation be classified within the R-1A District and shall be subject to all regulations, notations, references and conditions as are applicable to said district until such time that a determination may be made as to the proper district classification for such territory and an amendment can be made to that effect. 
950.05 - New Districts. 
Except for unit lots, nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to allow the creation of newly subdivided base lots with a minimum area of less than 9,000 square feet in any zoning. 
CHAPTER 951 - R-1A LOW DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY ESTATE DISTRICT 

951.01 - Purpose. 
The R-1A District is intended to provide a low density residential district for existing large and estate-type properties. These properties are unique in that they are unusually large in size and frequently include accessory structures, such as guest houses and employees' quarters. This district also allows recreational uses. 
951.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "R-1A" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. 
951.03 - Interim Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-1A District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
951.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the "R-1A" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Greenhouses, provided they do not exceed 200 square feet in area. 
D.  Swimming pools. 
E.  Tennis courts. 
F.  Living quarters within the principal structure of persons employed on the premises. 
G.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
H.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 951.02 and 951.05 of this Ordinance. 
951.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-1A" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  One guest, carriage, or caretaker's house as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The structure will not be used for rental purposes. 
2.  The structure, design, building materials and color are compatible with the principal structure and surrounding land uses. 
3.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Off-site private recreational facilities, provided that: 
1.  Such use is accessory to one existing permitted principal use on an abutting lot or lot only separated by a public right-of-way. Said properties are tied together by a deed restriction recorded with the City and Hennepin County. 
2.  The properties upon which the private recreational facilities are to be located and upon which the permitted principal use is located, are under the same ownership. Said properties are tied together by a deed restriction recorded with the City and Hennepin County. 
3.  The uses and activities are operated only for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use to which the property is tied and their occasional guests. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Public parks, playgrounds, cemeteries and memorial gardens, provided that: 
1.  The site is landscaped. 
2.  The use is available to the "public." 
3.  The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district. 
4.  The use meets the minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
5.  The site accesses on a collector or arterial street. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Accommodations for horses as an accessory use, in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  The minimum lot size for accommodating one horse shall be three acres, and the minimum lot size for two horses shall be five acres. No more than two horses may be accommodated on any one property within the City. 
2.  All stables shall be located a minimum distance of 300 feet from any adjacent residential structure, excluding the structure of the applicant, and all corral areas shall be located a minimum distance of 200 feet from any adjacent residential structure, excluding the residence of the applicant. 
3.  All accommodations for horses shall occur within the rear yard of a residential lot. 
4.  Where an application for the boarding of a horse shall occur adjacent to a vacant lot, the City Council shall take into account a proper location of a future residence in considering the application. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Commercial outdoor recreational areas including golf courses and country clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities, provided that: 
1.  The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in character. 
2.  Not more than five percent of the land area of the site shall be covered by buildings or structures. 
3.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use. 
4.  The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
3.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
951.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-1A" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Lot Area: 80,000 square feet. 
2.  Lot Width: 200 feet. 
3.  Lot Depth: 200 feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Principal Structure: 
a)  Front Yard: 45 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: 20 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 50 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard: 50 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: Ten feet. 
C.  Structures Adjacent to a Shoreline Used Exclusively for the Storage of Watercraft: 
1.  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
2.  Rear Yard: None required. 
951.07 - Lot Coverage and Height. 
The following requirements shall be observed in an "R-1A" District: 
A.  Lot coverage shall not exceed ten percent of lot area. Impervious surfaces on a lot shall not exceed 20 percent of the lot area. 
B.  All single family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of three stories and 40 feet, whichever is lesser. 
C.  All accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of two stories and 25 feet, whichever is lesser. 
CHAPTER 952 - R-1 LOW DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

952.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-1 Low Density Single Family District is to provide for exclusive low density single family detached residential dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses. These properties are large in size and commonly have accessory structures, such as guest houses and employees' quarters. This district also allows limited recreational uses. 
952.02 - Permitted Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in an "R-1" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. 
952.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-1 District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
952.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the "R-1" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Greenhouses, provided they do not exceed 200 square feet in area. 
D.  Swimming pools. 
E.  Living quarters within the principal structure of persons employed on the premises. 
F.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
G.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 952.02 and 952.05 of this Ordinance. 
952.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-1" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  One guest, carriage, or caretaker's house as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The structure will not be used for rental purposes. 
2.  The structure, design, building materials and color are compatible with the principal structure and surrounding land uses. 
3.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Off-site private recreational facilities, provided that: 
1.  Such use is accessory to one existing permitted principal use on an abutting lot or lot only separated by a public right-of-way. Said properties are tied together by a deed restriction recorded with the City and Hennepin County. 
2.  The properties upon which the private recreational facilities are to be located and upon which the permitted principal use is located, are under the same ownership. Said properties are tied together by a deed restriction recorded with the City and Hennepin County. 
3.  The uses and activities are operated only for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use to which the property is tied and their occasional guests. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Public parks, playgrounds, cemeteries and memorial gardens, provided that: 
1.  The site is landscaped. 
2.  The use is available to the "public." 
3.  The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district. 
4.  The use meets the minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
5.  The site accesses on a collector or arterial street. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Accommodations for horses as an accessory use, in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  The minimum lot size for accommodating one horse shall be three acres, and the minimum lot size for two horses shall be five acres. No more than two horses may be accommodated on any one property within the City. 
2.  All stables shall be located a minimum distance of 300 feet from any adjacent residential structure, excluding the structure of the applicant, and all corral areas shall be located a minimum distance of 200 feet from any adjacent residential structure, excluding the residence of the applicant. 
3.  All accommodations for horses shall occur within the rear yard of a residential lot. 
4.  Where an application for the boarding of a horse shall occur adjacent to a vacant lot, the City Council shall take into account a proper location of a future residence in considering the application. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Commercial outdoor recreational areas including golf courses and country clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities, provided that: 
1.  The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in character. 
2.  Not more than five percent of the land area of the site shall be covered by buildings or structures. 
3.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use. 
4.  The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
952.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-1" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Lot Area: 40,000 square feet. 
2.  Lot Width: 150 feet. 
3.  Lot Depth: 150 feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Principal Structure: 
a)  Front Yard: 45 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: 20 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 50 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard: 50 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: Ten feet. 
C.  Structures Adjacent to a Shoreline Used Exclusively for the Storage of Watercraft: 
1.  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
2.  Rear Yard: None required. 
952.07 - Lot Coverage and Height. 
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an "R-1" District: 
A.  Lot coverage shall not exceed 15 percent of lot area. Impervious surfaces on a lot shall not exceed 25 percent of the lot area. 
B.  All single family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of three stories and 40 feet, whichever is lesser. 
C.  All accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of two stories and 25 feet, whichever is lesser. 
CHAPTER 953 - R-2A SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

953.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-2A Single Family Residential District is to provide for low to medium density single family detached dwelling unit and directly related, complementary uses. 
953.02 - Permitted Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "R-2A" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. 
953.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-2A District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
953.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in he "R-2A" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Greenhouses, provided they do not exceed 200 square feet in area. 
D.  Swimming pools. 
E.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
F.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 953.02 and 953.05 of this Ordinance. 
953.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-2A" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Off-site private recreational facilities, provided that: 
1.  Such use is accessory to one existing permitted principal use on an abutting lot or lot only separated by a public right-of-way. Said properties are tied together by a deed restriction recorded with the City and Hennepin County. 
2.  The properties upon which the private recreational facilities are to be located and upon which the permitted principal use is located, are under the same ownership. Said properties are tied together by a deed restriction recorded with the City and Hennepin County. 
3.  The uses and activities are operated only for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use to which the property is tied and their occasional guests. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Public parks, playgrounds, cemeteries and memorial gardens, provided that: 
1.  The site is landscaped. 
2.  The use is available to the "public." 
3.  The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district. 
4.  The use meets the minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
5.  The site accesses on a collector or arterial street. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
E.  Tennis courts as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
2.  The courts shall be fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The courts shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure. 
4.  Any lighting used shall not allow the light to spread to adjoining properties. 
5.  A grading and drainage plan must be submitted and approved by the City Engineer. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Living quarters of persons employed on the premises, provided that: 
1.  Occupancy is limited to the principal structure. 
2.  Such accommodations are provided for no more than one family. 
3.  Two extra off-street parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Sailing School, provided the provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
953.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-2A" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Lot Area: 25,000 square feet. 
2.  Lot Width: 100 feet. 
3.  Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Principal Structure: 
a)  Front Yard: 30 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: 15 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard: 35 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: 15 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: Five feet. 
953.07 - Lot Coverage and Height. 
The following requirements shall be observed in an "R-2A" District: 
A.  Lot overage shall not exceed 20 percent of lot area. Impervious surfaces on a lot shall not exceed 30 percent of the lot area. 
B.  All single family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of three stories and 40 feet, whichever is lesser. 
C.  All accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of 20 feet. 
CHAPTER 954 - R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

954.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-2 Medium Density Single Family Residential District is to provide for medium density single family detached dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses. 
954.02 - Permitted Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "R-2" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. 
954.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-2 District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
954.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the "R-2" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Greenhouses, provided they do not exceed 200 square feet in area. 
D.  Swimming pools. 
E.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
F.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 954.02 and 954.05 of this Ordinance. 
954.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-2" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Off-site private recreational facilities, provided that: 
1.  Such use is accessory to one existing permitted principal use on an abutting lot or lot only separated by a public right-of-way. Said properties are tied together by a deed restriction recorded with the City and Hennepin County. 
2.  The properties upon which the private recreational facilities are to be located and upon which the permitted principal use is located, are under the same ownership. Said properties are tied together by a deed restriction recorded with the City and Hennepin County. 
3.  The uses and activities are operated only for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use to which the property is tied and their occasional guests. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Public parks, playgrounds, cemeteries and memorial gardens, provided that: 
1.  The site is landscaped. 
2.  The use is available to the "public." 
3.  The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district. 
4.  The use meets the minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
5.  The site accesses on a minor arterial. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Planned unit development as regulated by Section 801.33 of this Ordinance. 
E.  Tennis courts as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
2.  The courts shall be fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The courts shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure. 
4.  Any lighting used shall not allow the light to spread to adjoining properties. 
5.  A grading and drainage plan must be submitted to and subject to approval of the City Engineer. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Living quarters of persons employed on the premises, provided that: 
1.  Occupancy is limited to the principal structure. 
2.  Such accommodations are provided for no more than one family. 
3.  Two extra off-street parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
954.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-2" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Lot Area: 15,000 square feet. 
2.  Lot Width: 100 feet. 
3.  Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Principal Structure: 
a)  Front Yard: 25 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard: 30 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Five feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: Five feet. 
954.07 - Lot Coverage and Height. 
The following requirements shall be observed in an "R-2" District: 
A.  Lot coverage shall not exceed 20 percent of lot area. Impervious surfaces on a lot shall not exceed 30 percent of the lot area. 
B.  All single family residences shall be limited to a maximum height of 21/2 stories and 30 feet, whichever is lesser. 
C.  All accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of 20 feet. 
CHAPTER 955 - R-3A SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

955.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-3A Single and Two Family Residential District is to provide for high density single family dwelling units in the community's oldest neighborhoods and to introduce on a restricted basis, two family dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses. 
955.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "R-3A" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. 
E.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
955.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-3A District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
955.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the "R-3A" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Greenhouses, provided they do not exceed 200 square feet in area. 
D.  Swimming pools. 
E.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
F.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 955.02 and 955.05 of this Ordinance. 
955.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-3A" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Planned unit development as regulated by Section 801.33 of this Ordinance. 
C.  Tennis courts as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
2.  The courts shall be fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The courts shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure. 
4.  Any lighting used shall not allow the light to spread to adjoining properties. 
5.  A grading and drainage plan must be submitted and approved by the City Engineer. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Two family detached dwellings, provided that: 
1.  They are located and designed so as to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered satisfactorily met. 
955.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-3A" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Single Family: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Width: 60 feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
2.  Two Family: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area: 18,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Area Per Unit: 9,000 square feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet. 
d)  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Principal Structure: 
a)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
d)  Corner Lots: Lots fronting two principal streets shall be considered corner lots, and shall have a minimum of a 20 foot setback for both the front yard and side yard which abut a principal street. For corner lots that have less than 60 feet in width, the rear yard setback may be reduced to ten feet, and the inside side yard (non-principal street fronting) may be reduced to five feet. 
2.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Five feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: Five feet. 
955.07 - Lot Coverage and Height. 
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an "R-3A" District: 
A.  Lot coverage shall not exceed 30 percent of lot area. Impervious surfaces on a lot shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot area. 
B.  All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of two stories and 32 feet in vertical distance above the Grade Plane, as measured to the peak of the roof, whichever is lesser. 
C.  All residential accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of 20 feet. 
CHAPTER 956 - R-3 SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

956.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-3 Single Family and Two Family Residential District is to provide for high density single family dwelling units and to introduce on a restricted basis, two family dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses. 
956.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "R-3" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. 
E.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
956.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-3 District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
956.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the "R-3" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Greenhouses, provided they do not exceed 200 square feet in area. 
D.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
E.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 956.02 and 956.05 of this Ordinance. 
956.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-3" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
C.  Tennis courts as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
2.  The courts shall be fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The courts shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure. 
4.  Any lighting used shall not allow the light to spread to adjoining properties. 
5.  A grading and drainage plan must be submitted and approved by the City Engineer. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Two family detached dwellings, provided that: 
1.  They are located and designed so as to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
956.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-3" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Single Family: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Width: 60 feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
2.  Two Family: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area: 18,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Area Per Unit: 9,000 square feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet. 
d)  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Single Family, Two Family: 
a)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Five feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: Five feet. 
956.07 - Lot Coverage and Height. 
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an "R-3" District: 
A.  Lot coverage shall not exceed 30 percent of lot area. Impervious surfaces on a lot shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot area. 
B.  All residences shall be limited to a maximum height of 21/2 stories and 30 feet, whichever is lesser. 
C.  All residential accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of 20 feet. 
CHAPTER 957 - R-4A LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

957.01 - Purpose. 
The R-4A District is intended to provide a district which will allow low density single family, two family dwellings, townhouses and cluster housing in those areas where such development properly relates to other land uses and major streets, or where said use may act as a transition between land uses. 
957.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "R-4A" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. 
E.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
F.  Townhouses. 
G.  Two family dwellings. 
957.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-4A District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
957.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in an "R-4A" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
D.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 957.02 and 957.05 of this Ordinance. 
E.  Off-street loading areas. 
957.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-4A" District: (Requires a conditional use based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Swimming pools as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
3.  The use shall meet setbacks for accessory structures. 
4.  All City permits are obtained for the use. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Tennis courts as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
2.  The courts shall be fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The courts shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure. 
4.  Any lighting used shall not allow the light to spread to adjoining properties. 
5.  A grading and drainage plan must be submitted and approved by the City Engineer. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
957.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-4A" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Single Family: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area: 12,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Width: 80 feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
2.  Two Family: 
a)  Minimum Total Lot Area: 24,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 12,000 square feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet. 
3.  Townhouses: 
a)  Minimum Total Lot Area: 30,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 10,000 square feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Width: 120 feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Single Family, Two Family: 
a)  Front Yard: 30 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Townhouses: 
a)  Front Yard Setback: 35 feet. 
b)  Side Yard Setback: 20 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard Setback: 40 feet. 
3.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard Setback: 40 feet. 
b)  Side Yard Setback: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard Setback: Ten feet. 
C.  Should a structure containing four or more units be built upon property which abuts property zoned and used for a less intensive use, yard and setback requirements where the properties are contiguous shall conform to those which would be required in the zoning district which calls for the greater setbacks. 
957.07 - Lot Coverage and Height. 
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an "R-4A" District: 
A.  Lot coverage and impervious surface shall not exceed 35 percent of lot area. 
B.  All buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of 21/2 stories and 35 feet, whichever is lesser. 
CHAPTER 958 - R-4 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

958.01 - Purpose. 
The R-4 District is intended to provide a district which will allow medium density one or two family dwellings, townhouses and cluster housing in those areas where such development properly relates to other land uses and thoroughfares, or where said use may act as a transition between land uses. 
958.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "R-4" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. 
E.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
F.  Townhouses. 
G.  Two family dwellings. 
958.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-4 District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
958.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in an "R-4" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
D.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 801.58.2 and 801.58.5 of this Ordinance. 
E.  Off-street loading areas. 
958.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-4" District: (Requires a conditional use based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Swimming pools as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
3.  The use shall meet setbacks for accessory structures. 
4.  All City permits are obtained for the use. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Tennis courts as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
2.  The courts shall be fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The courts shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure. 
4.  Any lighting used shall not allow the light to spread to adjoining properties. 
5.  A grading and drainage plan must be submitted and approved by the City Engineer. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 801.18 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
958.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-4 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Single Family: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Width: 60 feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
2.  Two Family: 
a)  Minimum Total Lot Area: 18,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 9,000 square feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet. 
3.  Townhouses: 
a)  Minimum Total Lot Area: 27,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 9,000 square feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Single Family, Two Family: 
a)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Townhouses: 
a)  Front Yard Setback: 35 feet. 
b)  Side Yard Setback: 20 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard Setback: 40 feet. 
3.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard Setback: 40 feet. 
b)  Side Yard Setback: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard Setback: Ten feet 
C.  Should a structure containing four or more units be built upon property which abuts property zoned and used for a less intensive use, yard and setback requirements where the properties are contiguous shall conform to those which would be required in the zoning district which calls for the greater setbacks. 
958.07 - Lot Coverage and Height. 
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in an "R-4" District: 
A.  Lot coverage and impervious surface shall not exceed 35 percent of lot area. 
B.  All buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of 21/2 stories and 35 feet, whichever is lesser. 
CHAPTER 959 - R-5 AVERAGE DENSITY MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

959.01 - Purpose. 
The R-5 District is intended to provide a general multiple residence district of average density in those areas where such development property relates to other land uses and thorough fares, or where said use may act as a transition between land uses. 
959.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "R-5" District: 
A.  Single family detached dwellings. 
B.  Essential services. 
C.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
D.  Residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons in single family detached dwellings. 
E.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
F.  Townhouses. 
G.  Two family dwellings. 
H.  Multiple family dwellings. 
I.  Manor homes. 
J.  Quadraminiums. 
K.  Residential care facilities in multiple family structures having 16 or fewer persons. 
959.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the R-5 District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
959.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in an "R-5" District: 
A.  Tool houses, sheds and other such structures for the storage of domestic supplies and equipment. 
B.  Private garages and off-street parking. 
C.  Living quarters of persons employed on the premises. 
D.  Except as otherwise limited, private recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. 
E.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 959.02 and 959.05 of this Ordinance. 
F.  Off-street loading areas. 
959.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an "R-5" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in an regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Swimming pools as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The use is fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The use is not located within the front yard. 
3.  The use shall meet setbacks for accessory structures. 
4.  All City permits are obtained for the use. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Halfway houses, as defined in Chapter 902 of this Ordinance, provided that: 
1.  The use is licensed by the State. 
2.  Provisions are made to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. 
3.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Housing for the elderly, as defined by Section 902.02 of this Ordinance, in accordance with the following special provisions. 
1.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
3.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
959.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-5" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
1.  Single Family: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area: 9,000 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Lot Width: 60 feet. 
c)  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
2.  Two Family: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 5,300 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Total Lot Area: 10,600 square feet. 
3.  Townhouses, Quadraminiums, Manor Homes: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 5,300 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Total Lot Area: 10,600 square feet. 
4.  Multiple Family Dwellings: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 2,500 square feet. 
b)  Minimum Total Lot Area: 20,000 square feet. 
5.  Multiple Family Dwelling-Elderly Housing: 
a)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 1,000 square feet per unit. 
b)  Minimum Total Lot Area: 20,000 square feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Single Family, Two Family: 
a)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structure(s): 
a)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: Five feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: Five feet. 
959.07 - Schedule of Allowances. 
Except for elderly housing, the lot areas per multiple family dwelling unit prescribed above shall be further subject to the following schedule of allowances, which shall be added to or subtracted from the minimum lot area per dwelling unit as prescribed, thereby relating density requirements to the location, use and access provided the property. 
A.  For each parking space provided under the living area of a building or underground subtract 300 square feet. 
B.  If an adjacent site is zoned R-1A, R-1, R-2A, R-2, R-3A or R-3 Residential use, add 300 square feet per unit for that portion of any building within 200 feet of said district. 
C.  If an adjacent site is zoned for commercial use, subtract 300 square feet per unit for that portion of any building within 200 feet of said district. 
D.  For each unit containing bedrooms in excess of two, add 300 square feet. 
E.  The maximum allowance which may be subtracted under Section 959.07.A and C shall be 500 square feet per unit. 
959.08 - Lot Coverage, Height and Bulk. 
The following lot coverage, height and bulk requirements shall be observed in the "R-5" District: 
A.  Lot coverage shall not exceed 30 percent of lot area. Impervious surfaces on a lot shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot area. 
B.  The maximum floor area ration (F.A.R.) shall be 0.7. 
C.  All buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of three stories and 35 feet, whichever is lesser. 
CHAPTER 970 - INS INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

970.01 - Purpose. 
The INS District is intended to provide a district for facilities devoted to serving the public. It is unique in that the primary objective of uses within this district is the provision of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than the sale of goods or services. It is intended that uses within such a district will be compatible with adjoining development, and they normally will be located on an arterial street or thoroughfare. 
970.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the INS District: 
A.  Pre-school, elementary, junior or senior high schools having a regular course of study accredited by the State of Minnesota. 
B.  Religious institutions, such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues. 
C.  Publicly owned civic or cultural buildings, such as libraries, City offices, auditoriums, public administration buildings, public parking structures as a principal and sole use, and historical developments. 
970.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the INS District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
970.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the INS District: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Sections 970.02 and 970.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Parks, playgrounds or athletic fields. 
C.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
970.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in an INS District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Automobile parking lots as a principal use, provided that: 
1.  The use and design is in conformance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Cemeteries or memorial gardens, provided that: 
1.  The site is landscaped. 
2.  The use is available to the "public." 
3.  The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district. 
4.  The use meets the minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
5.  The site accesses on a collector or arterial street. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Colleges, seminaries and other institutions of higher education, provided that: 
1.  Adequate parking is provided in conformance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
2.  Provisions are made to buffer and screen any surrounding residential uses. 
3.  The site is served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Community centers, provided that: 
1.  Adequate screening from abutting and adjoining residential uses and landscaping is provided. 
2.  Adequate off-street parking and access is provided and that such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from adjoining and abutting residential uses. 
3.  Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Hospitals and residential care facilities including extended care facilities for mentally retarded, rest homes and care for the aged, ill and infirmed, provided that: 
1.  Interior side yards are screened. 
2.  Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas. Said area shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated. 
4.  All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
5.  All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly adhered to and all required operating permits are secured. 
6.  Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
7.  Off-street loading space in compliance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance is provided. 
8.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Housing for the elderly, provided that: 
1.  The development is in conformance to standards established in Section 959.06 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Halfway houses, provided that: 
1.  The use is licensed by the State. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
H.  Living quarters which are provided as an accessory use to a principal use in Section 970.02 or to a conditional use in this Section, provided that: 
1.  The use shall not be used as rental property. 
2.  A maximum of one such dwelling shall be allowed. 
3.  There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
I.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  Equipment and vehicles are completely enclosed in a permanent structure or if stored outside, are screened and landscaped from neighboring uses as provided in Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
J.  Public recreational facilities, provided that: 
1.  The site is landscaped. 
2.  The use is available to the "public." 
3.  The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district. 
4.  The use meets the minimum setback requirements for accessory structures. 
5.  The site accesses on a minor arterial. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
K.  Single family or two family residential dwellings, provided that: 
1.  The development shall be in compliance with the provisions of the R-3 Zoning District. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
L.  The lot area requirement for permitted uses may be reduced, provided that: 
1.  The use existed prior to July 1, 1990. 
2.  Compatibility with surrounding existing and potential uses is maintained. 
3.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
M.  Other uses of the same general character as those listed in Sections 970.02, 970.04 and 970.05 of this Ordinance. 
N.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
970.06 - Lot Area and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "INS" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Lot Area: 
1.  Minimum Site Area: 
a)  Religious Institutions: Three acres. 
b)  Elementary Schools: 15 acres. 
c)  Junior High Schools: 30 acres. 
d)  Senior High Schools: 50 acres. 
e)  Hospitals: Ten acres. 
f)  Community Centers: Three acres. 
g)  Public Parking Structure: One acre. 
2.  All school area requirements prescribed above may be reduced if and when the site is combined with or included within a neighborhood park. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Schools: 
a)  Front Yard: 50 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: 100 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 100 feet. 
2.  Hospitals: 
a)  Front Yard: 50 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: 100 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 100 feet. 
3.  Public Works Facilities: 
a)  Front Yard: 50 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: 100 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 100 feet. 
4.  Public Parking Structures: There shall be no minimum front yard, side yard or rear yard setback requirements, except that there shall be a minimum required setback when such boundary is adjacent to a residential district. In which case, the minimum required setback shall be the same as the setback for the adjacent residential district. In addition, the minimum requirements of Section 970.06.B.6 do not apply to a public parking structure. 
5.  All Other Institutional Uses: 
a)  Front Yard: 50 feet. 
b)  Side Yard: 50 feet. 
c)  Rear Yard: 50 feet. 
6.  In addition to these minimum requirements, setbacks of buildings located within the Institutional District shall be at least equal to the height of such buildings. 
970.07 - Lot Coverage and Height Requirements. 
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in the "INS" District: 
A.  The total lot coverage of all buildings shall not exceed 30 percent, except that rest homes and housing for the elderly shall not exceed a lot coverage of 40 percent, and public parking structures shall not exceed a lot coverage of 60 percent. 
B.  All principal structures and their accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of three stories and 40 feet. 
CHAPTER 974 - C-1A NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE AND LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

974.01 - Purpose. 
The C-1A District is intended to provide a district which is related to and may reasonably adjoin residential districts for the location and development of limited office, service, and retail uses. The uses allowed in this district are those in which there is limited contact with the public and provide for mixed commercial and residential use. 
974.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the C-1A District: 
A.  Art galleries or studios. 
B.  Barber, beauty shops, and day spas. 
C.  Commercial/professional offices. 
D.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
E.  Florist shops. 
F.  Interior decorating studios. 
G.  Mixed use buildings with a combination of residential and allowable retail, office and service use. 
H.  Municipal parks and playgrounds. 
I.  Photographic studios. 
J.  Residential use as a principal use subject to the density standards of the R-3 District. 
All new residential buildings with a footprint of 3,000 square feet or more are encouraged to be developed with more than one use. 
974.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the C-1A District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
974.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in a C-1A District: 
A.  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Section 974.02 and 974.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
C.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
974.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a C-1A District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Automobile parking lots of four or more spaces as a principal use or other than those accessory to the principal use, provided that: 
1.  The provisions of Chapter 920 of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Existing clubs or lodges, provided that: 
1.  All State regulations are complied with including obtaining all required permits and/or licenses. 
2.  Parking and loading areas are in conformance with the parking and loading ordinances outlined in Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The parking and loading spaces shall not be located within the front yard of a lot and must meet all applicable provisions of the parking and loading ordinance. 
4.  The site shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
E.  Medical or Dental Clinics. 
974.06 - Yard and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum setback requirements shall be observed in a C-1A District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
B.  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
C.  Side Yard: Directly abutting an R District. 20 feet. 
D.  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
974.07 - Lot Coverage, Height and Bulk. 
The following lot coverage, height and bulk shall be observed in a C-1A District: 
A.  Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage of all buildings shall be 30 percent. 
B.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 2.0. 
C.  Height. All buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of 2.5 stories and 30 feet, whichever is lesser. 
D.  Lot Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 9,000 square feet. 
CHAPTER 975 - C-1 OFFICE AND LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

975.01 - Purpose. 
The C-1 District is intended to provide a district which is related to and may reasonably adjoin high density or other residential districts for the location and development of administrative office buildings and related office uses which are subject to more restrictive controls. The office uses allowed in this district are those in which there is limited contact with the public and no manufacture, exterior display or selling of merchandise to the general public. 
975.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the "C-1" District: 
A.  Barber and beauty shops. 
B.  Commercial offices. 
C.  Interior decorating studios. 
D.  Medical offices or clinics. 
E.  Mortuaries or funeral homes. 
F.  Music or dance studios. 
G.  Photographic or art studios. 
H.  Municipal parks and playgrounds. 
I.  Residential use as a principal use subject to the density standards of the R-3 District. 
J.  Mixed-use buildings with upper story residential and ground floor office/service commercial use. 
K.  All new residential buildings with a footprint of 3,000 square feet or more shall be developed with more than one use. 
975.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the C-1 District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
975.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in a "C-1" District: 
A.  Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to the uses permitted in Sections 975.02 and 975.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
C.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
975.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a "C-1" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Automobile parking lots of four or more spaces as a principal use or other than those accessory to the principal use, provided that: 
1.  The provisions of Chapter 920 of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Banks or savings and loan institutions, not including drive-in facilities, provided that: 
1.  The services which are provided are for the local area rather than the region. 
2.  The traffic generated will not raise traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets. 
3.  The architectural appearance and scale of the building shall reflect the building character of the area and shall not be so dissimilar as to cause impairment of property values or constitute a blighting influence within the neighborhood. 
4.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Dry cleaning or laundry establishments as a principal use, provided that: 
1.  The development meets all applicable performance standards of the C-1 Zoning District, including, but not limited to, all setbacks, screening and landscaping and parking requirements. 
2.  The emission of odor or noise by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by applicable state of Minnesota pollution control standards, as amended. 
3.  The outside storage of materials and equipment is prohibited. 
4.  The location of exterior steam vents shall be such as to minimize the impacts on surrounding structures and uses. A plan demonstrating such shall be submitted to City staff for review. 
5.  The development is to be architecturally compatible with and sensitive to nearby structures. 
6.  The development does not conflict or result in incompatible land use arrangements as related to abutting land uses. 
7.  Operations with the primary function of in-store retail and general public customer contact are permitted. Operations which are primarily to serve other businesses on a wholesale level are prohibited. 
8.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
975.06 - Yard and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "C-1" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance setbacks. Front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks all shall be a minimum distance of ten feet. 
975.07 - Lot Coverage, Height and Bulk. 
The following lot coverage, height and bulk shall be observed in a "C-1" District: 
A.  Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage of all buildings shall be 50 percent. 
B.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 2.0. 
C.  Height. All buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of three stories and 35 feet, whichever is lesser. 
D.  Lot Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 9,000 square feet. 
CHAPTER 975.5 - C-1B MIXED USE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

975.5.01 - Purpose. 
The C-1B District is intended to provide a district which is related to and may reasonably adjoin residential districts for the location and development of mixed use buildings with residential use as the predominant use, in addition to limited office, service, and retail uses. 
975.5.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the C-1B District. 
A.  Mixed use buildings with no less than 60 percent of the building square footage (SF) comprising residential use, and the balance comprising of one or more of the following (or similar) type retail, office, or service use: 
1.  Art galleries or studios. 
2.  Commercial/professional offices. 
3.  Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons. 
4.  Florist shops. 
5.  Interior decorating studios. 
6.  Photographic studios. 
7.  Hobby Stores. 
8.  Variety, gift, boutique, or soft goods stores. 
9.  Wearing apparel stores. 
B.  Municipal parks and playgrounds. 
C.  Residential use as a principal use subject to the density standards of the R-3A District. 
975.5.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the C-1B District and are governed by Section 801.34 of this Ordinance. 
A.  None. 
975.5.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in a C-1B District. 
A.  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Section 801.81.2 and 801.81.5 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
C.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
975.5.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a C-1B District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 801.04 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 801.18 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 801.04.2.F. of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Planned unit development as regulated by Section 801.33 of this Ordinance. 
975.5.06 - Yard and Setback Requirements. 
The following minimum setback requirements shall be observed in a C-IB District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance. 
A.  Principal Structures. 
1.  Front Yard: Ten feet. 
2.  Side Yard: Ten feet. 
3.  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
B.  Accessory Structure(s). 
1.  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Side Yard: Five feet. 
3.  Rear Yard: Five feet. 
975.5.07 - Lot Coverage, Height, Bulk, and Other Regulations. 
The following lot coverage, height and bulk shall be observed in a C-1B District. 
A.  Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage of all buildings shall be 30 percent. 
B.  Impervious Surface. The maximum impervious surface coverage on a lot shall be 35 percent. 
C.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 2.0. 
D.  Height. All buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of two and one-half stories and 30 feet in vertical distance above the Grade Plan to the highest point of a flat, mansard, shed, round or arch type roof, or 32 feet in vertical distance above the Grade Plane, as measured to the highest peak of a pitched, hipped, or gambrel roof. 
E.  Lot Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 7,000 square feet. 
F.  All accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum height of 20 feet. 
CHAPTER 976 - C-2 SHOPPING CENTER BUSINESS DISTRICT 

976.01 - Purpose. 
The C-2 District is intended to provide a district which may be applied to land in single ownership or unified control for the purpose of developing a planned shopping center with a unified and organized arrangement of buildings and service facilities at locations which are suitable for such use. All of the following principal uses, except for required off-street parking facilities, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
976.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in a "C-2" District: 
A.  Adult Use-Principal and Accessory. 
B.  Antique shops. 
C.  Appliance sales or service stores. 
D.  Art galleries or studios. 
E.  Art supply, school supply, book or stationery stores. 
F.  Automotive accessory stores. 
G.  Bakeries, provided the room or rooms containing the preparation and baking process shall not have a gross floor area in excess of 2,400 square feet. 
H.  Banks, savings, lending or other financial institutions, excluding drive-in facilities. 
I.  Barber shops. 
J.  Beauty parlors. 
K.  Bicycle stores, including bicycle rental, repair or sales. 
L.  Blueprinting, photostatting or instant printing establishments under 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
M.  Business machine sales or services stores. 
N.  Camera and photo stores. 
O.  Candy or ice cream stores. 
P.  Carpet and rug stores. 
Q.  Catering establishments. 
R.  Clothes pressing or tailoring shops. 
S.  Department stores. 
T.  Drug stores. 
U.  Dry cleaning or laundry establishments. 
V.  Florist shops. 
W.  Food, grocery, meat, fish, bakery or delicatessen stores. 
X.  Furniture stores. 
Y.  Hardware stores. 
Z.  Hobby or toy stores. 
AA.  Interior decorating studios. 
BB.  Jewelry stores. 
CC.  Laboratories (medical or dental). 
DD.  Leather goods or luggage shops. 
EE.  Libraries. 
FF.  Locksmith shops. 
GG.  Medical or dental clinics. 
HH.  Newsstands. 
II.  "Off-sale" liquor stores. 
JJ.  Offices, including both business and professional uses. 
KK.  "On-sale" liquor stores. 
LL.  Optical stores. 
MM.  Orthopedic or medical appliance stores. 
NN.  Paint or wallpaper stores. 
OO.  Pickup and delivery food establishments, provided that no seating is provided and that no facilities exist for customer dining on the premises. 
PP.  Pet shops. 
QQ.  Phonograph, record or sheet music stores. 
RR.  Photography studios. 
SS.  Physical fitness, health service establishments, or reducing salons. 
TT.  Picture framing or picture stores. 
UU.  Pipe or tobacco shops. 
VV.  Post offices. 
WW.  Plumbing sales 
XX.  Public utility service stores. 
YY.  Schools, such as music, dance, business or vocational schools. 
ZZ.  Sporting goods stores. 
AAA.  Taxidermy shops. 
BBB.  Theaters, excluding drive-ins. 
CCC.  Variety, gift, notion or soft good stores. 
DDD.  Wearing apparel stores. 
EEE.  Coffee shops. 
FFF.  Municipal parks and playgrounds. 
976.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the C-2 district and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  Auto glass installation, internal to a shopping center complex. 
976.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in a "C-2" District: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses allowed in Sections 976.02 and 976.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
C.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
D.  Bus or taxi loading and unloading facilities. 
E.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes in the public right of way for which a permit has been issued by the City pursuant to City Code Ch. 315. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
976.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a "C-2" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Freestanding Automobile Service Station and/or Motor Repair-Minor. Motor fuel station, auto repair-minor, tire and battery stores and service, and/or other such limited services, provided that: 
1.  No building or structure, permanent or temporary, driveway surfaces, parking areas, advertising devices or other similar site improvements, except driveways traversing a public road boulevard, shall be located within 110 feet of any part of a residential district which is separated from the automobile service station by a public right-of-way or within 50 feet of a residential district if they are not separated by a public right-of-way. 
2.  Sites for such facilities are freestanding and not part of a principal shopping center structure and shall have not less than 125 feet of frontage on the side or sides of the site to or from which access or egress at two or more locations is possible and not less than 120 feet of frontage if there is only one point of access. The total site area shall be not less than 20,000 square feet for each service bay, to a maximum of 60,000 total square feet. 
3.  Pump islands shall be set back not less than 30 feet from any property line and not less than 50 feet from any residential district boundary. 
4.  Hydraulic hoists or pits and all lubrication, greasing, washing, repair or diagnostic equipment shall be used totally enclosed within a building. 
5.  Facilities on a site contiguous to any residential district shall not be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless otherwise allowed by formal action of the City Council. 
6.  Facilities may offer minor auto repairs, but they shall not offer major auto repairs, the sale or storage of junked cars, or automobile wrecking. 
7.  Safety. Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the standards and requirements imposed by this Ordinance for motor fuel stations shall apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to other requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property. 
8.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance, scale, and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot. 
9.  Surfacing. The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City. 
10.  Drainage. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City shall be installed. 
11.  Curbing. A concrete curb not less than six inches above grade shall separate the public sidewalk from motor vehicles service areas. 
12.  Pump Islands. Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed. 
13.  Green Strip. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918. 
14.  Lighting Standard Base Landscaped. Each light standard base shall be landscaped. 
15.  Stacking, parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of a butting residential districts in compliance with Chapter 918. 
16.  Vehicle Circulation. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement. Provisions shall be made for transport delivery of fuel which will not conflict with pump island service. 
17.  Noise. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise in accordance with the Noise Control Section of this Ordinance. 
18.  Outside Storage. No outside storage except as allowed in compliance with Section 916.12 of this Ordinance. 
19.  Litter Control. The operation shall be responsible for litter control within 500 feet of the property line and is to occur on a daily basis. 
20.  Sales Limitations. Sale of products other than those specifically mentioned in this Section shall be subject to a conditional use permit and be in compliance with Section 976.05.I of this Ordinance. 
21.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Convenience Store with Gasoline. Grocery and/or food operations, with convenience gas (no vehicle service or repair), provided that: 
1.  Permitted Uses. The retail sales involve uses or activities which are allowed in a C-1, C-2 or C-3 District. 
2.  Take-Out Food. Convenience/deli food is of the take-out type only and that no provision for seating or consumption on the premises is provided. Furthermore, that the enclosed are devoted to such activity, use and merchandise shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area. 
3.  Sanitation. That any sale of food items is subject to the approval of the City Health Inspector who shall provide specific written sanitary requirements for each proposed sale location based upon applicable State and County regulations. 
4.  Licenses. That the non-automotive sales shall qualify for and be granted an annual food handling, retail sales license or other license, as circumstances shall require, in addition to the conditional use permit. 
5.  Litter Control. The operation shall be responsible for litter control within 500 feet of the property line and is to occur on a daily basis. 
6.  Area. That the approximate area and location devoted to non-automatic merchandise sales shall be specified in general terms in the application and in the conditional use permit. Exterior sales shall be subject to a separate conditional use permit. 
7.  Hours of Operation. The hours of operation shall be limited to 6.00 a.m. to 12.00 p.m., unless extended by the City Council. 
8.  Motor Fuel Facilities. Motor fuel facilities are installed in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and unloading operations do not conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands. 
9.  Canopy. A protective canopy located over pump island may be an accessory structure on the property and may be located 20 feet or more from the front lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off-site is maintained. 
10.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot. All sides of the principal and accessory structures are to have essentially the same or a coordinated, harmonious finish treatment. 
11.  Dust Control and Drainage. The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City. 
12.  Area. A minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet and minimum lot frontage of 125 feet. The City Council may exempt previously developed or previously platted property from this requirement, provided that the site is capable of adequately and safety handling all activities and required facilities. 
13.  Curb Separation. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches above grade shall separate the public sidewalk from motor vehicle areas, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 920. 
14.  Landscaping. At the boundaries of the lot, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 920. 
15.  Light Standards Base Landscaped. Each light standard base shall be landscaped. 
16.  Access. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, and shall be subject to the approval of the City. 
17.  Pedestrian Traffic. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by parked cars or moving vehicles. 
18.  Noise. Noise control shall be as required in the Noise Control Section of this Ordinance. 
19.  Outside Storage and Sales. No outside storage except as allowed in compliance with Section 916.12. An enclosed screened area is to be provided for rubbish and dumpsters. 
20.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Drive-in facilities for banks, or savings and loan associations, provided that: 
1.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance, scale, construction materials, and functional plan of the building and site shall not be dissimilar to the existing nearby commercial and residential buildings, and shall not cause impairment in property values, or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the site. 
2.  Vehicle Access. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements. 
3.  Surfacing. The entire area other than that portion occupied by buildings or structures or plantings shall be surfaced with a material which will control dust and drainage and which is subject to the approval of the City. 
4.  Drive-through Windows. Service windows shall be allowed if the following additional criteria are satisfied: 
a)  Stacking. Not less than 180 feet of segregated automobile stacking lane(s) must be provided for the service window. 
b)  Traffic Control. The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a manner to protect the pedestrians, buildings and green area on the site. 
c)  Use of Street. No part of the public street or boulevard may be used for stacking of automobiles. 
d)  Noise. The stacking lane, service intercom, and service window shall be designed and located in such a manner as to minimize automobile and communication noises, emissions, and headlight glare upon adjacent premises, particularly residential premises, and to maximize maneuverability of vehicles on the site. Levels of noise, light, and air quality shall occur and be measured at property lines and shall satisfy established state regulations. 
e)  Hours. Hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic, noise and glare upon any existing neighboring residential uses. 
f)  Green Strip. At any common boundary shared with a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened so as to create an effective visual and sound buffer and separation of uses. 
g)  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Indoor amusement or recreational establishments, such as commercial bowling alleys, billiard halls, game centers, swimming pools, skating rinks, or tennis courts as a principal use, provided that: 
1.  If located within a shopping center, the use has its own exclusive exterior access. 
2.  Any and all applicable local, state and federal laws, permits licenses and operational regulations are complied with. 
3.  The use is located and developed so as not to create an incompatible operation problem with adjoining and neighboring commercial and/or residential uses. 
4.  The hours of operation shall be subject to City Council control and change as a means to maintain compatibility of uses and activities. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Repair stores or "fix-it" shops which provide services for the repair of home, garden, yard or personal appliances, provided that: 
1.  The use is conducted completely indoors. 
2.  The site shall accommodate sufficient parking and loading areas in conformance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Restaurants, excluding drive-ins or convenience food operations, provided that: 
1.  The use obtains all local, state and federal food and beverage handling licenses and/or permits. 
2.  There shall be no excessive noise or odors emitted from the use. 
3.  There shall be no outdoor storage and/or display. 
4.  The hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic, noise and glare upon any existing neighboring residential uses. 
5.  The use must be landscaped and screened in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Restaurant, convenience food, provided that: 
1.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance, scale, construction materials, and functional plan of the building and site shall not be dissimilar to the existing nearby commercial buildings, and shall not cause impairment in property values, or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the site. 
2.  Green Strip. At any common boundary shared with a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened so as to create an effective visual and sound buffer and separation of uses. 
3.  Lighting Standard Base Landscaping. Each light standard base island and all islands in the parking lot landscaped or covered. The light source is hooded to prevent glare onto adjoining property and the public right-of-way. 
4.  Curbing. Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous concrete curbs not less than six inches high above the parking lot or driveway grade. 
5.  Vehicle Access. Vehicular access points shall be limited and shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements. 
6.  Drainage. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
7.  Surfacing. The entire area other than that portion occupied by buildings or structures or plantings shall be surfaced with a material which will control dust and drainage and which is subject to the approval of the City. 
8.  Loading Berth. Adequate space shall be provided on the site for a loading berth to accommodate the parking and maneuvering of semi-tractor trailers. 
9.  Refuse Storage. All refuse shall be stored in containers as specified by City Code. Said containers are to be screened and enclosed by a fence or similar structure. 
10.  Litter Control. The operation shall be responsible for litter control within 500 feet of the property line and is to occur on a daily basis. 
11.  Drive-Through Windows. Service windows shall be allowed if the following additional criteria are satisfied: 
a)  Stacking. Not less than 180 feet of segregated automobile stacking lane must be provided for the service window. 
b)  Traffic Control. The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a manner to protect the pedestrians, buildings and green area on the site. 
c)  Use of Street. No part of the public street or boulevard may be used for stacking of automobiles. 
d)  Noise. The stacking lane, order board intercom, and service window shall be designed and located in such a manner as to minimize automobile and communication noises, emissions, and headlight glare upon adjacent premises, particularly residential premises, and to maximize maneuverability of vehicles on the site. Levels of noise, light, and air quality shall be measured at property lines and shall satisfy established state regulations. 
e)  Hours. Hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic, noise and glare upon any existing neighboring residential uses. 
12.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
H.  Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting "R" Districts. 
2.  Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
3.  Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced. 
4.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
5.  The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
I.  Open or outdoor services, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that: 
1.  Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to 30 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. Uses specified as requiring a separate conditional use permit shall be exempted from this provision. 
2.  Outside sales areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting "R" District. 
3.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
4.  Areas are asphalt or concrete surfaced. 
5.  The use does not take up parking space or loading areas as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  Additional parking, pursuant to Chapter 920 of this Ordinance is provided for said space. 
7.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
J.  Child care facilities as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The attendance of children is on a temporary sporadic basis as compared to a long-term schedule enrollment. 
2.  The facility must allow the children to stay for a period longer than three hours. The maximum length of stay per individual child is five hours. 
3.  The ages of the children attending range from 16 months to 12 years. 
4.  The hours of operation coincide with those of the commercial retail stores in the area or complex. 
5.  The employees and facility are licensed by the State Department of Human Services. 
6.  Fire codes as applicable are complied with. 
7.  Liability insurance coverage for the operation is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City, and includes the City as an additional named insured. 
8.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
K.  Automobile parking lots of four or more spaces as a principal use or other than those accessory to the principal use, provided that: 
1.  The provisions of Chapter 920, of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
L.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
M.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
N.  Micro-production Facility, provided that: 
1.  Licensing. The owner of the micro-production facility qualifies for and receives all federal, state and city licenses necessary for the operation of the micro-production facility, including a brewer license and a malt liquor wholesale license (if wholesale of malt liquor is an intended activity); winery license; and/or a distiller's license from the State of Minnesota, according Minn. Stats.  340A. 
2.  Taproom/Tasting Room License. An accessory taproom or tasting room for the on-sale of beer, wine, or spirits produced on-site shall require a taproom/tasting room license from the City of Wayzata, according to City Code Section 524.02. 
3.  Off-sale. On-site sale of beer in the form of growlers shall require a Brewery License for Off-Sale of Malt Liquor, according to City Code Section 524.02. On-site sale of wine or spirits, other than samples as governed under Minnesota State Statutes, shall be prohibited. 
4.  Production of Beer. Total production of malt liquor shall not exceed 5,000 barrels annually. Micro-production Facilities with a taproom license shall not exceed 3,500 barrels annually, and only 500 barrels may be sold off-sale as growlers. Any micro-production facility operating as a brewery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a brewery taproom or off-sale malt liquor license. 
5.  Production of Wine. Total production of wine shall not exceed 50,000 gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a winery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or winery license. 
6.  Production of Spirits. Total production of spirits shall not exceed 40,000 proof gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a distillery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or distillery license. 
7.  Off-street Loading. The micro-production facility shall provide adequate space for off-street loading and unloading of all trucks greater than 22 feet in length. In the absence of off-street loading, the City may impose limits on deliveries or shipments using the public rights of ways, including regulating the number of trucks per day and the hours that deliveries are permitted. 
8.  Outdoor Storage. No outdoor storage is permitted on the site, with the exception that waste handling (refuse and/or recycling) may occur in an enclosure that is fully screened from adjoining streets and residentially zoned properties. 
9.  Odors. No odors from the micro-production facility shall be perceptible beyond the property line. The micro-production facility operator shall take appropriate measures to reduce or mitigate any odors generated from the operation and be in compliance with any applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Standards. 
10.  Waste. Waste products shall be disposed of in a timely manner and in such a way to reduce odors. 
11.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed in such a way as to have no direction source of light visible from adjacent property, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 916.06 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
12.  Parking. Parking supply shall be provided on-site or through off-site arrangement, to avoid street parking on residential streets. Off-site or reduced parking supply shall require separate approval per the requirements of Chapter 920 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, as applicable. 
13.  Hours of Operation. Micro-production facility operation hours shall be limited to the hours specified in Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A for off-sale intoxicating liquor unless further limited the City Council as part of a Conditional Use Permit. 
14.  Other Provisions. The provisions of Section 904.02.F of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, pertaining to Conditional Use Permit criteria, are considered and satisfactorily met. A micro-production facility shall meet all other applicable performance standards and design requirements in the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
976.06 - Special Limitations and Conditions. 
A.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. 
B.  Each business establishment shall be operated as a separate and distinct business entity. Each business establishment shall be physically separate from any other such establishment by solid walls, partitions or windows, although nothing in this paragraph is intended to prevent either common ownership or free pedestrian movement from one establishment to another through either an area commonly owned or leased by all adjoining establishments or through direct doorway connections. All business establishments shall be accessible from the exterior of the building in which they are located by either a direct door to the exterior or by direct access to a "common area" which in turn has adequate access to the exterior of the building without passing through another business establishment. 
976.07 - Height, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "C-2" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Height. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed three stories and 35 feet in height, whichever is lesser. 
B.  Setback. 
1.  There shall be a side yard on each side of any building having a width of not less than 20 feet, except that no building shall be located within 50 feet of any side lot line abutting a lot in any residential district. 
2.  There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet, except that no buildings shall be located within 50 feet of any residential district. 
3.  The minimum building setback from any commercial district boundary shall be as set forth herein or the average height of the building, whichever is greater. 
C.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 1.0. 
D.  Lot Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 20,000 square feet. 
E.  Required Landscaping. A minimum of 20 percent of the total lot area shall be landscaped. A landscaped buffer strip of at least eight feet wide shall be provided between parking areas and adjacent streets or sidewalks. The buffer strip shall consist of shade trees at maximum intervals of 30 feet and a decorative fence, masonry wall, or hedge. 
976.08. - Administrative Procedure. 
Requests for shopping centers within the C-2 Zoning District shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and procedures of Chapter 933 (Planned Unit Development) of this Ordinance. 
CHAPTER 977 - C-3 SERVICE DISTRICT 

977.01 - Purpose. 
The C-3 District is intended to provide an area of service facilities to the motoring public. Because of the unique character of this type of commercial activity and its great dependence upon transient trade and traffic, and because of the greater than normal adverse effects created by the uses within this district, the location of such activities are critical and should be developed either within other commercial spheres adjacent to arterial traffic routes or as well-buffered areas adjacent to major streets. This district also is intended as a business district which may be located adjacent to shopping centers or other retail business districts, thus keeping the basic retail areas compact and convenient, or in separate areas which may be located in close proximity to a major street or highway, in order that highway service types of land uses can be provided. 
977.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in a "C-3" District: 
A.  Adult Use-Principal and Accessory. 
B.  Antique shops. 
C.  Appliance sales or service stores. 
D.  Art galleries or studios. 
E.  Art supply, school supply, book or stationery stores. 
F.  Automotive accessory stores. 
G.  Bakeries, provided the room or rooms containing the preparation and baking process shall not have a gross floor area in excess of 2,400 square feet. 
H.  Banks, savings, lending or other financial institutions, excluding drive-in facilities. 
I.  Barber shops. 
J.  Beauty parlors. 
K.  Bicycle stores, including bicycle rental, repair or sales. 
L.  Blueprinting, photostatting or instant printing establishments under 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
M.  Business machine sales or services stores. 
N.  Camera and photo stores. 
O.  Candy or ice cream stores. 
P.  Carpet and rug stores. 
Q.  Catering establishments. 
R.  Clothes pressing or tailoring shops. 
S.  Department stores. 
T.  Drug stores. 
U.  Dry cleaning or laundry establishments. 
V.  Florist shops. 
W.  Food, grocery, meat, fish, bakery or delicatessen stores. 
X.  Furniture stores. 
Y.  Hardware stores. 
Z.  Hobby or toy stores. 
AA.  Interior decorating studios. 
BB.  Jewelry stores. 
CC.  Laboratories (medical or dental). 
DD.  Leather goods or luggage shops. 
EE.  Libraries. 
FF.  Locksmith shops. 
GG.  Medical or dental clinics. 
HH.  Monument sales, excluding processing. 
II.  Mortuaries or funeral homes. 
JJ.  Newspaper distribution agencies. 
KK.  Newsstands. 
LL.  "Off-sale" liquor stores. 
MM.  Offices, including both business and professional uses. 
NN.  "On-sale" liquor stores. 
OO.  Optical stores. 
PP.  Orthopedic or medical appliance stores. 
QQ.  Paint or wallpaper stores. 
RR.  Pickup and delivery food establishments, provided that no seating is provided and that no facilities exist for customer dining on the premises. 
SS.  Pet shops. 
TT.  Phonograph, record or sheet music stores. 
UU.  Photography studios. 
VV.  Physical fitness, health service establishments, or reducing salons. 
WW.  Picture framing or picture stores. 
XX.  Pipe or tobacco shops. 
YY.  Post offices. 
ZZ.  Plumbing sales 
AAA.  Public utility service stores. 
BBB.  Recording studios. 
CCC.  Rental agencies for the rental of automobiles, trucks or carriage trailers. 
DDD.  Repair stores or "fix it" shops which provide services for the repair of home, garden, yard or personal appliances. 
EEE.  Schools, such as music, dance, business or vocational schools. 
FFF.  Sporting goods stores. 
GGG.  Taxidermy shops. 
HHH.  Theaters, excluding drive-ins. 
III.  Trading stamp redemption centers. 
JJJ.  Variety, gift, notion or soft good stores. 
KKK.  Wearing apparel stores. 
LLL.  Coffee shops. 
MMM.  Municipal parks and playgrounds. 
977.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the C-3 District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
977.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in a "C-3" District: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in Sections 977.02 and 977.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
C.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
D.  Bus or taxi loading and unloading facilities. 
E.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes in the public right of way for which a permit has been issued by the City pursuant to City Code Ch. 315. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
977.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a "C-3" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Freestanding Automobile Service Station and Auto Repair-Minor. Motor fuel station, auto repair-minor, tire and battery stores and service, and/or other such limited services, provided that: 
1.  No building or structure, permanent or temporary, driveway surfaces, parking areas, advertising devices or other similar site improvements, except driveways traversing a public road boulevard, shall be located within 110 feet of any part of a residential district which is separated from the automobile service station by a public right-of-way or within 50 feet of a residential district if they are not separated by a public road right-of-way. 
2.  Sites for such facilities are freestanding and not internal to a principal shopping center structure and shall have not less than 125 feet of frontage on the side or sides of the site to or from which access or egress at two or more locations is possible and not less than 120 feet of frontage if there is only one point of access. The total site area shall be not less than 20,000 square feet for each service bay, to a maximum of 60,000 total square feet. 
3.  Pump islands shall be set back not less than 30 feet from any property line and not less than 50 feet from any residential district boundary. 
4.  Hydraulic hoists or pits and all lubrication, greasing, washing, repair or diagnostic equipment shall be used totally enclosed within a building. 
5.  Facilities on a site contiguous to any residential district shall be not operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless otherwise allowed by formal action of the City Council. 
6.  Facilities may offer minor auto repairs, but they shall not offer major auto repairs, the sale or storage of junked cars, or automobile wrecking. 
7.  Safety. Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the standards and requirements imposed by this Ordinance for motor fuel stations shall apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to other requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property. 
8.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot. 
9.  Surfacing. The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City. 
10.  Drainage. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City shall be installed. 
11.  Curbing. A concrete curb not less than six inches above grade shall separate the public sidewalk from motor vehicles service areas. 
12.  Pump Islands. Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed. 
13.  Green Strip. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918. 
14.  Lighting Standard Base Landscaped. Each light standard base shall be landscaped. 
15.  Stacking. Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with Chapter 918. 
16.  Vehicle Circulation. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement. Provisions shall be made for transport delivery of fuel which will not conflict with pump island service. 
17.  Noise. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise in accordance with the Noise Control Section of this Ordinance. 
18.  Outside Storage. No outside storage except as allowed in compliance with Section 916.12 of this Ordinance. 
19.  Sales Limitations. Sale of products other than those specifically mentioned in this Section be subject to a conditional use permit and be in compliance with Section 976.05.I of this Ordinance. 
20.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Convenience Store with Gasoline. Grocery and/or food operations, with convenience gas (no vehicle service or repair), provided that: 
1.  Permitted Uses. The retail sales involve uses or activities which are allowed in a C-1, C-2 or C-3 District. 
2.  Take-Out Food. Convenience/deli food is of the take-out type only and that no provision for seating or consumption on the premises is provided. Furthermore, that the enclosed are devoted to such activity, use and merchandise shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area. 
3.  Sanitation. That any sale of food items is subject to the approval of the City Health Inspector who shall provide specific written sanitary requirements for each proposed sale location based upon applicable State and County regulations. 
4.  Licenses. That the non-automotive sales shall qualify for and be granted an annual food handling, retail sales license or other license, as circumstances shall require, in addition to the conditional use permit. 
5.  Litter Control. The operation shall be responsible for litter control within 300 feet of the premises and is to occur on a daily basis. 
6.  Area. That the approximate area and location devoted to non-automatic merchandise sales shall be specified in general terms in the application and in the conditional use permit. Exterior sales shall be subject to a separate conditional use permit. 
7.  Hours of Operation. The hours of operation shall be limited to 6.00 a.m. to 12.00 p.m., unless extended by the City Council. 
8.  Motor Fuel Facilities. Motor fuel facilities are installed in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and unloading operations do not conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands. 
9.  Canopy. A protective canopy located over pump island may be an accessory structure on the property and may be located 20 feet or more from the front lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and off-site is maintained. 
10.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance, scale, and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot. All sides of the principal and accessory structures are to have essentially the same or a coordinated, harmonious finish treatment. 
11.  Dust Control and Drainage. The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City. 
12.  Area. A minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet and minimum lot frontage of 125 feet. The City Council may exempt previously developed or previously platted property from this requirement, provided that the site is capable of adequately and safety handling all activities and required facilities. 
13.  Curb Separation. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches above grade shall separate the public sidewalk from motor vehicle areas, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 920. 
14.  Landscaping. At the boundaries of the lot, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 920. 
15.  Light Standard Base Landscaped. Each light standard base shall be landscaped. 
16.  Access. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, and shall be subject to the approval of the City. 
17.  Pedestrian Traffic. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by parked cars or moving vehicles. 
18.  Noise. Noise control shall be as required in the Noise Control Section of this Ordinance. 
19.  Outside Storage and Sales. No outside storage except as allowed in compliance with Section 916.12. An enclosed screened area is to be provided for outside rubbish and dumpsters. 
20.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Drive-in facilities for banks, or savings and loan associations, provided that: 
1.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance, scale, construction materials, and functional plan of the building and site shall not be dissimilar to the existing nearby commercial and residential buildings, and shall not cause impairment in property values, or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the site. 
2.  Vehicle Access. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements. 
3.  Surfacing. The entire area other than that portion occupied by buildings or structures or plantings shall be surfaced with a material which will control dust and drainage and which is subject to the approval of the City. 
4.  Drive-through Windows. Service windows shall be allowed if the following additional criteria are satisfied: 
a)  Stacking. Not less than 180 feet of segregated automobile stacking lane(s) must be provided for the service window. 
b)  Traffic Control. The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a manner to protect the pedestrians, buildings and green area on the site. 
c)  Use of Street. No part of the public street or boulevard may be used for stacking of automobiles. 
d)  Noise. The stacking lane, service intercom, and service window shall be designed and located in such a manner as to minimize automobile and communication noises, emissions, and headlight glare upon adjacent premises, particularly residential premises, and to maximize maneuverability of vehicles on the site. Levels of noise, light, and air quality shall occur and be measured at property lines and shall satisfy established state regulations. 
e)  Hours. Hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic, noise and glare upon any existing neighboring residential uses. 
f)  Green Strip. At any common boundary shared with a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened so as to create an effective visual and sound buffer and separation of uses. 
g)  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Indoor amusement or recreational establishments, commercial bowling alleys, billiard halls, game centers, swimming pools, skating rinks or tennis courts as a principal use, provided that: 
1.  If located within a shopping center, the use has its own exclusive exterior access. 
2.  Any and all applicable local, state and federal laws, permits licenses and operational regulations are complied with. 
3.  The use is located and developed so as not to create an incompatible operation problem with adjoining and neighboring commercial and/or residential uses. 
4.  The hours of operation shall be subject to City Council control and change as a means to maintain compatibility of uses and activities. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Repair stores or "fix-it" shops which provide services for the repair of home, garden, yard or personal appliances, provided that: 
1.  The use is conducted completely indoors. 
2.  The site shall accommodate sufficient parking and loading areas in conformance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Restaurants, excluding drive-ins or convenience food operations, provided that: 
1.  The use obtains all local, state and federal food and beverage handling licenses and/or permits. 
2.  There shall be no excessive noise or odors emitted from the use. 
3.  There shall be no outdoor storage and/or display. 
4.  The hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic, noise and glare upon any existing neighboring residential uses. 
5.  The use must be landscaped and screened in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Restaurant, convenience food, provided that: 
1.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance, scale, construction materials, and functional plan of the building and site shall not be dissimilar to the existing nearby commercial buildings, and shall not cause impairment in property values, or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the site. 
2.  Green Strip. At any common boundary shared with a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened so as to create an effective visual and sound buffer and separation of uses. 
3.  Lighting. Each light standard base island and all islands in the parking lot landscaped or covered. The light source is hooded to prevent glare onto adjoining property and the public right-of-way. 
4.  Curbing. Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous concrete curbs not less than six inches high above the parking lot or driveway grade. 
5.  Vehicle Access. Vehicular access points shall be limited and shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements. 
6.  Drainage. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
7.  Surfacing. The entire area other than that portion occupied by buildings or structures or plantings shall be surfaced with a material which will control dust and drainage and which is subject to the approval of the City. 
8.  Loading Berth. Adequate space shall be provided on the site for a loading berth to accommodate the parking and maneuvering of semi-tractor trailers. 
9.  Refuse Storage. All refuse shall be stored in containers as specified by City Code. Said containers are to be screened and enclosed by a fence or similar structure. 
10.  Litter Control. The operation shall be responsible for litter control within 500 feet of the property line and is to occur on a daily basis. 
11.  Drive-Through Windows. Service windows shall be allowed if the following additional criteria are satisfied: 
a)  Stacking. Not less than 180 feet of segregated automobile stacking lane must be provided for the service window. 
b)  Traffic Control. The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a manner to protect the pedestrians, buildings and green area on the site. 
c)  Use of Street. No part of the public street or boulevard may be used for stacking of automobiles. 
d)  Noise. The stacking lane, order board intercom, and service window shall be designed and located in such a manner as to minimize automobile and communication noises, emissions, and headlight glare upon adjacent premises, particularly residential premises, and to maximize maneuverability of vehicles on the site. Levels of noise, light, and air quality shall be measured at property lines and shall satisfy established state regulations. 
e)  Hours. Hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic, noise and glare upon any existing neighboring residential uses. 
12.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
H.  Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting "R" Districts. 
2.  Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
3.  Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced. 
4.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
5.  The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
I.  Open or outdoor services, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that: 
1.  Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to 30 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. Uses specified as requiring a separate conditional use permit shall be exempted from this provision. 
2.  Outside sales areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting "R" District. 
3.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
4.  Areas are asphalt or concrete surfaced. 
5.  The use does not take up parking space or loading areas as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  Additional parking, pursuant to Chapter 920 of this Ordinance is provided for said space. 
7.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
J.  Child care facilities as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The attendance of children is on a temporary sporadic basis as compared to a long-term schedule enrollment. 
2.  The facility must allow the children to stay for a period longer than three hours. The maximum length of stay per individual child is five hours. 
3.  The ages of the children attending range from 16 months to 12 years. 
4.  The hours of operation coincide with those of the commercial retail stores in the area or complex. 
5.  The employees and facility are licensed by the State Department of Human Services. 
6.  Fire codes as applicable are complied with. 
7.  Liability insurance coverage for the operation is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City, and includes the City as an additional named insured. 
8.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
K.  Animal hospitals, animal clinics or kennels, excluding establishments with outside runs, provided that: 
1.  Any building in which animals are kept, whether roofed sheltered or enclosed structure, shall be located a distance of 100 feet or more from any lot line. 
2.  The animals shall, at a minimum, be kept in an enclosed pen or corral of sufficient height and strength to retain such animals. Said pen or corral may not be located closer than 100 feet from a lot line. 
3.  The provisions of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Regulations SW 53(2) are complied with. 
4.  All other applicable state and local regulations pertaining to nuisance, health and safety conditions, etc. are complied with. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
L.  Automobile agencies, used car lots, automobile washes, boat or marine stores or agencies and major auto repair which as a principal or accessory use, in accordance with the provisions of Section 977.06, provided that: 
1.  The use is adequately screened from view of neighboring residential uses. 
2.  Adequate measures are taken to control noise levels. 
3.  Adequate measures are taken to control pollution and emissions exhaust. 
4.  Hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic noise and glare upon any existing neighboring residential uses. 
5.  Vehicle Access. Vehicular access points shall be limited and shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements. 
6.  Lighting. Each light standard base island and all islands in the parking lot landscaped or covered. The light source is hooded to prevent glare onto adjoining property and the public right-of-way. 
7.  Compatibility. The architectural appearance, scale, construction materials, and function plan of the building and site shall not be dissimilar to the existing nearby commercial buildings and shall not cause impairment in property values, or constitute a blighting influence within reasonable distance of the site. 
8.  Green Strip. At any common boundary shared with a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened so as to create an effective visual and sound buffer and separation of uses. 
9.  Drainage. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
10.  Surfacing. The entire area other than that portion occupied by buildings or structures or plantings shall be surfaced with a material which will control dust and drainage and which is subject to the approval of the City. 
11.  Parking and Loading. Adequate parking and loading spaces shall be provided on the site including adequate room to accommodate the parking and maneuvering of cars and/or semi-tractor trailers in conformance with Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
12.  Refuse Storage. All refuse shall be stored in containers as specified by the City Code. Said containers are to be fully screened and enclosed by a fence or similar structure. 
13.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
M.  Miniature golf courses, par three golf courses, archery ranges, tennis courts or golf driving ranges, provided that: 
1.  The entire perimeter of the site is fenced in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect of nuisance factors such as traffic noise and glare upon any existing neighboring residential uses. 
3.  Lighting. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed to prevent glare onto adjacent properties and/or roads. 
4.  The site is well maintained, landscaped and screened in accordance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
N.  Motels, hotels, lodges, or boarding houses, provided that: 
1.  All State regulations are complied with including obtaining all required permits and/or licenses. 
2.  Parking and loading areas are in conformance with the parking and loading ordinances outlined in Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The parking and loading spaces shall not be located within the front yard of a lot and must meet all applicable provisions of the parking and loading ordinance. 
4.  The site shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
O.  Nursery or garden stores or retail greenhouses, provided that: 
1.  There are no growing fields on the site. 
2.  Outdoor sales/display area shall be limited to 30 percent of the gross lot area and be in conformance with the performance standards of Section 916.12 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
P.  Outdoor sale and display of fruits or vegetables, provided that: 
1.  The provisions of Section 916.12 of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
Q.  Commercial car washes (drive through, mechanical and self-service), provided that: 
1.  The architectural appearance, scale, and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence. 
2.  Magazine or stacking space is constructed to accommodate that number of vehicles which can be washed during a maximum 30-minute period and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
3.  At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
4.  Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot shall be landscaped or covered. 
5.  Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
6.  The entire area other than occupied by the building or plantings shall be surfaced with material which will control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
7.  The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
8.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall be in compliance with Section 916.06 of this Ordinance. 
9.  Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
10.  All signing and information or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
11.  Provisions are made to control and reduce noise. 
12.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
R.  Automobile parking lots of four or more spaces as a principal use or other than those accessory to the principal use, provided that: 
1.  The provisions of Chapter 920 of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
S.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
T.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
U.  Micro-production Facility, provided that: 
1.  Licensing. The owner of the micro-production facility qualifies for and receives all federal, state and city licenses necessary for the operation of the micro-production facility, including a brewer license and a malt liquor wholesale license (if wholesale of malt liquor is an intended activity); winery license; and/or a distiller's license from the State of Minnesota, according to Minn. Stats.  340A. 
2.  Taproom/Tasting Room License. An accessory taproom or tasting room for the on-sale of beer, wine, or spirits produced on-site shall require a taproom/tasting room license from the City of Wayzata, according to City Code Section 524.02. 
3.  Off-sale. On-site sale of beer in the form of growlers shall require a Brewery License for Off-Sale of Malt Liquor, according to City Code Section 524.02. On-site sale of wine or spirits, other than samples as governed under Minnesota State Statutes, shall be prohibited. 
4.  Production of Beer. Total production of malt liquor shall not exceed 5,000 barrels annually. Micro-production Facilities with a taproom license shall not exceed 3,500 barrels annually, and only 500 barrels may be sold off-sale as growlers. Any micro-production facility operating as a brewery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a brewery taproom or off-sale malt liquor license. 
5.  Production of Wine. Total production of wine shall not exceed 50,000 gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a winery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or winery license. 
6.  Production of Spirits. Total production of spirits shall not exceed 40,000 proof gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a distillery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or distillery license. 
7.  Off-street Loading. The micro-production facility shall provide adequate space for off-street loading and unloading of all trucks greater than 22 feet in length. In the absence of off-street loading, the City may impose limits on deliveries or shipments using the public rights of ways, including regulating the number of trucks per day and the hours that deliveries are permitted. 
8.  Outdoor Storage. No outdoor storage is permitted on the site, with the exception that waste handling (refuse and/or recycling) may occur in an enclosure that is fully screened from adjoining streets and residentially zoned properties. 
9.  Odors. No odors from the micro-production facility shall be perceptible beyond the property line. The micro-production facility operator shall take appropriate measures to reduce or mitigate any odors generated from the operation and be in compliance with any applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Standards. 
10.  Waste. Waste products shall be disposed of in a timely manner and in such a way to reduce odors. 
11.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed in such a way as to have no direction source of light visible from adjacent property, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 916.06 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
12.  Parking. Parking supply shall be provided on-site or through off-site arrangement, to avoid street parking on residential streets. Off-site or reduced parking supply shall require separate approval per the requirements of Chapter 920 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, as applicable. 
13.  Hours of Operation. Micro-production facility operation hours shall be limited to the hours specified in Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A for off-sale intoxicating liquor unless further limited the City Council as part of a Conditional Use Permit. 
14.  Other Provisions. The provisions of Section 904.02.F of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, pertaining to Conditional Use Permit criteria, are considered and satisfactorily met. A micro-production facility shall meet all other applicable performance standards and design requirements in the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
977.06 - Height, Setback and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "C-3" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance. The following lot coverage, height and bulk shall be observed in a "C-3" District. 
A.  Height. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed two stories and 30 feet in height, whichever is lesser. 
B.  Setback. 
1.  Front. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than ten feet. 
2.  Side. There shall be a side yard on each side of any building having a width of not less than ten feet, except where a greater side yard is required to provide parking and loading, as required by Chapters 914 and 915, and except that no building shall be located within 50 feet of any side lot line abutting a residential district. 
3.  Rear. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than ten feet, except where a greater rear yard is required to provide parking and loading, as required by Chapters 914 and 915, and except that no building shall be located within 50 feet of any rear lot line abutting a residential district. 
C.  Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage of all buildings shall be 50 percent. 
D.  Lot Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 15,000 square feet. 
E.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 1.0. 
F.  Required Landscaping. A minimum of 20 percent of the total lot shall be landscaped and maintained. A landscaped buffer strip of at least eight feet wide shall be provided between parking areas and adjacent streets or sidewalks. The buffer strip shall consist of shade trees at maximum intervals of 30 feet and a decorative fence, masonry wall, or hedge. 
CHAPTER 978 - C-4 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

978.01 - Purpose. 
The C-4 District is intended to provide a district accommodating those retail, service and office functions which are characteristic to a "downtown" area and to allow the present downtown area to expand, develop and redevelop, with emphasis on specialty shops and office uses. Planned commercial development as provided for in this Ordinance will be encouraged so as to provide a cohesive and unified central business district in general accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
978.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in a "C-4" District: 
A.  Adult Use-Accessory. 
B.  Antique shops. 
C.  Appliance sales or service stores. 
D.  Art galleries or studios. 
E.  Art supply, school supply, book or stationery stores. 
F.  Bakeries, provided the room or rooms containing the preparation and baking process shall not have a gross floor area in excess of 2,400 square feet. 
G.  Banks, savings, lending or other financial institutions. 
H.  Barber shops. 
I.  Beauty parlors. 
J.  Blueprinting, photostatting or instant printing establishments under 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
K.  Business machine sales or service stores. 
L.  Camera and photo stores. 
M.  Candy or ice cream stores. 
N.  Carpet and rug stores (sample showrooms only). 
O.  Catering establishments. 
P.  Clothes pressing or tailoring shops. 
Q.  Department stores. 
R.  Drug stores. 
S.  Dry cleaning receiving and pick up or laundry self-service establishments, excluding commercial laundering and dry-cleaning. 
T.  Florist shops. 
U.  Food, grocery, meat, fish, bakery or delicatessen stores. 
V.  Furniture stores. 
W.  Hardware stores. 
X.  Hobby stores. 
Y.  Interior decorating studios. 
Z.  Jewelry stores. 
AA.  Laboratories (medical or dental). 
BB.  Leather goods or luggage shops. 
CC.  Libraries. 
DD.  Locksmith shops. 
EE.  Medical or dental clinics. 
FF.  Newsstands which are not free-standing. 
GG.  "Off-sale" liquor stores. 
HH.  Offices, including both business and professional uses. 
II.  "On-sale" liquor stores. 
JJ.  Optical stores. 
KK.  Paint or wallpaper stores. 
LL.  Parking or garages, other than those accessory to a principal use, for the parking and storage of private passenger automobiles only. 
MM.  Pawn shops. 
NN.  Pet shops. 
OO.  Phonograph, record or sheet music stores. 
PP.  Photography studios. 
QQ.  Picture framing or picture stores. 
RR.  Pipe tobacco shops. 
SS.  Post offices. 
TT.  Public utility service stores. 
UU.  Restaurants excluding the service of liquor and excluding convenience food establishments. 
VV.  Schools, such as music, dance, business or vocational schools. 
WW.  Sporting goods stores. 
XX.  Taxidermy shops. 
YY.  Theaters, excluding drive-ins. 
ZZ.  Variety, gift, notion or soft good stores. 
AAA.  Wearing apparel stores. 
BBB.  Coffee shops 
CCC.  Municipal parks and playgrounds. 
DDD.  Upper story dwelling units subject the density standards of the R-5 District. 
978.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the C-4 District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  None. 
978.04 - Accessory Uses. 
The following are permitted accessory uses in a "C-4" District: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in Sections 978.02 and 978.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
C.  Telephone booths. 
D.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
E.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
F.  Bus or taxi loading and unloading facilities. 
G.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes in the public right of way for which a permit has been issued by the City pursuant to City Code Ch. 315. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
978.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a "C-4" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Drive-in facilities for banks or savings and loan associations, provided that: 
1.  The driveway access shall not be on a residential street. 
2.  The curb cut setbacks and parking shall be in conformance with Chapter 920, the Parking Ordinance. 
3.  The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a manner to protect the pedestrians, buildings and green area on the site. 
4.  The service windows and driveway shall be screened from view if adjacent to a residentially used property. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Physical, culture or health service establishments or reducing salons, provided that: 
1.  The use shall not serve alcoholic beverages. 
2.  If located within a shopping center, the use has its own exclusive exterior access. 
3.  The use is located and developed so as not to create an incompatible operation problem with adjoining and neighboring commercial and/or residential uses. 
4.  Any and all applicable local, state and federal laws, permits licenses and operational regulations are complied with. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Accessory, enclosed retail, rental or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that: 
1.  Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a "B-1" or "B-2" District. 
2.  Such use does not constitute more than 30 percent of the lot area and not more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. 
3.  Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 920 of this Ordinance is provided. 
4.  All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Chapter 927 this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Drive-inns or convenience food establishments, provided that the provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Residential use as a principal use, provided that: 
1.  The development does not front or border Lake Street. 
2.  The development does not conflict with existing or potential future commercial uses and activities. 
3.  The density standards imposed as part of the R-5 Zoning District are complied with. 
4.  Adequate open space and recreational space is provided on site for the benefit of the occupants. 
5.  The development does not conflict or result in incompatible land use arrangements as related to abutting residential uses or commercial uses. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting "R" Districts. 
2.  Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
3.  Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced. 
4.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
5.  The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that: 
1.  Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to 30 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. 
2.  Outside sales areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting "R" District. 
3.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
4.  Areas are asphalt or concrete surfaced. 
5.  The use does not take up parking space or loading areas as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
H.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
I.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
J.  Existing clubs or lodges, provided that: 
1.  All State regulations are complied with including obtaining all required permits and/or licenses. 
2.  Parking and loading areas are in conformance with the parking and loading ordinances outlined in Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The parking and loading spaces shall not be located within the front yard of a lot and must meet all applicable provisions of the parking and loading ordinance. 
4.  The site shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
K.  Micro-production Facility, provided that: 
1.  Licensing. The owner of the micro-production facility qualifies for and receives all federal, state and city licenses necessary for the operation of the micro-production facility, including a brewer license and a malt liquor wholesale license (if wholesale of malt liquor is an intended activity); winery license; and/or a distiller's license from the State of Minnesota, according to Minn. Stats.  340A. 
2.  Taproom/Tasting Room License. An accessory taproom or tasting room for the on-sale of beer, wine, or spirits produced on-site shall require a taproom/tasting room license from the City of Wayzata, according to City Code Section 524.02. 
3.  Off-sale. On-site sale of beer in the form of growlers shall require a Brewery License for Off-Sale of Malt Liquor, according to City Code Section 524.02. On-site sale of wine or spirits, other than samples as governed under Minnesota State Statutes, shall be prohibited. 
4.  Production of Beer. Total production of malt liquor shall not exceed 5,000 barrels annually. Micro-production Facilities with a taproom license shall not exceed 3,500 barrels annually, and only 500 barrels may be sold off-sale as growlers. Any micro-production facility operating as a brewery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a brewery taproom or off-sale malt liquor license. 
5.  Production of Wine. Total production of wine shall not exceed 50,000 gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a winery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or winery license. 
6.  Production of Spirits. Total production of spirits shall not exceed 40,000 proof gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a distillery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or distillery license. 
7.  Off-street Loading. The micro-production facility shall provide adequate space for off-street loading and unloading of all trucks greater than 22 feet in length. In the absence of off-street loading, the City may impose limits on deliveries or shipments using the public rights of ways, including regulating the number of trucks per day and the hours that deliveries are permitted. 
8.  Outdoor Storage. No outdoor storage is permitted on the site, with the exception that waste handling (refuse and/or recycling) may occur in an enclosure that is fully screened from adjoining streets and residentially zoned properties. 
9.  Odors. No odors from the micro-production facility shall be perceptible beyond the property line. The micro-production facility operator shall take appropriate measures to reduce or mitigate any odors generated from the operation and be in compliance with any applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Standards. 
10.  Waste. Waste products shall be disposed of in a timely manner and in such a way to reduce odors. 
11.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed in such a way as to have no direction source of light visible from adjacent property, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 916.06 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
12.  Parking. Parking supply shall be provided on-site or through off-site arrangement, to avoid street parking on residential streets. Off-site or reduced parking supply shall require separate approval per the requirements of Chapter 920 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, as applicable. 
13.  Hours of Operation. Micro-production facility operation hours shall be limited to the hours specified in Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A for off-sale intoxicating liquor unless further limited the City Council as part of a Conditional Use Permit. 
14.  Other Provisions. The provisions of Section 904.02.F of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, pertaining to Conditional Use Permit criteria, are considered and satisfactorily met. A micro-production facility shall meet all other applicable performance standards and design requirements in the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
978.06 - Special Limitations and Conditions. 
A.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. 
B.  Each business establishment shall be operated as a separate and distinct business entity. Each business establishment shall be physically separate from any other such establishment by solid walls, partitions or windows, although nothing in this paragraph is intended to prevent either common ownership or free pedestrian movement from one establishment to another through either an area commonly owned or leased by all adjoining establishments or through direct doorway connections. All business establishments shall be accessible from the exterior of the building in which they are located by either a direct door to the exterior or by direct access to a "common area" which in turn has adequate access to the exterior of the building without passing through another business establishment 
C.  Retail or Commercial Use. At least 50 percent of the building frontage on the ground floor along Lake Street must be used for retail or service commercial use and should comprise at least 50 percent of the ground floor building footprint. 
D.  New Lake Street Buildings. All new buildings along Lake Street with a building footprint of 4,000 square feet or more shall be developed with more than one of the following uses. retail, service, residential, and office. Upper floors may be used for any permitted use including residential. 
E.  All buildings shall meet the defined sidewalk line except for small setbacks to provide outdoor seating, plazas or recess entries. 
F.  Parking in the front yard is prohibited. 
978.07 - Height, Setback and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "C-4" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance. The following lot coverage, height and bulk shall be observed in a "C-4" District: 
A.  Height. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed three stories and 35 feet in height, whichever is lesser. Three story buildings are subject to the following additional standards. 
1.  The third story must be set back from the building's front facade a minimum distance of ten feet; or 
2.  A portion of the third story, equal to no more than 25 percent of the building's street frontage may be located in the same plane as the building's front facade if the remainder of the third story is setback a minimum distance of 20 feet. 
B.  Setback. 
1.  There shall be no front yard, exterior side yard or rear yard requirements, except that there shall be a required setback from C-4 District boundaries when such boundaries are adjacent to a residential district the same as the setback for the adjacent district. 
C.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 2.0. 
D.  Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 12,000 square feet. 
CHAPTER 979 - C-4A LIMITED CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

979.01 - Purpose. 
The C-4A District is intended to provide a district accommodating those retail, service, office and residential functions which are characteristic to a "downtown" area and to allow the present downtown area to expand, develop and redevelop, with emphasis on specialty shops and office uses with continuous linear low level building designs. Such areas are to be characterized by individual store fronts with public sidewalk access, as contrasted to shopping mall type development. Planned commercial development as provided for in this Ordinance will be encouraged, so as to provide a cohesive and unified central business district in general accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
979.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses within the "C-4A" District: 
A.  Adult Use-Accessory. 
B.  Antique shops. 
C.  Appliance sales or service stores. 
D.  Art galleries or studios. 
E.  Art supply, school supply, book or stationery stores. 
F.  Bakeries, provided the room or rooms containing the preparation and baking process shall not have a gross floor area in excess of 2,400 square feet. 
G.  Banks, savings, lending or other financial institutions. 
H.  Barber shops. 
I.  Beauty parlors. 
J.  Blueprinting, photostatting or instant printing establishments under 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
K.  Business machine sales or service stores. 
L.  Camera and photo stores. 
M.  Candy or ice cream stores. 
N.  Carpet and rug stores (sample showrooms only). 
O.  Catering establishments. 
P.  Clothes pressing or tailoring shops. 
Q.  Department stores. 
R.  Drug stores. 
S.  Dry cleaning receiving and pick up or laundry self-service establishments, excluding commercial laundering and dry cleaning. 
T.  Florist shops. 
U.  Food, grocery, meat, fish, bakery or delicatessen stores. 
V.  Furniture stores. 
W.  Hardware stores. 
X.  Hobby stores. 
Y.  Interior decorating studios. 
Z.  Jewelry stores. 
AA.  Laboratories (medical or dental). 
BB.  Leather goods or luggage shops. 
CC.  Libraries. 
DD.  Locksmith shops. 
EE.  Medical or dental clinics. 
FF.  Newsstands which are not free-standing. 
GG.  "Off-sale" liquor stores. 
HH.  Offices, including both business and professional uses. 
II.  "On-sale" liquor stores. 
JJ.  Optical stores. 
KK.  Paint or wallpaper stores. 
LL.  Parking or garages, other than those accessory to a principal use, for the parking and storage of private passenger automobiles only. 
MM.  Pawn shops. 
NN.  Pet shops. 
OO.  Phonograph, record or sheet music stores. 
PP.  Photography studios. 
QQ.  Picture framing or picture stores. 
RR.  Pipe tobacco shops. 
SS.  Post offices. 
TT.  Public utility service stores. 
UU.  Restaurants excluding the service of liquor and excluding convenience food establishments. 
VV.  Schools, such as music, dance, business or vocational schools. 
WW.  Sporting goods stores. 
XX.  Taxidermy shops. 
YY.  Theaters, excluding drive-ins. 
ZZ.  Variety, gift, notion or soft good stores. 
AAA.  Wearing apparel stores. 
BBB.  Coffee shops. 
CCC.  Municipal parks and playgrounds. 
DDD.  Upper story dwelling units subject to the density standards of the R-5 District. 
979.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the C-4A District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  Existing car wash and dispensing operations, provided that: 
1.  All proposed alterations and/or modifications to the building and site are subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as set forth in Chapter 904 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
979.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are accessory uses in the C-4A District: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in Sections 979.02 and 979.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
C.  Telephone booths. 
D.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
E.  Bus or taxi loading and unloading facilities. 
979.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a "C-4A" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Drive-in facilities for banks or savings and loan associations, provided that: 
1.  The driveway access shall not be on a residential street. 
2.  The curb cut setbacks and parking shall be in conformance with Chapter 920, the Parking Ordinance. 
3.  The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a manner to protect the pedestrians, buildings and green area on the site. 
4.  The service windows and driveway shall be screened from view if adjacent to a residentially used property. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Physical, culture or health service establishments or reducing salons, provided that: 
1.  The use shall not serve alcoholic beverages. 
2.  If located within a shopping center, the use has its own exclusive exterior access. 
3.  The use is located and developed so as not to create an incompatible operation problem with adjoining and neighboring commercial and/or residential uses. 
4.  Any and all applicable local, state and federal laws, permits licenses and operational regulations are complied with. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Accessory, enclosed retail, rental or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that: 
1.  Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a "B-1, or "B-2" District. 
2.  Such use does not constitute more than 30 percent of the lot area and not more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. 
3.  Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 920 of this Ordinance is provided. 
4.  All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Drive-ins and delicatessens with seating facilities, provided that the provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Residential use as a principal use, provided that: 
1.  The development does not front or border Lake Street. 
2.  The development does not conflict with existing or potential future commercial uses and activities. 
3.  The density standards imposed as part of the R-5 Zoning District are complied with. 
4.  Adequate open space and recreational space is provided on site for the benefit of the occupants. 
5.  The development does not conflict or result in incompatible land use arrangements as related to abutting residential uses. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting "R" Districts. 
2.  Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
3.  Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced. 
4.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
5.  The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that: 
1.  Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to 30 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. 
2.  Outside sales areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting "R" District. 
3.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
4.  Areas are asphalt or concrete surfaced. 
5.  The use does not take up parking space or loading areas as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
H.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
I.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
J.  Existing clubs or lodges, provided that: 
1.  All State regulations are complied with including obtaining all required permits and/or licenses. 
2.  Parking and loading areas are in conformance with the parking and loading ordinances outlined in Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The parking and loading spaces shall not be located within the front yard of a lot and must meet all applicable provisions of the parking and loading ordinance. 
4.  The site shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
K.  Micro-production Facility, provided that: 
1.  Licensing. The owner of the micro-production facility qualifies for and receives all federal, state and city licenses necessary for the operation of the micro-production facility, including a brewer license and a malt liquor wholesale license (if wholesale of malt liquor is an intended activity); winery license; and/or a distiller's license from the State of Minnesota, according to Minn. Stats.  340A. 
2.  Taproom/Tasting Room License. An accessory taproom or tasting room for the on-sale of beer, wine, or spirits produced on-site shall require a taproom/tasting room license from the City of Wayzata, according to City Code Section 524.02. 
3.  Off-Sale. On-site sale of beer in the form of growlers shall require a Brewery License for Off-Sale of Malt Liquor, according to City Code Section 524.02. On-site sale of wine or spirits, other than samples as governed under Minnesota State Statutes, shall be prohibited. 
4.  Production of Beer. Total production of malt liquor shall not exceed 5,000 barrels annually. Micro-production Facilities with a taproom license shall not exceed 3,500 barrels annually, and only 500 barrels may be sold off-sale as growlers. Any micro-production facility operating as a brewery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a brewery taproom or off-sale malt liquor license. 
5.  Production of Wine. Total production of wine shall not exceed 50,000 gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a winery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or winery license. 
6.  Production of Spirits. Total production of spirits shall not exceed 40,000 proof gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a distillery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or distillery license. 
7.  Off-Street Loading. The micro-production facility shall provide adequate space for off-street loading and unloading of all trucks greater than 22 feet in length. In the absence of off-street loading, the City may impose limits on deliveries or shipments using the public rights of ways, including regulating the number of trucks per day and the hours that deliveries are permitted. 
8.  Outdoor Storage. No outdoor storage is permitted on the site, with the exception that waste handling (refuse and/or recycling) may occur in an enclosure that is fully screened from adjoining streets and residentially zoned properties. 
9.  Odors. No odors from the micro-production facility shall be perceptible beyond the property line. The micro-production facility operator shall take appropriate measures to reduce or mitigate any odors generated from the operation and be in compliance with any applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Standards. 
10.  Waste. Waste products shall be disposed of in a timely manner and in such a way to reduce odors. 
11.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed in such a way as to have no direction source of light visible from adjacent property, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 916.06 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
12.  Parking. Parking supply shall be provided on-site or through off-site arrangement, to avoid street parking on residential streets. Off-site or reduced parking supply shall require separate approval per the requirements of Chapter 920 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, as applicable. 
13.  Hours of Operation. Micro-production facility operation hours shall be limited to the hours specified in Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A for off-sale intoxicating liquor unless further limited the City Council as part of a Conditional Use Permit. 
14.  Other Provisions. The provisions of Section 904.02.F of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, pertaining to Conditional Use Permit criteria, are considered and satisfactorily met. A micro-production facility shall meet all other applicable performance standards and design requirements in the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
979.06 - Special Limitations and Conditions. 
A.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. 
B.  Each business establishment shall be operated as a separate and distinct business entity. Each business establishment shall be physically separate from any other such establishment by solid walls, partitions or windows, although nothing in this paragraph is intended to prevent either common ownership or free pedestrian movement from one establishment to another through either an area commonly owned or leased by all adjoining establishments or through direct doorway connections. All business establishments shall be accessible from the exterior of the building in which they are located by either a direct door to the exterior or by direct access to a "common area" which in turn has adequate access to the exterior of the building without passing through another business establishment. 
C.  Retail or Commercial Use. At least 50 percent of the building frontage on the ground floor along Lake Street must be used for retail or service commercial use and must comprise at least 50 percent of the ground floor building footprint. 
D.  New Lake Street Buildings. All new buildings along Lake Street with a building footprint of 4,000 square feet or more must be developed with more than one of the following uses: retail, service, residential and office. Upper floors may be used for any permitted use including residential. 
E.  All buildings shall meet the defined sidewalk line except for small setbacks to provide outdoor Seating, plazas, or recessed entries. 
F.  Parking in the front yard is prohibited. 
979.07 - Height, Setback and Lot Coverage. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "C-4A" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Height. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed two stories and 30 feet in height, whichever is lesser. 
B.  Setbacks. There shall be no front yard, exterior side yard or rear yard requirements, except that there shall be a required setback within C-4A District boundaries when such boundaries are adjacent to a residential district. In such cases, the setback shall be the same as the setback for the adjacent district. 
C.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 2.0. 
D.  Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 12,000 square feet. 
CHAPTER 980 - C-4B CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

980.01 - Purpose. 
The C-4B District is intended to provide a district accommodating those retail sales, service, office and residential functions which are characteristic to a "downtown" area and to allow the present downtown area to expand, develop and redevelop, with emphasis on specialty shops and retail uses with continuous linear low level building designs, while maintaining this desired character. Such areas are to be characterized by individual storefronts with public sidewalk access, as contrasted to shopping mall type development. The district requires retail use at street grade. 
980.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in a "C-4B" District: 
A.  At street grade, the following specifically identified retail sale and service uses: 
1.  Adult Use-Accessory. 
2.  Antique shops. 
3.  Art galleries or studios. 
4.  Art supply, school supply, book or stationery stores. 
5.  Bakeries, provided the room or rooms containing the preparation and baking process shall not have a gross floor area in excess of 2,400 square feet. 
6.  Banks, savings, lending or other financial institutions, (excluding drive-ins). 
7.  Barber shops. 
8.  Beauty parlors. 
9.  Blueprinting, photostatting or instant printing. 
10.  Business machine sales or service stores. 
11.  Camera and photo stores. 
12.  Candy or ice cream stores. 
13.  Carpet and rug stores (sample showrooms only). 
14.  Clothes pressing or tailoring shops. 
15.  Department stores. 
16.  Drug stores. 
17.  Dry cleaning receiving and pick up or laundry self-service establishments, excluding commercial laundering and dry cleaning. 
18.  Florist shops. 
19.  Food, grocery, meat, fish, bakery or delicatessen stores. 
20.  Furniture stores. 
21.  Hardware stores. 
22.  Hobby stores. 
23.  Interior decorating studios. 
24.  Jewelry stores. 
25.  Leather goods or luggage shops. 
26.  Libraries. 
27.  Locksmith shops. 
28.  Medical or dental clinics. 
29.  Newsstands which are not free-standing. 
30.  Optical stores. 
31.  Paint or wallpaper stores. 
32.  Pet shops. 
33.  Phonograph, record or sheet music stores. 
34.  Photography studios. 
35.  Picture framing on picture stores. 
36.  Pipe tobacco shops. 
37.  Post offices. 
38.  Public utility service stores. 
39.  Restaurants including the service of liquor and excluding convenience food establishments. 
40.  Sporting goods stores. 
41.  Taxidermy shops. 
42.  Theaters, excluding drive-ins. 
43.  Variety, gift, notion or soft goods stores. 
44.  Wearing apparel stores. 
45.  Coffee shops. 
46.  Municipal parks and playgrounds. 
47.  Municipal "Off-sale" and "On-sale" Liquor Stores. 
B.  Other than at street grade. 
1.  All uses identified in Section 980.02.A above. 
2.  Laboratories (medical and dental). 
3.  Offices, including both business and professional uses. 
4.  Schools such as music, dance, business or vocational schools. 
5.  Upper story dwelling units subject to the density standards of the R-5 District. 
980.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the C-4B District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance: 
A.  Accessory parking lot fronting on Lake Street, provided that: 
1.  The use is accessory to a principal use or is a principal use under public ownership. 
2.  The design and construction of the facility is in compliance with applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.  The use of the site for parking is temporary in nature with the intent of development of the site for commercial purposes. 
980.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the C-4B District: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in Sections 980.02 and 980.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. Unless approved as an interim use, such area shall not border or front Lake Street. 
C.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
D.  Bus or taxi loading and unloading facilities. 
980.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a "C-4B" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Drive-in facilities for banks or savings and loan associations, provided that: 
1.  The driveway access shall not be on a residential street. 
2.  The curb cut setbacks and parking shall be in conformance with Chapter 920, the Parking Ordinance. 
3.  The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a manner to protect the pedestrians, buildings and green area on the site. 
4.  The service windows and driveway shall be screened from view if adjacent to a residentially used property. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Physical, culture or health service establishments or reducing salons, provided that: 
1.  The use shall not serve alcoholic beverages. 
2.  If located within a shopping center, the use has its own exclusive exterior access. 
3.  The use is located and developed so as not to create an incompatible operation problem with adjoining and neighboring commercial and/or residential uses. 
4.  Any and all applicable local, state and federal laws, permits licenses and operational regulations are complied with. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Accessory, enclosed retail, rental or service activity other than that allowed as a permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that: 
1.  Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a "B-1" or "B-2" District. 
2.  Such use does not constitute more than 30 percent of the lot area and not more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. 
3.  Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 920 of this Ordinance is provided. 
4.  All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Chapter 927 of this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
D.  Drove-ins and delicatessens with seating facilities, provided that the provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
E.  Residential use as a principal use, provided that: 
1.  The development does not front or border Lake Street. 
2.  The development does not conflict with existing or potential future commercial uses and activities. 
3.  The density standards imposed as part of the R-5 Zoning District are complied with. 
4.  Adequate open space and recreational space is provided on site for the benefit of the occupants. 
5.  The development does not conflict or result in incompatible land use arrangements as related to abutting residential uses. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
F.  Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting "R" Districts. 
2.  Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
3.  Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced. 
4.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
5.  The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
G.  Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that: 
1.  Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to 30 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. 
2.  Outside sales areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting "R" District. 
3.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
4.  Areas are asphalt or concrete surfaced. 
5.  The use does not take up parking space or loading areas as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
H.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
I.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
J.  Existing clubs or lodges provided that: 
1.  All State regulations are complied with including obtaining all required permits and/or licenses. 
2.  Parking and loading areas are in conformance with the parking and loading ordinances outlined in Chapter 920 of this Ordinance. 
3.  The parking and loading spaces shall not be located within the front yard of a lot and must meet all applicable provisions of the parking and loading ordinance. 
4.  The site shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
K.  Micro-production Facility, provided that: 
1.  Licensing. The owner of the micro-production facility qualifies for and receives all federal, state and city licenses necessary for the operation of the micro-production facility, including a brewer license and a malt liquor wholesale license (if wholesale of malt liquor is an intended activity); winery license; and/or a distiller's license from the State of Minnesota, according to Minn. Stats.  340A. 
2.  Taproom/Tasting Room License. An accessory taproom or tasting room for the on-sale of beer, wine, or spirits produced on-site shall require a taproom/tasting room license from the City of Wayzata, according to City Code Section 524.02. 
3.  Off-sale. On-site sale of beer in the form of growlers shall require a Brewery License for Off-Sale of Malt Liquor, according to City Code Section 524.02. On-site sale of wine or spirits, other than samples as governed under Minnesota State Statutes, shall be prohibited. 
4.  Production of Beer. Total production of malt liquor shall not exceed 5,000 barrels annually. Micro-production Facilities with a taproom license shall not exceed 3,500 barrels annually, and only 500 barrels may be sold off-sale as growlers. Any micro-production facility operating as a brewery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a brewery taproom or off-sale malt liquor license. 
5.  Production of Wine. Total production of wine shall not exceed 50,000 gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a winery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or winery license. 
6.  Production of Spirits. Total production of spirits shall not exceed 40,000 proof gallons annually. Any micro-production facility operating as a distillery shall annually submit production reports to the City with the request to renew a tasting room or distillery license. 
7.  Off-street Loading. The micro-production facility shall provide adequate space for off-street loading and unloading of all trucks greater than 22 feet in length. In the absence of off-street loading, the City may impose limits on deliveries or shipments using the public rights of ways, including regulating the number of trucks per day and the hours that deliveries are permitted. 
8.  Outdoor Storage. No outdoor storage is permitted on the site, with the exception that waste handling (refuse and/or recycling) may occur in an enclosure that is fully screened from adjoining streets and residentially zoned properties. 
9.  Odors. No odors from the micro-production facility shall be perceptible beyond the property line. The micro-production facility operator shall take appropriate measures to reduce or mitigate any odors generated from the operation and be in compliance with any applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Standards. 
10.  Waste. Waste products shall be disposed of in a timely manner and in such a way to reduce odors. 
11.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed in such a way as to have no direction source of light visible from adjacent property, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 916.06 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
12.  Parking. Parking supply shall be provided on-site or through off-site arrangement, to avoid street parking on residential streets. Off-site or reduced parking supply shall require separate approval per the requirements of Chapter 920 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, as applicable. 
13.  Hours of Operation. Micro-production facility operation hours shall be limited to the hours specified in Minn. Stats. Ch. 340A for off-sale intoxicating liquor unless further limited the City Council as part of a Conditional Use Permit. 
14.  Other Provisions. The provisions of Section 904.02.F of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance, pertaining to Conditional Use Permit criteria, are considered and satisfactorily met. A micro-production facility shall meet all other applicable performance standards and design requirements in the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 782 [8-9-2018]) 
980.06 - Existing Uses. 
Any established use which legally existed within its respective zoning district prior to the enactment and application of a C-4B classification and which requires a conditional use permit under the C-4B designation, may be continued in like fashion and activity and shall automatically be considered as having received conditional use approval. A change in ownership of such property shall not affect the conditional use permit approval status so long as the business or use continues in a like fashion and activity. 
980.07 - Special Limitations and Conditions. 
A.  All business establishments at street grade shall be retail or service establishments which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. 
B.  All business establishments at street grade shall be complementary to the retail character of the district and enhance pedestrian traffic. 
C.  Each business establishment shall be operated as a separate and distinct business entity. Each business establishment shall be physically separate from any other such establishment by solid walls, partitions or windows, although nothing in this paragraph is intended to prevent either common ownership or free pedestrian movement from one establishment to another through either an area commonly owned or through direct doorway connections. All business establishments shall be accessible from the exterior of the building in which they are located either by a direct door to the exterior or by direct access to a "common area" which in turn has adequate access to the exterior of the building without passing through another business establishment. 
D.  At least 50 percent of the building frontage on the ground floor along Lake Street must be used for retail or service commercial use and must comprise at least 50 percent of the ground floor building footprint. 
E.  New Lake Street Buildings. All new buildings along Lake Street with a building footprint of 4,000 square feet or more must be developed with more than one of the following uses: retail, service, residential, and office. Upper floors may be used for any permitted use including residential. 
F.  All buildings shall meet the defined sidewalk line except for small setbacks to provide outdoor seating, plazas, or recessed entries. 
G.  Parking is prohibited in the front yard is prohibited. 
980.08 - Height, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "C-4B" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Height. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed two stories and 30 feet in height, whichever is lesser. 
B.  Setback. There shall be no front yard, exterior side yard or rear yard requirements, except that there shall be a required setback within C-4B District boundaries when such boundaries are adjacent to a residential district. In such cases, the setback shall be the same as the setback for the adjacent district. 
C.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 2.0. 
D.  Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 12,000 square feet. 
CHAPTER 985 - R-D RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

985.01 - Purpose. 
The R-D District is intended to allow restrictive industrial-type growth for certain uses with high standards of performance which do not create appreciable nuisances or hazards. The regulations for this District are intended to encourage development which will be very similar to office uses, which will be compatible with and can reasonably adjoin higher density residential development, and which will promote desirable concentrations of similar such uses. 
985.02 - Special Limitations and Conditions. 
A.  All applications to use or plat property for research and development purposes shall be considered in accordance with the procedures and provisions of Chapter 933, Planned Unit Development. 
B.  All uses within the R-D District shall be conditional uses and shall be considered in accordance with the procedures and provisions of Chapter 904, Conditional Uses. Such uses shall be limited to administrative, wholesale, testing, light manufacturing and similar or related uses which can be conducted in an unobtrusive manner. 
C.  All research and development projects shall contain sufficient open space, landscaping and off- street parking areas, and all such projects shall maintain a high standard of appearance, with all external effects to be adequately controlled (e.g., noise and smoke). 
CHAPTER 986 - B-W BUSINESS/WAREHOUSING DISTRICT 

986.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "B-W" Business/Warehousing District is to provide for the establishment of wholesale and retail trade of large volume or bulk commercial items, storage and warehousing. The overall character of the "B-W" District is intended to be transitional in nature, thus industrial uses allowed within this District shall be limited to those which can compatibly exist adjacent to commercial and lower intensity activities. 
986.02 - Permitted Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses within the "B-W" District: 
A.  Automobile repair-minor. 
B.  Commercial printing establishments. 
C.  Commercial/professional offices. 
D.  Conference centers. 
E.  Essential services. 
F.  Governmental and public utility buildings and structures. 
G.  Indoor commercial recreation. 
H.  Laboratories. 
I.  Wholesale showrooms. 
986.03 - Interim Use. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are interim uses in the B-W District and are governed by Chapter 934 of this Ordinance. 
A.  None. 
986.04 - Accessory Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses within the "B-W" District: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses allowed in Sections 986.02 and 986.05 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas and Structures. Parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted principal use, other than delivery trucks parked for not more than two consecutive hours, shall be limited to vehicles of not more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
C.  Enclosed storage of merchandise in either principal or accessory building, solely intended to be retailed by a related and established principal use. 
D.  Bus or taxi loading and unloading facilities. 
986.05 - Conditional Uses. 
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are conditional uses in a "B-W" District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance.) 
A.  Open and outdoor storage including the parking of commercial vehicles in excess of that allowed as a permitted accessory use as an accessory use, provided that: 
1.  The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of neighboring uses and abutting "R" Districts. 
2.  Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
3.  Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced. 
4.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
5.  The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
B.  Open or outdoor services, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use, provided that: 
1.  Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to 30 percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. Uses specified as requiring a separate conditional use permit shall be exempted from this provision. 
2.  Outside sales areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting "R" District. 
3.  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences. 
4.  Areas are asphalt or concrete surfaced. 
5.  The use does not take up parking space or loading areas as required for conformity to this Ordinance. 
6.  Additional parking, pursuant to Chapter 920 of this Ordinance is provided for said space. 
7.  The provisions of Section 904.02.G of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
C.  Manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or storage of products and materials, provided that: 
1.  The proposed use complies with the performance standards outlined in Chapters 916, 917, 918, 919, 920 and all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.G of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
3.  Planned unit development as regulated by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
D.  Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures necessary for the health safety and general welfare of the City shall be allow as a conditional use, provided that: 
1.  When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Chapter 918 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The provisions of Section 904.02.F of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
986.06 - Height, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "B-W" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance: 
A.  Height. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed two stories and 25 feet in height, whichever is lesser. 
B.  Setback. 
1.  Front Yard: 25 feet. 
2.  Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of any building having a width of not less than 20 feet, except that no building shall be located within 50 feet of any side lot line abutting a lot in any residential district. 
3.  Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet, except that no buildings shall be located within 50 feet of any residential district. 
C.  Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be 1.0. 
D.  Lot Area. The minimum total lot area shall be 30,000 square feet. 
CHAPTER 990 - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

990.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "PUD," Planned Unit Development District is to provide for the integration and coordination of land parcels as well as the combination of varying types of residential, commercial and industrial uses. 
990.02 - Application. 
All permitted, permitted accessory, or conditional uses contained in Chapters 941 through 989 of this Ordinance shall be treated as potentially permitted uses within a PUD District. 
990.03 - Procedures. 
Whether requested as a rezoning or initially established by City action alone, a PUD, Planned Unit Development District shall be established and governed subject to the amendment and procedure requirements as outlined in Chapter 903 of this Ordinance, plus the procedures, conditions and standards imposed by Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
CHAPTER 991 - S SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT 

991.01 - Purpose. 
The intent of this Section is to reduce the effects of overcrowding, to prevent pollution of waters of the community, to minimize flood damages, to maintain property values, and to maintain natural characteristics of shorelands and adjacent water areas by controlling lot sizes, placement of structures on lots, and alteration of shoreland areas. 
991.02 - Statutory Authorization. 
This Section is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minn. Stats. Ch. 105, Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minn. Stats. Ch. 462. 
991.03 - Shoreland Districts. 
The shorelands within the City of Wayzata are hereby designated as shoreland districts and the requirements set forth in this Section shall govern development and other activities within these districts. The classification of the shoreland areas shall govern the use, alteration and development of these areas according to said classification as per Minn. Stats. 104.485 and Minn. R. NR 82-84. 
991.04 - District Application. 
The "S" District shall be applied to and superimposed upon all zoning districts as contained herein as existing or amended by the Zoning Ordinance text and Official Zoning Map. The regulations and requirements imposed by the "S" District shall be in addition to those established for the base zoning districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of standards, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
991.05 - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the Shoreland District are established within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of the surface water depending on the size of the surface water as indicated on the Wayzata Shoreland District Map. 
SURFACE WATER DISTANCE (FEET) 1 Greater than ten acres 1,000 Rivers and streams (draining an area greater than two square miles) 300 2  
1 The practical distance may be less whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographical divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and prevent flowage toward the surface water. 
2 The distance requirement shall be increased to the limit of the floodplain when the floodplain is greater than 300 feet. 
991.06 - Shoreland Classification System. 
The surface waters affected by this Section and which require controlled development of their shoreland (Shoreland District) shall be shown on the map designated as the official "Zoning Map of the City of Wayzata" which is properly approved and made a part of this Section and filed with the Zoning Administrator. Surface waters generally greater than ten acres and given an identification number by the State of Minnesota shall be defined in Section 902.02 of this Ordinance and listed below. Other surface waters affected by this Section, generally having less than ten acres, shall be classified as stormwater treatment and control areas and thus regulated under the provisions of Chapter 992 of this Ordinance. 
A.  Lakes Classification System. 
SURFACE WATER DISTRIBUTION 
General Development Lakes DNR Identification Number Name 27-133 Lake Minnetonka Recreational Development Lakes DNR Identification Number Name 27-95 Gleason Lake 27-138 Peavey Lake  
991.07 - Land Use Districts. 
The land uses allowable for the Shoreland Overlay District shall follow the permitted interim, accessory, and conditional use designations as defined and outlined in the base zone districts, as found in Sections 51-86 of this Ordinance, as may be amended, referred to as the Wayzata Zoning Regulations, and shall be properly delineated on the Official Zoning Map for the shorelands of Wayzata. These land use districts are in conformance with the criteria specified in Minnesota Regulation, Part 6120.3200, Subp. 3. 
991.08 - Minimum Lot Size and Width. 
The following chart sets forth the minimum lot sizes and width standards within the Shoreland Overlay District. Where these standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard shall prevail. 
Sewered Lots 
A.  Low Density (R-1A, R-1, R-2A, R-2, R-3A, R-3, R-4A, R-4, R-5). 
RD 
Recreational 
Development GD 
General 
Development Area Width Area Width 1. Riparian Lots Single 20,000 75 10,000 75 Duplex 35,000 100 26,000 100 Triplex 50,000 125 38,000 125 Quad 65,000 150 49,000 150 2. Non-Riparian Lots Single 15,000 75 10,000 75 Duplex 26,000 100 17,500 100 Triplex 38,000 125 25,000 125 Quad 49,000 150 32,500 150  
B.  Institutional (INS)-(See Chapter 970, INS Institutional District of this Ordinance). 
C.  Commercial (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-4A, C-4B)-(See Chapters 975-980 of this Ordinance). 
D.  Research and Development (RD)-(See Chapter 985 Research and Development District of this Ordinance). 
E.  Business/Warehousing (B-W)-(See Chapter 986 Business/Warehouse District of this Ordinance). 
F.  Substandard Lots of Record. Any lot of record filed in the office of the Hennepin County Register of Deeds on or before January 1, 1983, which does not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance may be allowed as a building site subject to approval of a shoreland impact plan/conditional use permit, as provided in Section 991.19 of this Ordinance and provided: 
1.  The lot meets all standards of the applicable base zoning district. 
2.  The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands. 
3.  All dimensional requirements of the Shoreland Overlay District are complied with insofar as practical in compliance with requirements for legal non-conforming lots found in Section 915.02.M of this Ordinance. 
G.  Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as recreation areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots within subdivisions are permissible, provided they are consistent with the district regulations of the Zoning Ordinance and a conditional use permit is issued consistent with Chapter 904 and Section 991.19 of this Ordinance. 
1.  The lot must meet the width and size requirements for riparian residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access lots. 
2.  If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than six watercraft is to be allowed, the width of the lot must be increased by five percent of the minimum width requirement for riparian residential lots for each watercraft beyond six. 
3.  The lot must be jointly owned by all owners of non-riparian lots in the subdivision who are provided riparian access right on the access lot. 
4.  Covenants must be developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or docking. They may also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners. The covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or stored over water. 
Note-Lots developed with five or more dwelling units require approval of a planned unit development conditional use in accordance with Chapter 933 and Section 991.17 of this Ordinance. 
991.09 - Minimum Setback Requirement. 
The following chart sets forth the minimum setback standards within the Shoreland Overlay District. Where these standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard shall prevail. 
RD 
Recreational 
Development GD 
General 
Development A. Setback from Ordinary High Water Mark 1. Structures Sewered 75 feet 75 feet B. Side Yard Setbacks 
(Subject to individual district requirements.) C. Additional Structure Setbacks 1. Top of Bluff 30 feet 30 feet 2. Unplatted Cemetery 50 feet 50 feet Right-of-Way Line of Federal, State, or County Highway 30 feet 30 feet Right-of-Way Line of Public Street, or Other Roads or Streets Not Classified (Subject to individual district requirements)  
D.  Lake Shore Setbacks. 
1.  The setback requirements of Section 991.09 shall not apply to piers and docks. Setback requirements for water-oriented accessory structures are regulated in Section 991.13.B of this Ordinance. 
2.  No principal structure or building addition other than a water oriented accessory structure as specified above shall be located closer to the ordinary high water mark than the greater of: 
a)  Seventy-five feet; 
b)  A line which is drawn between the two closest riparian principal structures on either side of a proposed building site; 
c)  The average setback of the two closest riparian principal structures on either side of a proposed building site; or 
d)  The average setback line shall be measured parallel to the ordinary high water level. In all circumstances, the setback shall be established by measuring the distance from the ordinary high water level to that part of the said principal structure that is closest to the lake. 
3.  The required setback distance may be reduced by a variance if the following conditions are met: 
a)  The minimum setback from the ordinary high water mark is at least 75 feet; 
b)  The setback shall not adversely impact views of the shoreline or lake for adjacent neighboring principal structures; 
c)  The reduction of setback requirements is based upon a specific need or circumstance which is unique to the property in question and which, if approved, will not set a precedent which is contrary to the intent of this Ordinance. However, any structure built as a result of an issued variance shall be considered in determining the proper setback of future construction on adjacent lots; 
d)  A shoreland impact plan is submitted and approved as required and set forth in Section 991.19 of this Ordinance; 
e)  The conditions of Chapter 905 and Section 991.20 of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
991.10 - Building/Structure Height. 
The minimum building structure height for either lake classification shall follow the individual district requirements of the base zoning districts but shall not exceed 35 feet. Building heights of over 35 feet may be allowed through approval of a shoreland impact plan/conditional use permit as regulated under Section 991.19 of this Ordinance. 
991.11 - Impervious Surface Coverage. 
A.  Allowable Coverage. 
1.  Impervious surface coverage for lots in all zoning districts shall not exceed 25 percent of the lot area, except as provided below: 
a)  Where appropriate and where structures and practices are in place for the treatment of stormwater runoff and/or prevent stormwater from directly entering a public water in compliance with the Stormwater Management Plan for the City of Wayzata, May 1988 as may be amended, or as approved by the City Engineer, impervious surface coverage may be allowed to exceed 25 percent impervious surface coverage to a maximum of 75 percent on any one site. 
b)  Impervious surface coverage may be allowed to exceed 75 percent of the total lot area when the following stipulations are met: 
1)  All structures and practices are in place for the treatment of stormwater runoff. 
2)  A shoreland impact plan/conditional use permit is submitted and approved as provided for in Section 991.19.A of this Ordinance, subject to the conditions listed in Section 991.19.C of this Ordinance. 
2.  Measures for the treatment of stormwater runoff and/or prevention of stormwater from directly entering a public water include such appurtenances as sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps), installation of debris guards and microsilt basins on storm sewer inlets, oil skimming devices, etc. 
991.12 - Residential Density. 
In cases where the residential density requirements, as specified in Section 991.08 of this Ordinance, shall be exceeded, the maximum allowed density shall be that set forth by the base zoning district of the subject property. For high density residential, including planned unit development, the density may not exceed the density standards as specified in the R-5 District provided in Chapter 959 of this Ordinance. Development which exceeds the residential density requirements, as specified in Section 991.08 of this Ordinance, shall be in conformance with the Shoreland Management Plan and subject to a conditional use permit and shoreland impact plan set forth in Section 991.19., subject to the conditions listed in Section 991.19.D of this Ordinance and subject to approval of the plan by the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District and the City Engineer. 
991.13 - Design Criteria for Structures. 
A.  Design Criteria for Structures. 
1.  High Water Elevations. Structures shall be placed in accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or flood-proofed shall be determined as follows: 
a)  For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher; 
b)  For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the flood of record, if data is available. If data is not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three approaches, technical evaluations shall be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with Minn. Stats. Parts 6120.500 to 6120.6200 governing the management of floodplain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined shall be used for placing structures and other facilities; and 
c)  Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor placed lower than the determined elevation if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the determined elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and debris. 
B.  Water-Oriented Accessory Structures. As may be allowed by the respective base zoning district, each lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback in Section 991.09 of this Ordinance if this water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions: 
1.  The structure or facility shall not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet above grade at any point; 
2.  The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level shall be at least ten feet; 
3.  The structure or facility shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions; 
4.  The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but shall not be enclosed or used as a storage area; 
5.  The structure or facility shall not be designed or used for human habitation and shall not contain water supply or sewer treatment facilities; and 
6.  As an alternative for general development and recreational development water bodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating and water-oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square feet, provided the maximum width of the structure shall be 20 feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline. 
C.  Stairways, Lifts, and Landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts shall meet the following design requirements: 
1.  Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet in width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, and planned unit developments; 
2.  Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used for commercial properties, public open space recreational properties, and planned unit developments; 
3.  Canopies or roofs shall not be allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings; 
4.  Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion; 
5.  Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public waters assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and 
6.  Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons shall also be allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of items 1 to 5 listed above are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minnesota Regulations, Chapter 1340. 
D.  Significant Historic Sites. No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been documented in a public repository. 
E.  Steep Slopes. The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions shall be attached to permits to prevent erosion and preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation. 
F.  Bluff Impact Zones. Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones. 
G.  Standards for Commercial, Industrial, Public, and Semi-Public Uses. 
1.  Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semi-public uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with water-oriented needs shall meet the following standards: 
a)  In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this Ordinance, the uses shall be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures. 
b)  Uses that require short term watercraft mooring for patrons shall centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need. 
c)  Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards: 
1)  No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs shall be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages shall be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the County Sheriff. 
2)  Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information. They shall only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs shall not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, shall be in conformance with Chapter 927 of this Ordinance, but under no circumstance shall they be located higher than ten feet above the ground, and shall not exceed 32 square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights shall be shielded or directed to prevent excessive illumination out across public waters or on shore. 
3)  Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent excessive illumination out across public waters or on shore. This does not preclude use of navigational lights. 
2.  Uses without water-oriented needs shall be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer leaf on conditions. 
991.14 - Shoreland Alterations. 
Alterations of vegetation and topography shall be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat. 
A.  Vegetation Alterations. 
1.  Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by Section 991.14.C of this Ordinance are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow: 
a)  Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on 2. Removal or alteration of vegetation shall be allowed subject to the following standards: 
1)  Steep slopes shall not be allowed. 
b)  In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees shall be allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, beach and watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, provided that: 
1)  The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, shall not be substantially reduced; 
2)  The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards. 
B.  Topographic Alterations/Grading and Filling. 
1.  Grading and filling, and excavations necessary for the construction of structures, and driveways under approved construction permits for these facilities shall not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and filling standards in this section shall be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, and driveways. 
2.  Notwithstanding items A and B above, a shoreland permit shall be required from the Zoning Administrator for: 
a)  The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and 
b)  The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones. 
3.  The following considerations and conditions shall be adhered to during the issuance of permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals: 
a)  Grading or filling in any type two, three, four, five, six, seven, or eight wetland shall be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland. * 
1)  Sediment and pollution trapping and retention; 
2)  Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage; 
3)  Fish and wildlife habitat; 
4)  Recreational use; 
5)  Shoreline or bank stabilization; and 
6)  Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others. 
* This evaluation shall also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other local, state, or federal agencies such as the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant shall be so advised. 
b)  Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible; 
c)  Mulches or similar materials shall be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and permanent vegetation cover shall be established as soon as possible. 
d)  Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature shall be used; 
e)  Altered areas shall be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service; 
f)  Fill or excavation material shall not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope; 
g)  Plans to place fill or excavate material on steep slopes shall be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and shall not create finished slopes of 30 or greater; 
h)  Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact zones; 
i)  Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters shall first be authorized by the Commissioner under Minn. Stats.  105.42. 
j)  Alterations of topography shall only be allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and shall not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and 
k)  Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, shall be permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, and the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet. 
4.  Connections to Public Waters. Excavation where the intended purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, shall be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after the Commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public waters. 
C.  Placement and Design of Roads, Driveways, and Parking Areas. 
1.  Public and private roads and parking areas shall be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the guidelines of the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District. 
2.  Roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts. 
3.  Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas shall be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this sub-part are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of Section 991.14.B of this Ordinance shall be met. 
D.  Stormwater Management. All development within the Shoreland Overlay District shall be consistent with the Stormwater Management Plan for the City of Wayzata, May 1988 as may be amended and the following general and specific standards. 
1.  General Standards. 
a)  When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters. 
b)  Development shall be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site. 
c)  When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and facilities. 
E.  Specific Standards. 
1.  When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the field guidelines of the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District. 
2.  Newly constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge. 
991.15 - Non-Conformities. 
All legally established non conformities as of the date of this Ordinance may continue, but they shall be managed according to applicable state statutes and regulations of Chapter 915 of this Ordinance regulating non-conformities for the subjects of alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and intensification of use, except that the following standards shall also apply in shoreland areas. 
A.  Additional/Expansions to Non-Conforming Structures. 
1.  All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing non-conforming structure shall meet the setback, height, and other requirements of Section 991.08, 991.09 and 991.10 of this Ordinance. Any deviation from these requirements shall be authorized by a variance pursuant to Section 991.20 of this Ordinance. 
2.  Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the following criteria and standards are met: 
a)  The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were established; 
b)  A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure; 
c)  The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and 
d)  The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened. 
991.16 - Administration. 
A.  Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of lots; the use, size, type and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste removal systems, the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this Section and Ordinance and other applicable regulations. In cases where standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard will prevail. 
B.  Relationship to Floodplain. Placement of all structures shall comply with Chapter 992 of this Ordinance. 
C.  Shoreland Permits Required. A shoreland permit shall be required for the construction of buildings or building additions (and including such related activities as construction of decks and signs), and those grading and filling activities not exempted by Section 991.14.B of this Ordinance. Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on the forms provided. 
D.  Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of occupancy as regulated by Chapter 907 of this Ordinance upon compliance with each activity requiring a shoreland permit as specified in Section 991.96.C of this Ordinance. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a violation of this Section and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 908 of this Ordinance. 
991.17 - Residential Planned Unit Development (PUD). 
Residential planned unit development conditional uses are allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previous built sites or conversion of existing buildings and land. All lots developed with five or more dwelling units require approval of a planned unit development conditional use in compliance with this Ordinance. Planned unit development shall comply with the following criteria. 
A.  Residential planned unit development shall be processed as a conditional use in accordance with Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Application for a residential planned unit development shall follow the guidelines in Chapter 933 of this Ordinance. 
C.  Site "Suitable Area" Evaluation. Proposed residential planned unit developments shall be evaluated using the following procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/dwelling site density evaluation in Section 991.17.D, E, and F of this Ordinance. 
1.  The development parcel shall be divided into tiers by locating one or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward. 
Shoreland Tier Dimensions Sewered (Feet) General Development Lakes-First Tier 200 General Development Lakes and Additional Tiers-Second 200 Recreational Development Lakes 267  
2.  The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land before the ordinary high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed development are then subjected to the residential planned unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or sites. 
D.  PUD Density Evaluation. The procedures for determining the "base" density of a PUD and density increase multipliers are as follows: Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the water body, but shall not be transferred to any other tier closer. 
E.  PUD "Base" Density Evaluation. The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size standard for lakes. Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned unit developments are then compared with the tier, density, and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in Section 991.18.G of this Ordinance. 
F.  Density Increase Multipliers. 
1.  Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base densities previously determined shall be allowed if the dimensional standards in Section 991.08 of this Ordinance are met or exceeded and the design criteria in Section 991.17.G of this Ordinance are satisfied. The allowable density increases in item 2 below shall only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are increased to at least 50 percent greater than the minimum setback, or the impact on the water body is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the local unit of government and the setback is at least 25 percent greater than the minimum setback. 
2.  Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density increases for planned unit development. 
Density Evaluation Tiers Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier(Percent) First 50 Second 100 Third 200 Fourth 200 Fifth 200  
G.  Maintenance and Design Criteria. 
1.  Before final approval of a residential planned unit development, adequate provisions shall be developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development. 
2.  Open Space Preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means shall be provided to ensure long-term preservation and maintenance of open space. The instruments shall include all of the following protections. 
a)  Commercial use prohibited (for residential PUDs); and 
b)  Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine maintenance prohibited; and 
c)  Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and other materials prohibited; and 
d)  Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited. 
3.  Development organization and functioning. Unless an equally effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all residential planned unit developments shall use an owners association with the following features. 
a)  Membership shall be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site purchaser and any successive purchasers; 
b)  Each member shall pay a pro rata share of the association's expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites; 
c)  Assessments shall be adjustable to accommodate changing conditions; and 
d)  The association shall be responsible for insurance, taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities. 
H.  Open Space Requirements. Residential planned unit developments shall contain open space meeting the following criteria. 
1.  At least 30 percent of the total development area shall be preserved as open space; 
2.  Dwelling units or sites, land covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures are developed areas and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space; 
3.  Open space shall include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries; 
4.  The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, shall be preserved by use of restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equal effective and permanent means; and 
5.  The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, shall be included as open space. For residential PUDs, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or at least 70 percent of the shore impact zone area of new developments shall be preserved in its natural or existing state. 
I.  Erosion Control and Stormwater Management. Erosion control and stormwater management plans shall be developed and the residential planned unit development shall. 
1.  Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction. This shall be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques shall be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control plans approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if project size and site physical characteristics warrant; and 
2.  Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. 
J.  Centralization and Design of Facilities. Centralization and design of facilities and structures shall be done according to the following standards: 
1.  Dwelling units or sites shall be clustered into one or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They shall be designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the ordinary high water level shall be increased in accordance with Section 991.17.F of this Ordinance for developments with density increases; 
2.  Structures, parking areas, and other facilities shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening shall be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided; 
3.  Accessory structures and facilities shall meet the required principal structure setback and shall be centralized. 
991.18 - Planned Unit Development District. 
Mixed use planned unit development is allowed for integration and coordination of land parcels as well as the combination of varying types of residential and commercial uses. 
A.  Application/Procedures. Applications and procedures for a planned unit development district in the shoreland area shall be consistent with Chapters 990 and 933 and Section 991.17 regarding planned unit development. The DNR shall be notified of rezoning to a PUD as required in Section 991.22. 
991.19 - Shoreland Impact Plan/Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Shoreland Impact Plan. Except for situations listed below, landowners or developers desiring to develop land or construct any dwelling or any other artificial obstruction on land located within any Shoreland District within the City of Wayzata shall first submit a conditional use permit application as regulated by Chapter 904 of this Ordinance and a plan of development, hereinafter referred to as "Shoreland Impact Plan," which shall set forth proposed provisions for sediment control, water management, maintenance of landscaped features, and any additional matters intended to set forth proposed changes requested by the applicant and affirmatively disclose what, if any, change will be made in the natural condition of the earth, including loss of change of earth ground cover, destruction of trees, grade courses and marshes. The plan shall minimize tree removal, ground cover change, loss of natural vegetation, and grade changes as much as possible, and shall affirmatively provide for the relocation or replanting of as many trees as possible which are proposed to be removed. The purpose of the shoreland impact plan shall be to eliminate and minimize as much as possible potential pollution, erosion and siltation. 
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  No conditional use permit or shoreland impact plan shall be required for the development of permitted accessory uses contained within the R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts. 
2.  No conditional use permit or shoreland impact plan shall be required for the development of permitted principal uses contained within the zoning districts, provided that such uses are constructed on standard lots and in compliance with the standards of this Ordinance and that all such uses are serviced with public sanitary sewer. 
C.  Conditions. All conditional use permits for consideration under this Section shall be subject to the following stipulations. 
1.  The projects shall be analyzed to determine the impact of impervious surfaces, stormwater runoff, floodplain, and water quality implications. Only those projects shall be allowed where the adverse impacts have been mitigated through approved means to the extent possible. 
2.  Stormwater treatment measures including, but not limited to, sediment basins (debris basins), desilting basins or silt traps, installation of debris guards, and microsilt basins on stormwater inlets, oil skimming devices, etc. shall be required subject to the review of the City Engineer and the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District on projects where applicable. 
3.  Projects shall be analyzed in terms of provisions for maintenance and enhancement of landscape features, and change in the natural condition of the soil, trees, grade courses and marshes. The vegetative planting plan shall contain trees, when fully mature, that will exceed the building height. The plan shall also minimize tree removal, ground cover change, loss of natural vegetation, and grade changes as much as possible. It shall further provide for the relocation or replanting of trees which are proposed to be removed. 
4.  Projects shall be analyzed in terms of the appearance of the structure when viewed from the lake's surface. Building materials, and color shall be analyzed to determine which facade and roof materials minimize the appearance and blend the structure into the shoreland and vegetation. 
5.  Building heights shall be analyzed to determine the impact on surrounding structures and views from the lake surface or other shores. Structures shall not be allowed to exceed a height beyond that is allowed by the base zoning district or cannot be screened by landscaping or other design measures. 
6.  Residential densities on a project basis shall not be allowed to exceed the maximum allowed density of the base zoning district for which the project is proposed. For higher density residential development and planned unit developments, the density shall not be allowed to exceed the density standards as specified in the R-5 District of this Ordinance. 
7.  Lot coverage on a project basis shall be restricted to the provisions for maximum impervious surface coverage as provided for in this Ordinance. 
8.  Overall residential densities in the shoreland area shall not exceed the surplus development capacity for residential density, as calculated for Lake Minnetonka, Gleason and Peavey Lakes, as specified in the Wayzata Comprehensive Plan/Shoreland Management Plan, as may be amended. 
9.  Overall lot coverage in the shoreland area shall not exceed the surplus development capacity for impervious surface coverage calculated for Lake Minnetonka, Gleason and Peavey Lakes, as specified in the Wayzata Comprehensive Plan/Shoreland Management Plan, as may be amended. 
10.  All projects shall be in conformance with the Stormwater Management Plan for the City of Wayzata, May 1988, as may be amended and/or approved by the City Engineer. 
11.  All projects shall be in conformance with the Wayzata Comprehensive Plan/Shoreland Management Plan, as may be amended. 
12.  All projects shall be subject to the review of the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District. 
991.20 - Variance. 
Variances may be granted by the City Council in accordance with Chapter 905 of this Ordinance in extraordinary cases, but only when the proposed use is determined to be in the public interest. The following additional criteria shall apply within shoreland areas: 
A.  Result in the placement of an artificial obstruction which shall restrict the passage of storm and flood water in such a manner as to increase the height of flooding, except obstructions approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in conjunction with sound floodplain management. 
B.  Result in incompatible land uses or which shall be detrimental to the protection of surface and ground water supplies. 
C.  Be not in keeping with land use plans and planning objectives for the City of Wayzata or which shall increase or cause danger to life or property. 
D.  Be inconsistent with the objectives of encouraging land uses compatible with the preservation of the natural land forms, vegetation and the marshes and wetlands within the City of Wayzata. 
E.  Shall constitute a hardship as defined in Chapter 905 of this Ordinance. 
F.  No permit or variance shall be issued unless the applicant has submitted a Shoreland Impact Plan as required and set forth in this Ordinance. In granting any variance, the City Council may attach such conditions as they deem necessary to ensure compliance with the purpose and intent of this Section. 
991.21 - Subdivision/Platting Provisions. 
A.  Land Suitability. Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit developments authorized under Section 991.17 of this Ordinance, shall be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by the local unit of government shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage removal capabilities, near shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. 
B.  Consistency with Other Controls. Subdivisions shall conform to all provisions for subdivision, found as Part X of this Code. A subdivision shall not be approved where a later variance from one or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purposes. 
C.  Information Requirements. Sufficient information must be submitted by the applicant for the community to make a determination of land suitability. The information shall include the provisions found as Part X of this Code and the following additional evaluation criteria and conditions: 
1.  The surface water features required in Minn. Stats.  505.02, Subd. 1, to be shown on plats; 
2.  Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic vegetation; and aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and erosion, both during and after construction activities; 
3.  Location of 100-year floodplain areas and floodway districts from existing adopted maps or data; and 
4.  A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the "toe" and the "top" of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream. 
D.  Dedications. When a land or easement dedication is a condition of subdivision approval, the approval shall provide easements over natural drainage or ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands. 
991.22 - Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources. 
A.  Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider subdivisions/plats, variances, amendments, or conditional uses resulting from the requirements of Chapter 991 of this Ordinance shall be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats shall include copies of the subdivision/plat. 
B.  A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under this Shoreland Ordinance shall be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action. 
991.23 - Effect of Permit. 
The granting of any permit, variance or subdivision approval under provisions of this Ordinance shall in no way affect the owner's capability to obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance or legislation of any state agency or subdivision thereof. Approval may be expressly given in conjunction with other permits applied for, but no approval shall be implied from the grant of such permits nor from the necessity to apply for a permit as described herein. 
CHAPTER 992 - W WETLANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT 

992.01 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Section to protect and conserve wetland resources in the City of Wayzata in view of the facts that they serve as beneficial wildlife habitat, and that they also provide an effective, natural treatment, and control, of the City of Wayzata's stormwater runoff. Certain low lying and/or wetland areas of the City act as natural stormwater treatment control areas by detaining stormwater runoff, by allowing suspended sediment to settle from such water, and by removing nutrients from the runoff. These detention and drainageways thereby beneficially control both quantity and quality of stormwater runoff, and provide habitat for wildlife. A development or alteration of such areas could severely reduce the overall effectiveness of the City's stormwater treatment and control system by increasing potential pollution of Lake Minnetonka and increasing the flood damage potential to areas adjacent to the natural drainage areas. The preservation of areas containing low lands, marshes, wetlands, drainage areas, water bodies and waterways necessary to implement the Wayzata Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan is essential to the health, safety and general welfare or the City's residents. The Wayzata Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan is on file at Wayzata City Hall and was adopted on August 2, 1988, by the Wayzata City Council. 
992.02 - District Application. 
A.  All wetlands and their flood envelopes within the City of Wayzata are hereby designated as part of the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District, and the requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall govern development and other activities within these districts. 
B.  The Wetland System District Map shall be on file in the office of the City Engineer Department, together with all explanatory matter thereon or attached thereto, and declared to be part of this Ordinance. The map shall be open to inspection by the public during normal business hours of the City Hall. 
C.  The Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed upon all zoning districts as contained herein as existing or amended by the text and map of this Ordinance. The regulations and requirements imposed by the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District shall be in addition to those established for districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of districts, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
D.  The boundaries of wetlands and flood envelopes within the City may be changed by the City Council when it can be demonstrated by registered site survey and topographic work, and hydrologic analysis performed by registered engineer or land surveyor that the established boundaries shown on the Wetland System District Map are incorrect. 
992.03 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish and wildlife. 
B.  Scientific research and educational activities teach principles of ecology and conservation. 
C.  General outdoor recreation and leisure activities that are not inconsistent with the intent of this Ordinance and do not adversely affect the district's wildlife habitat or stormwater runoff quality enhancement values as measured by methodologies used in the "Stormwater Management Plan for the City of Wayzata." 
992.04 - Conditional Uses. 
The following operations and uses are allowed in the Wetlands Overlay District by conditional use permit. 
A.  Excavation or filling within any Wetland Overlay District which, as determined by the City Council, will mitigate or enhance previous actions, activities or conditions in an altered wetland. This may include actions which will improve the condition of wildlife habitat and/or stormwater runoff values in the wetlands district. Conditional uses within the Wetland Overlay District must also meet the standards outlined in Section 992.07. 
992.05 - Permitted Uses in Flood Envelope. 
The following operations and uses are permitted in the flood envelope as a matter of right, subject to any other applicable codes, ordinances or law: 
A.  Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening, and harvesting of crops. 
B.  Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, and play areas, but excluding structures and buildings except those permitted as conditional uses (Section 992.06). 
C.  Parking for commercial uses, provided that the established quality and quantity standards for specific wetlands will be maintained or exceeded. 
992.06 - Conditional Uses in Flood Envelope. 
The following operations and uses are allowed in the flood envelope by conditional use permit which require processing pursuant to Chapter 904 of this Ordinance: 
A.  Digging, dredging, extraction of any material from water bodies, water courses, wetlands, floodplain or natural drainage system. 
B.  Creation of ponds, dam or relocation of any water course or changes to the natural drainage system. 
C.  Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials. 
D.  Accessory buildings or structures. 
E.  Railroads, streets, parking lots, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines. 
F.  The construction or placement of structures for human habitation on fill, provided the requirements of Section 992.07 are met. 
992.07 - Restrictions on Issuance of Conditional Use Permits in the Flood Envelope of the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District. 
No conditional use permit shall be issued unless the following provisions are complied with: 
A.  No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levies), obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use, which acting alone or in combination with existing or reasonably anticipated future uses, adversely affects the capacity of a floodway or wetland, or increases water levels beyond permitted (see Section 992.07.D) levels. 
B.  No permit shall be issued with results in a use or obstruction detrimental to the protection of surface and groundwater supplies. 
C.  No permit shall be issued which will result in an obstruction or use incompatible with preservation of those natural land forms, vegetation and adjacent marshes and wet areas contiguous to stormwater detention areas or channels in the City which are principal factors in the management of surface water runoff throughout the year. 
D.  No permit shall be issued which results in development of land in stormwater detention areas necessary for temporary withholding of excessive runoff of surface water, or of land and water areas which provide groundwater infiltration, and which development will or may decrease the capacity or to provide such groundwater infiltration. 
E.  No permit shall be issued unless the proposed use, alteration or obstruction has received the approval of all governmental bodies having jurisdiction over such use or obstruction, including the appropriate watershed district, as the case may be, if such approval is required by the statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations applicable to such governmental bodies, and to such use or obstruction. 
F.  Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures and/or restriction of bridge openings and other narrow sections of water courses. 
G.  Electrical and heating equipment shall be installed at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area or adequately flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code. 
H.  Fill. The placement of fill in any area within the flood envelope of the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District or stormwater detention basin shall be governed by the following limitations: 
1.  Fill shall be limited to what is needed to grade or landscape for the proposed use, and shall not in any way obstruct the flow of stormwaters. 
2.  Spoil from dredging or sand and gravel operations shall not be deposited unless it can be done in accordance with H.1. above. 
3.  Fill shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover. 
4.  Fill within the flood envelope will be permitted if compensating flood volume is provided within the Wetlands Overlay District and if, based upon submission of a Wetland Systems Impact Plan (see Section 71.7.2), the City agrees that environmental degradation will not occur. A percentage of total allowable encroachment into the flood envelope of the Wetlands Overlay District will be allocated to riparian land owners in amounts of proportional to their percentage of ownership of the total flood envelope area with: 
a)  A total maximum allowable rise in the calculated flood elevation of 0.5 feet, or 
b)  A total increase in the calculated flood elevation rising to an elevation that is 1.0 foot below the elevation where structural damage of existing structures would occur, whichever is less. 
5.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain written approval for filling in the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District or stormwater basins from all property owners whose lands would be impacted by the subsequent rise of the established 100-year flood elevation prior to receiving approval of filling by the City. 
I.  Accessory Structures. Accessory structures permitted as a conditional use shall be governed by the following limitations: 
1.  Such structures shall not be designed for human habitation. 
2.  Such structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to stormwaters: 
a)  Whenever possible, such structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of stormwater flows. 
3.  Such structures shall be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code. 
4.  Accessory structures connected by tunnel, walkway, or a similar conveyance shall be considered part of the principal use, and shall not be permitted within the flood envelope. 
J.  Structure on Lakes, Ponds, or Flowages. For lakes, ponds or flowages, no structure, except boathouses, piers and docks, shall be placed at an elevation such that the lowest floor, including basement floor, is less than 21/2 feet above the calculated 100-year frequency flood elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall serve as the highest known water level. In those instances where sufficient data on known high water levels are not available, the elevation of the line of permanent shoreland vegetation shall be used as the estimated high water elevation. When fill is required to meet this elevation, the fill shall be allowed to stabilize, and construction shall not begin until the property has been inspected and approved by the Building Official. 
K.  Storage of Materials or Equipment Within the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding or rain inundation, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
L.  Wetland Systems Impact Plan. 
1.  As part of the application for a conditional use permit for a use within the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District, the applicant must furnish a Wetland Systems Impact Plan. A copy of said plan shall be transmitted to an engineer or other expert person or agency, as designated by the City for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is consistent with the water quality and wildlife habitat recommendations contained in the "Stormwater Management Plan for the City of Wayzata" and, therefore, permissible within the Wayzata Wetlands Overlay District or stormwater detention basin. 
2.  Contents of Plan. A Wetland Systems Impact Plan shall contain such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the City to fulfill the purposes of the Wetland Systems Impact Plan: 
a)  Said plan shall identify the calculated 100-year frequency flood elevation, and shall set forth proposed provisions for erosion and sediment control, water management, impacts on drainage and floodplain uses, maintenance of landscape features and any additional matters intended to improve or maintain the quality of the environment. 
b)  Evidence that the proposed development in the Wetland Systems Overlay District shall not reduce the district's scores for wildlife habitat and stormwater runoff quality enhancement values as calculated by methodologies presented in the "Stormwater Management Plan for the City of Wayzata" under conditions of the 100-year frequency (one percent probability) flood event. 
c)  Evidence that a development within the Wetland Systems Overlay District serves to maintain or increase the wetland criteria scores through compensatory measures, and provided that all other requirements are met. 
d)  Affirmatively set forth the changes requested by the applicant and affirmatively disclose what, if any, change will be made in the natural conditions of the earth (including loss or change of earth ground cover or destruction of trees, if any) or upon lakes, streams, water courses and marshes, low lands and wetlands in the area. 
e)  Evidence that the plan minimizes tree removal, ground cover change, loss of natural vegetation, and grade changes as much as possible and affirmatively provides for the relocation or replanting of as many trees as possible, which are proposed to be removed. 
f)  Evidence that the applicant has, to the greatest extent possible, eliminated potential pollution, erosion, siltation, or flooding, which may result from the proposed development. 
M.  Approved conditional use permits shall not adversely impact environmentally sensitive areas. This shall include, but not be limited to, spawning beds, nesting areas or habitat of endangered or threatened species. The City may limit the implementation season of an approved conditional use permit so as not to disturb or interfere with nesting or spawning seasons of the wildlife within the Wetland Overlay District or flood envelope. 
N.  Application for a conditional use permit shall comply with the standards and provisions outlined in Chapter 904 of this Ordinance. 
992.08 - Variances to the Provisions of Wetland Overlay District. 
A.  All applications for variances to the requirements of this Ordinance shall comply with and follow the procedures and criteria for approval as outlined in Chapter 905 of this Ordinance. 
B.  The City Council may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance is the proposed plan of the applicant provides mitigative measures to recreate, to an equal or greater degree, the environmental and hydrological function of the wetland area that is proposed to be altered. 
CHAPTER 993 - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT (FP) 

993.01 - Statutory Authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minn. Stats. Ch. 103F and 462, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
993.02 - Purpose. 
A.  This Ordinance regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the City of Wayzata. The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions. 
B.  National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Ordinance is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
C.  This Ordinance is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development. 
993.03 - General Provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which Regulations Apply. The Floodplain Overlay District shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the official Zoning Map as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Floodplain Districts. The Floodplain Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon all districts as existing or amended by the text and map of this Ordinance. The regulations and requirements imposed by the Floodplain Overlay District shall be in addition to those established by all other districts of this Ordinance. Where the floodplain regulations and requirements conflict with the base zoning district, the more restrictive regulations will be applied. 
B.  Incorporation of Maps by Reference. The following maps together with all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the Official Zoning Map and this Ordinance. The attached material includes the Flood Insurance Study for Hennepin County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas, dated November 4, 2016, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels enumerated below, dated November 4, 2016, all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file in the office of the City Manager. Effective Flood Insurance Rate Map panels. 
27053C0306F 27053C0308F 27053C0326F 27053C0307F 27053C0309F 27053C0328F  
C.  Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. 
D.  Interpretation. The boundaries of a zoning district shall be determined by scaling distances on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
1.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of any district, for example where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on the official Zoning Map and actual field conditions, the flood elevations shall be the governing factor. The Zoning Administrator must interpret the boundary location based on the ground elevations that existed on the site on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area within the regulatory floodplain, and other available technical data. 
2.  Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the City Council and to submit technical evidence. 
E.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or other private agreements. However, where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance prevail. All other Ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain Overlay District or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance of any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
G.  Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected and shall remain in full force. 
993.04 - Districts Established. 
A.  Districts. The floodplain areas within the Floodplain Overlay District are hereby divided into the following three districts: 
1.  Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section 993.03.B. For lakes, wetlands and other basins within Zones AE that do not have a floodway delineated, the Floodway District also includes those areas that are at or below the ordinary high water level as defined in Minn. Stats.  103G.005, Subd. 14. 
2.  Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section 993.03.B, but are located outside of the floodway. For lakes, wetlands and other basins within Zones AE that do not have a floodway delineated, the Flood Fringe District also includes those areas below the one percent annual chance (100-year) flood elevation but above the ordinary high water level as defined in Minn. Stats.  103G.005, Subd. 14. 
3.  General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District shall include those areas within Zone A that do not have a delineated floodway as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section 993.03.B. 
B.  Applicability. Within the floodplain districts established in this Ordinance, the use, size, type and location of development must comply with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations. In no cases shall floodplain development adversely affect the efficiency or unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries to the main stream, drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems. All uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in Sections 993.05, 993.06, and 993.07 are prohibited. 
993.05 - Floodway District (FW). 
A.  Permitted Uses. The following uses, subject to the standards set forth in Section 993.05.B, are permitted within the Floodway District, if the use is allowed in the underlying zoning district and any applicable overlay district: 
1.  Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
2.  Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, trap and skeet ranges, shooting preserves, target ranges, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails. 
3.  Industrial or commercial accessory uses such as loading areas and parking areas. 
4.  General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
5.  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines, provided that the Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit. 
B.  Floodway District Standards. Permitted uses within the Floodway District must meet the following standards. 
1.  The use must have low flood damage potential. 
2.  The use must not obstruct flood flows or cause any increase in flood elevations. 
3.  The use must not include structures, fill, obstructions, excavations, or storage of materials or equipment. 
4.  Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the one percent chance or regional flood. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses in the Floodway District if the use is also allowed in the underlying zoning district and in any applicable overlay district, and the use meets the standards and procedures in Section 993.13. 
1.  Structures accessory to a permitted or conditional use in the Floodway District. 
2.  Placement of fill. 
3.  Extraction or storage of sand, gravel, and other materials. 
4.  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures. 
5.  Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials. 
6.  Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes, and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures. 
D.  Conditional Use Permit Standards for Uses in the Floodway District. All conditional uses in the Floodway District must meet the conditional use permit procedures and standards in Chapter 904 and Section 993.13, and must meet all of the following standards: 
1.  The use must not cause any increase in the stage of the one percent chance or regional flood, or cause an increase in flood damage in the reach or reaches affected. 
2.  All accessory structures must meet the following requirements: 
a)  Accessory structures must not be intended for human habitation 
b)  Accessory structures must have low flood damage potential 
c)  Accessory structures must be constructed and placed so as to offer a minimal obstruction to the flow of flood waters. 
d)  Service utilities such as electrical and heating equipment within the structures must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly flood-proofed. 
e)  Accessory structures must meet one of the following: 
1)  The structure must be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood-proofed in accordance with the FP1 and FP2 flood-proofing classifications in the State Building Code. All flood-proofed structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
2)  As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally/wet flood-proofed to the FP3 or FP4 flood-proofing classifications in the State Building Code, provided that the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment and does not exceed 576 square feet in size. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria: 
(a)  To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two automatic openings in the outside walls of the structure, with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and 
(b)  There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure, and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings. 
3.  All fill and storage of materials or equipment must meet the following requirements: 
a)  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
b)  Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain must be protected by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap, or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site development plan. 
c)  Temporary placement of fill, other materials, or equipment which would cause an increase to the stage of the one percent chance or regional flood may only be allowed if the City has approved a plan that assures removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. 
4.  Flood control structures that will change the course, current, or cross section of protected wetlands or public water must meet the provisions of Minn. Stats.  103G.245. 
5.  A levee, dike, or floodwall constructed in the floodway must not cause an increase to the one percent chance or regional flood. The technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. 
6.  Floodway developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system. 
993.06 - Flood Fringe District (FF). 
A.  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses within the Flood Fringe District are those uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts that comply with the standards in Section 993.06.B. 
B.  Standards for Flood Fringe District. 
1.  Permitted uses within the Flood Fringe District must meet all of the following requirements: 
a)  All structures, including accessory structures, must be constructed on fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation, and the fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of any structure. All fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by riprap, vegetative covering, or other acceptable method. 
b)  The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on fill to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. 
c)  The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with Section 993.06.B.1.a). 
2.  All uses within the Flood Fringe District must meet all of the following requirements: 
a)  All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or water-tight to prevent infiltration of floodwaters. 
b)  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life, is prohibited. 
c)  All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation, or must have a flood warning and emergency evacuation plan acceptable to the City Engineer. 
d)  Commercial Uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks and parking lots, may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, any facilities used by employees or the general public shall be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would inundate to a depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of a one percent chance or regional flood. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses in the Flood Fringe District, if they are also allowed in the underlying zoning district and any applicable overlay district. All conditional uses in the Flood Fringe District must meet the conditional use permit standards in Chapter 904 and Section 993.13. 
1.  Any structure that is not elevated on fill in accordance with Section 993.06.B.1.a), if it meets the following requirements: 
a)  The use must comply with all Flood Fringe District standards in Section 993.06.B.2. 
b)  Basements, as defined by Section 902.02, shall be subject to the following: 
1)  Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. 
2)  All areas of non-residential structures, including basements, may be located below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation provided the structure is flood-proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood-proofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood-proofing must meet the FP1 or FP2 flood-proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood-proofed to the FP3 or FP4 classification shall not be permitted. 
2.  Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory flood protection elevation, if it meets the following requirements: 
a)  The use must comply with all Flood Fringe District standards in Section 993.06.B.2. 
b)  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
c)  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council. 
3.  The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar material, other than for the purpose of elevating a structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation, provided the following requirements are met: 
a)  The use must comply with all Flood Fringe District standards in Section 993.06.B.2. 
b)  A erosion and sedimentation control plan is required which includes the following: 
1)  The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional (one percent chance) flood event. 
2)  The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City Engineer. 
3)  The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists. 
4)  Any structure that uses alternative methods to elevate a structure above the regulatory flood protection elevation other than through the use of fill, such as stilts, pilings, parallel walls, or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garage. The alternative elevation methods must meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above-grade not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: 
(1)  The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 
(2)  It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and 
(3)  It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional standards. 
D.  Design and Certification. The structure's design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding. 
E.  Specific Standards for Above-Grade, Enclosed Areas. Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate: 
1.  The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be a minimum of two automatic openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention. 
2.  That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP3 or FP4 classifications in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage. 
993.07 - General Floodplain District (GF). 
A.  Permitted Uses. Permitted uses within the General Floodplain District are the same as the permitted uses for the Floodway District as outlined in Section 993.05.A. 
B.  Other Uses. The General Floodplain District includes the entire Floodplain and does not differentiate between those areas that are in the Floodway District and those areas that are in the Flood Fringe District. Because of this, the City shall determine whether the proposed use is in the Floodway District or Flood Fringe District using procedures established in Section 993.07.C. If it is determined that the use lies in the Floodway District, the provisions of Section 993.05 shall apply. If it is determined that the proposed use lies in the Flood Fringe District, the provisions of Section 993.06 shall apply. 
C.  Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations. 
1.  Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the General Floodplain District, the Zoning Administrator must obtain, review and reasonably utilize any regional flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source. 
2.  If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily available, the applicant must furnish additional information, as needed, to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use would fall within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District. Information must be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards and the standards in Section 993.07.C.3 below. 
3.  The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include the following components, as applicable: 
a)  Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (one percent chance) flood. 
b)  Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas. 
c)  Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage increase than one-half foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway boundaries. 
4.  The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning Administrator may seek technical assistance from a designated engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on this assessment, the Zoning Administrator may approve or deny the application. 
5.  Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of Sections 993.06 and 993.06. 
993.08 - Subdivision Standards. 
A.  Subdivisions. No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for reasons of flooding or inadequate drainage, water supply, or sewage treatment facilities. In addition to the requirements in Part X, Subdivisions, the following additional requirements apply to all subdivisions located in the Floodplain Overlay District: 
1.  All lots within a subdivision that are located within the Floodplain Overlay District must be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District and which is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
2.  All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional (one percent chance) flood has been approved by the City Council. The plan must be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City Engineer, and must demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation. 
3.  For all subdivisions in the Floodplain Overlay District, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation, and the required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents. 
4.  In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the information required in Section 993.07.C to determine the regional flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site. 
5.  If a subdivision proposal is in a flood prone area, any such proposal must be reviewed to ensure that: 
a)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area, 
b)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and 
c)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard. 
6.  If a proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements must be: 
a)  Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
b)  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
c)  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and 
d)  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
993.09 - Public Utilities and Public Transportation Facilities. 
A.  Public Utilities. All public utilities and facilities, such as gas, electrical, sewer and water supply systems, to be located in a floodplain shall be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
B.  On-Site Water Supply and Sewage Treatment Systems. Where public utilities are not provided: 
1.  On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are subject to the provisions in Minn. R. Ch. 4725.4350, as amended; and 
2.  New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the provisions in Minn. R. Ch. 7080.2270, as amended. 
C.  Public Transportation Facilities. Railroad tracks, roads and bridges to be located within the Floodway District shall comply with Section 993.05. These transportation facilities must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health, safety or welfare or where such facilities are essential to orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health, safety or welfare. 
993.10 - Manufactured Homes, Manufactured Home Parks, and Recreational Vehicles. 
A.  Manufactured Homes. New manufactured homes, new manufactured home parks, and expansions to existing manufactured home parks are prohibited in any floodplain district. 
B.  Recreational Vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are prohibited in any floodplain district. 
993.11 - Floodplain Use Permit. 
A.  Floodplain Use Permit Required. A floodplain use permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be secured prior to the conducting the following activities within the Floodplain Overlay District: 
1.  Erection, addition or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in this Ordinance. 
2.  The use or change of use of a building, structure, or land. 
3.  The construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system. 
4.  Any changes to a non-conforming use, structure, or occupancy of land. 
5.  The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source. 
6.  Placement of fill, excavation of materials, or storage of materials and equipment within a floodplain district. 
7.  Relocation or alteration of a watercourse, including new or replacement culverts and bridges, unless a public waters work permit has been applied for and approved by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 
8.  Any other type of development as defined in this Ordinance. 
B.  Application for Floodplain Use Permit. Application for a floodplain use permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by him or her, and shall include the following where applicable: 
1.  A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions, existing and proposed buildings, structures, and significant natural features having an influence on the permit. 
2.  Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the stream channel. 
3.  Copies of any required municipal, county, state or federal permits or approvals. 
4.  Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application. 
C.  Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered or Non-Conforming Use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator, stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Section. 
D.  Certification. The applicant is required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Flood-proofing measures must be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect. 
E.  Record of First Floor Elevation. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The Zoning Administrator must also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and alterations or additions to structures are flood-proofed. 
F.  Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. Before authorizing any alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to Minn. Stats.  103G.245, this will suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
G.  Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease Base Flood Elevations. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data. 
993.12 - Variances. 
A.  Variance Applications. An application for a variance to the provisions of the Floodplain Overlay District will be processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable State Statutes and Chapter 905. 
B.  Adherence to State Floodplain Management Standards. A variance must not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by State law. 
C.  Additional Variance Criteria. The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied: 
1.  Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
2.  Variances may only be issued by a community upon: 
a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or Ordinances. 
3.  Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
D.  Flood Insurance Notice. The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction below the base or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. 
3.  Such notifications must be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
E.  Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
F.  Submittal of Final Decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
G.  Record-Keeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their approval, and must report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
993.13 - Conditional Use Permits. 
A.  Review Process and Procedure. An application for a conditional use permit under the provisions of this Ordinance will be processed and reviewed in accordance with Chapter 904. 
B.  Factors Used in Decision-Making. In reviewing conditional use permit applications, the City Council must consider all relevant factors specified in other Sections of this Ordinance, and the following factors in granting and imposing conditions on conditional use permits in the Floodplain Overlay District: 
1.  The potential danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 
2.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
3.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and the ability of these systems to minimize the potential for disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 
4.  The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
5.  The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed use to the community. 
6.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
7.  The availability of viable alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding. 
8.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
9.  The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and flood plain management program for the area. 
10.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
11.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
C.  Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. The City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities. 
2.  Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation. 
3.  Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions. 
4.  Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures. 
5.  Flood-proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and this Ordinance. The applicant must submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. 
D.  Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for conditional use permit applications to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
E.  Submittal of Final Decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
993.14 - Non-Conformities. 
A.  Non-Conforming Uses, Structures, or Occupancies. A use, structure, or occupancy of land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this Ordinance but which is not in conformity with the provisions of the Floodplain Overlay District may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in Section 902.02 of this Ordinance, are subject to the provisions of Sections 993.14.A.1 through 993.14.A.6. 
1.  Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures, or occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited. 
2.  A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows. Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage potential must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood-proofing techniques (i.e., FP1 through FP4 flood-proofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in Sections 993.14.A.3 through 993.14.A.7 below. 
3.  If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the market value of any nonconforming structure, it shall be considered substantial improvement, and the entire structure must meet the standards of Section 993.05 or 993.06 of this Ordinance for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all labor. 
4.  If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure, is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the property or structure must conform to this Ordinance. The City Assessor must notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of nonconformities that have been discontinued for a period of more than one year. 
5.  If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in Section 902.02, the nonconformity may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in Section 993.05 or 993.06 shall apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively. 
6.  If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive loss, as defined in Section 902.02, it must not be reconstructed except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
7.  Any substantial improvement, as defined in Section 902.02, to a nonconforming structure requires that the existing structure and any additions must meet the requirements of Section 993.05 or 993.06 for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. 
993.15 - Violations and Enforcement. 
A.  Violations. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with approvals of variances or conditional uses permits, shall be penalized in accordance with Chapter 908. 
B.  Enforcement. Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance will be investigated and resolved in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 908. In responding to a suspected Ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator and City may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures, or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The City must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct Ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
C.  Other Lawful Action. Nothing in this Ordinance restricts the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this Ordinance and will be prosecuted accordingly. 
993.16 - Amendments. 
A.  Ordinance Amendment. All map revisions must meet the process, procedure, and standards of Chapter 903. 
B.  Restrictions on Removal. The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map must not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) if the Commissioner determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use. 
C.  Amendments Require DNR Approval. All amendments to this Ordinance must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner must approve the amendment prior to community approval. 
D.  Map Revisions Require Ordinance Amendments. The floodplain overlay district regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to the floodplain maps adopted in Section 993.03.B of this Ordinance. 
PART X - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters 
CHAPTER 1001 - GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS 

1001.01 - Short Title. 
This Chapter may be known, cited and referred to as the Wayzata Subdivision Ordinance. 
1001.02 - Purpose and Goals. 
A.  Purpose. This Chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
1.  To encourage well planned, efficient and attractive subdivisions, by establishing adequate and impartial standards for design and construction. 
2.  To provide for the health and safety of residents, by requiring properly designed streets and adequate sewer and water service. 
3.  To place the cost of improvements against those benefiting from their construction 
4.  To secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and waters. 
5.  To set the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
B.  Goals. Subdivisions approved under this Ordinance shall be guided by the following: 
1.  Preserve and enhance Wayzata's "small town" character (Comprehensive Plan). 
2.  Respect the existing scale, character and pattern of the City, recognizing existing neighborhoods and commercial areas (Wayzata Physical Plan). 
3.  Provide a balanced housing supply available for all people no matter their income, age, race or ethnicity (Comprehensive Plan). 
4.  Support a pedestrian environment at a human, not automotive scale (Wayzata Physical Plan). 
5.  Relate development/redevelopment to the natural characteristics of the land to enhance the development through the preservation of attractive natural amenities (i.e., lakes, wetlands, creeks, wooded areas, slopes, etc.) (Comprehensive Plan). 
1001.03 - Approvals Necessary for Acceptance of Subdivision Plats. 
Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall be referred to the City Planning Commission and approved by the City Council as having fulfilled the requirements of this Chapter. 
A.  For general State law provisions relating to the subdivision of land and the platting thereof, see Minn. Stats. Chs. 429, 462.351, 462.358, and 505.01 et seq. 
1001.04 - Conditions for Recording. 
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the Hennepin County Recorder's office or have any validity until the plat has been prepared, approved and acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this Chapter. 
1001.05 - Building Permits. 
No building permits shall be considered for issuance by the City for the construction of any building, structure or improvement to the land or to any lot in a subdivision as defined herein, until all requirements of this Chapter have been fully complied with. Building permit requirements are set forth in Chapter 802-1 of the City Code. 
1001.06 - Conflict. 
Whenever there is a difference between minimum standards or dimensions specified herein and those contained in other official regulations, resolutions or City Code provisions, the most restrictive standards shall apply. 
1001.07 - Measured Distances. 
All measured distances expressed in feet shall be the nearest tenth of a foot. 
1001.08 - Definitions. 
Except for those words and phrases defined below, the words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to be given the meaning in common usage, so as to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. 
A.  "Alley" means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street. 
B.  "Applicant" means the owner, his agent or person having legal control and/or interest in the land proposed to be subdivided. 
C.  "Attorney" means the attorney employed by the City, unless otherwise stated. 
D.  "Base Lot" means a lot meeting all the specifications within its zoning district prior to being divided into a subdivision of single-family attached units. 
E.  "Block" means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and the entire boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake. 
F.  "Boulevard" means the portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the property line. 
G.  "Building" means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or movable property of any kind, and includes any structure. 
H.  "Butt Lot" means a lot at the end of a block, located between two corner lots. 
I.  "City" means the City of Wayzata. 
J.  "Cluster Development" means a subdivision development planned and constructed so as to group housing units into relatively tight patterns, while providing a unified network of open space and wooded areas, meeting the overall density regulation of this Chapter and the Zoning Ordinance. 
K.  "Comprehensive Plan" means a comprehensive plan prepared by the City, including a compilation of policy statement goals, standards and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development of the City, including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
L.  "Contour Map" means a map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevations. "Contour interval" shall mean the vertical height between contour lines. 
M.  "Copy" means a print or reproduction made from a tracing. 
N.  "County" means Hennepin County, Minnesota 
O.  "Design Standards" means the specifications to landowners or subdivision applicants for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as rights-of-way, blocks, easements and lots. 
P.  "Development" means the act of building structures and installing site improvements. 
Q.  "Double Frontage Lot" means a lot which has a property line abutting on one street and an opposite property line abutting on another non-intersecting street. 
R.  "Drainage Course" means a water course or indenture for the drainage of surface water. 
S.  "Easement" means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land and for the purpose of constructing and maintaining drives, utilities, including, but not limited to, wetlands, ponding areas, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines. 
T.  "Engineer" means the registered engineer employed by the City, unless otherwise stated. 
U.  "Flag Lot" means an "L" shaped design utilizing a minimum frontage on a public street in order to facilitate back lot or rear property division and development. 
V.  "Final Plat" means a drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the requirements of the City and in such form as required by Hennepin County for the purpose of recording. 
W.  "Governing Body" means the Wayzata City Council. 
X.  "Key Map" means a map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitively shows the area proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical features (e.g., town centers, lakes and roads). 
Y.  "Lot" means a parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof. 
Z.  "Lot, Corner," means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees. 
AA.  "Lot Improvement" means any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. Certain proposed lot improvements shall be properly bonded for as provided in these regulations. 
BB.  "Metes and Bounds Description" means a description of real property which is not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof. 
CC.  "Natural Water Way" means a natural passageway in the surface of the earth, so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area. The term also shall include all drainage structures that have been constructed or placed for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another. 
DD.  "Outlot" means a lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open space or other future use, for which no building permit shall be issued. 
EE.  "Owner" means an individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in the land sought to be subdivided. 
FF.  "Parks and Playgrounds" means public land and open spaces in the City dedicated or reserved for recreation purposes. 
GG.  "Pedestrian Way" means a public right-of-way or private easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the installation of paths or trails. 
HH.  "Percentage of Grade" means along a centerline of a street, the change in vertical elevation in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 of horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage. 
II.  "Planning Commission" means the Planning Commission of the City. 
JJ.  "Preliminary Plat" means a drawing or map of a proposed subdivision meeting the requirements herein enumerated submitted to the Planning Commission and governing body for their consideration, in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, along with required supporting data. 
KK.  "Private Street" means a street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public and is owned by one or more private parties. 
LL.  "Protective Covenants" means contracts entered into between all owners and holders of mortgage constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and providing mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair the stability of property value and economic integrity of any given area. 
MM.  "Public Improvement" means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water system, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume ownership, responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
NN.  "Quadraminiums" means single structures which contain four subdivided dwelling units all of which have individually separate entrances from the exterior of the structure. 
OO.  "Reserve Strips" means a narrow strip of land placed between lot lines and streets to control access. 
PP.  "Right-of-Way" means the land covered by a public road, otherwise dedicated for public use, or land for certain private uses, such as land over which a power line passes. 
QQ.  "Setback" means the distance between a building and the property line nearest thereto. 
RR.  "Street" means a public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated. 
SS.  "Streets, Arterial," means those streets carrying larger volumes of traffic and serving as links between various subareas of the City. Arterial streets are intended to provide for collection and distribution of traffic between highways and collector streets; hence regulation of direct access to property is critical. 
TT.  "Streets, Collector," means those streets which carry traffic from local streets to the major system of arterials and highways. Collector streets primarily provide principal access to residential neighborhoods, including, to a lesser degree direct land access. 
UU.  "Streets, Local," means those streets which are used primarily for access to abutting properties and for local traffic movement. 
VV.  "Streets, Marginal Access (Service Road)," means those local streets which are parallel and adjacent to high volume arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
WW.  "Streets, Cul-De-Sac," means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
XX.  "Street Width" means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
YY.  "Subdivision" means the division of land into two or more lots or parcels or combination of two or more lots or parcels. This term includes resubdivision, lot combination and, where appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
ZZ.  "Surveyor" means a land surveyor registered under Minnesota State laws. 
AAA.  "Tracing" means a plat or map drawn on transparent paper, film, or cloth which can be reproduced by using regular reproduction procedure. 
BBB.  "Two-Family Dwelling" means a dwelling designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
CCC.  "Unit Lots" means lots created from the subdivision of single-family attached dwellings having different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional base lot within the zoning district. 
DDD.  "Zoning Ordinance" means the Zoning Ordinance or resolution controlling the use of land as adopted by the City. 
CHAPTER 1002 - MINOR SUBDIVISION AND LOT COMBINATION 

1002.01 - Qualification. 
This Chapter shall apply to the following applications: 
A.  In the case of a request to divide a portion of a lot where the division is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot so that no additional lots are created and both new lots conform to Zoning Ordinance lot size minimum standards. 
B.  In the case of a request to combine two existing platted lots: 
1.  Of which one or both lots are non-confirming due to insufficient lot size, width or depth; and 
2.  Which results in a single lot that is not greater in area than 125 percent of the minimum lot size of the established zoning district. 
C.  In the case of a request to divide a lot from a larger tract of land thereby creating no more than two lots, each may not be greater in area than 125 percent of the minimum lot size of the established zoning district. To qualify, the parcel of land shall not have been part of a minor subdivision within the last five years. 
D.  In the case of a request to divide a base lot which is a part of a recorded plat upon which has been constructed a two-family dwelling, townhouse or quadraminium, where the division is to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling unit within such a structure and the newly created property lines will not cause any of the unit lots or the structure to be in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, or the State Building Code. 
1002.02 - Content and Data Requirements. 
A.  Certificate of Survey. The requested minor division shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor in the form of a Certificate of Survey. 
B.  Property Description and Submission Information. The data and supportive information detailing the proposed subdivision shall be the same as required for a preliminary plat as described in Section 1003.02 of this Chapter. Exceptions, as stipulated in writing, may be granted by the City Manager. 
1002.03 - Design Standards. 
The minor subdivision shall conform to all design standards as specified in this Chapter. Any proposed deviation from said standards shall require the processing of a variance request. 
1002.04 - Processing. 
A.  If the land division involves property which has been previously platted, or the total property area included is greater than ten acres, the City Manager shall have the authority to approve the subdivision, provided that it complies with applicable provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  In the case of applications involving property not previously platted or less than ten acres in total area, applicable processing provisions of Section 1003.02, Preliminary Platting, shall be followed. 
C.  The provisions of Section 1003.02.E of this Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met. 
CHAPTER 1003 - PROCEDURES FOR FILING AND REVIEW 

1003.01 - Sketch Plan. 
In order to ensure that all applicants are informed of the procedural requirements and minimum standards of this Chapter and the requirements or limitations imposed by other City Code provisions or plans, prior to the development of a preliminary plat, all applicants shall present a sketch plan to the City Manager prior to filing a preliminary plat. The City Manager may refer said sketch plan to City Staff, the Planning Commission and/or the City Council for review or comments. 
1003.02 - Preliminary Plat. 
A.  Filing. 
1.  The applicant, or his surveyor, or his planner or another designated agent shall prepare and file a plat which is in conformity with the requirements of this Chapter. The applicant must demonstrate to the City ownership of the land in question or show the legal and written power to file a preliminary plat application for the land in question. 
2.  The applicant also shall complete an "Application for Consideration of Planning Request," and/or such other application form as may be required, and shall submit any additional information, plans or studies as are required by this Ordinance, and shall furnish the City Manager with four copies of their plat and one reduced copy of their plat no larger than 11 x 17 inches. 
3.  The applicant shall submit a list of property owners located within 350 feet of the subject property. The records of the City Assessor shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and ownership of all such properties. 
4.  The applicant shall submit any necessary applications for variances from the provisions of this Chapter, as set out in Section 1009.04. 
5.  Prior to consideration of the proposed plat by the City, the applicant shall pay the required filing fee as established by City Council resolution. 
6.  The plat shall be considered as being officially submitted when all of the information requirements are complied with and the appropriate fees paid. 
B.  Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed application as outlined in A. above, the City Manager shall set a public hearing for public review of the preliminary plat. The hearing shall be held after adequate time has been allowed for staff and advisory body review of the plat, but within 45 days of the completed filing of the application. The applicant and/or his representative(s) shall appear at the public hearing before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposal. Notice of the hearing shall consist of a legal property description, description of request and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to all owners of land within 350 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Failure of any property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate the public hearing. 
C.  Technical Assistance Reports. The City Manager may instruct the appropriate staff to prepare technical reports and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council. This may include the City Planner, City Engineer, City Code Enforcement Officer or the City Attorney, among others. 
D.  Review by Other Commissions or Jurisdictions. The City Manager shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to County, Metropolitan, State or other public jurisdictions for their review and comment, where appropriate and when required. This may include the State Commissioner of Natural Resources and the Watershed District Board. 
E.  Planning Commission Criteria. The Planning Commission shall report its findings and make its recommendations to the City Council no later than 30 days after the close of public hearing described in B. above. If the Planning Commission has not acted upon the preliminary plat within 30 days following the close of the public hearing on such and in compliance with this Chapter, the council may act on the preliminary plat without the Planning Commission's recommendation. The Planning Commission shall consider possible adverse effects of the preliminary plat. Its judgment shall be based upon, but not limited to, the following factors: 
1.  The proposed subdivision or lot combination shall be consistent with the Wayzata Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Building pads that result from a subdivision or lot combination shall preserve sensitive areas such as lakes, streams, wetlands, wildlife habitat, trees and vegetation, scenic points, historical locations, or similar community assets. 
3.  Building pads that result from subdivision or lot combination shall be selected and located with respect to natural topography to minimize filing or grading. 
4.  Existing stands of significant trees shall be retained where possible. 
Building pads that result from a subdivision or lot combination shall be sensitively integrated into existing trees. 
5.  The creation of a lot or lots shall not adversely impact the scale, pattern or character of the City, its neighborhoods, or its commercial areas. 
6.  The design of a lot, the building pad, and the site layout shall respond to and be reflective of the surrounding lots and neighborhood character. 
7.  The lot size that results from a subdivision or lot combination shall not be dissimilar from adjacent lots or lots found in the surrounding neighborhood or commercial area. 
8.  The architectural appearance, scale, mass, construction materials, proportion and scale of roof line and functional plan of a building proposed on a lot to be divided or combined shall be similar to the characteristics and quality of existing development in the City, a neighborhood or commercial area. 
9.  The design, scale and massing of buildings proposed on a subdivided or combined lot shall be subject to the architectural guidelines and criteria for the Downtown Architectural District, Commercial and Institutional Architectural Districts, and Residential Architectural Districts and the Design Review Board/City Council review process outline in Chapter 909 of the Wayzata Zoning Ordinance. 
10.  The proposed lot layout and building pads hall conform with all performance standards contained herein. 
11.  The proposed subdivision or lot combination shall not tend to or actually depreciate the values of neighboring properties in the area in which the subdivision or lot combination is proposed. 
12.  The proposed subdivision or lot combination shall be accommodated with existing public services, primarily related to transportation and utility systems, and will not overburden the City's service capacity. 
F.  City Council Action. 
1.  The Council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within 120 days following delivery of an application completed in compliance with this Chapter unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to by the applicant. 
2.  If the preliminary plat is not approved by the City Council, the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Council and shall be transmitted to the subdivider. If the preliminary plat is approved, such approval shall not constitute final acceptance of the layout. Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals and other features and requirements as specified by this Chapter to be indicated on the final plat. The City Council may impose such conditions and restrictions as it deems appropriate or require such revisions or modifications in the preliminary plat or final plat as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety, comfort, general welfare and convenience of the City. 
3.  The City Council reserves the right to decline approval of a subdivision or lot combination if it does not comply with all the criteria found in Section 1003.02.E of this Ordinance. 
4.  Following City Council approval of a preliminary plat, the applicant must submit a final plat to the City Manager within 100 days of preliminary approval unless otherwise specified as part of a development agreement. If this procedure is not followed, then approval of the preliminary plat shall be considered void, unless a request for time extension is submitted in writing and approved by the City Council. 
5.  Should the applicant desire to amend a preliminary plat as approved, he may submit an amended preliminary plat. The applicant shall follow the same procedure as a new preliminary plat. No public hearing or fee will be required unless the amendment, in the opinion of the City Council, is of such scope as to constitute a new preliminary plat. 
1003.03 - Final Plat. 
A.  Filing. After the preliminary plat has been approved, the final plat shall be submitted for review as set forth in the subsections which follow. The City may agree to review the preliminary and final plat simultaneously. The final plat shall incorporate all changes, modifications and revisions required by the City. Otherwise, it shall conform to the approved preliminary plat. 
B.  Except as provided as specified as part of a Development Contract, the submission of a final plat application shall be no later than 100 days after the date of approval of the preliminary plat for distribution to the City Council and appropriate City staff. Seven copies of the final plat and one reduced copy no larger than 11 x 17 inches shall be submitted to the City Manager for City review. 
C.  All final plats shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and requirements of this Chapter. 
D.  An applicant shall submit with the final plat a current Abstract of Title or a Registered Property Certificate, along with any unrecorded documents, and an Opinion of Title. 
E.  Review of a Final Plat. 
1.  Upon receipt of a final plat, the City Manager shall refer one copy each to the City Council, appropriate City staff, the County Surveyor, and the Watershed District Board, if applicable, and to all applicable utility companies, and one copy, with Abstract of Title or Registered Property Certificate and Opinion Title, to the City Attorney. 
2.  The City Council may refer the final plat to the Planning Commission for recommendation if they feel the proposed final plat is substantially different from the approved preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall submit a report thereon to the City Council within 45 days. 
3.  The City staff receiving final plat copies shall submit reports through the City Manager to the City Council within 15 days, expressing their recommendation on the final plat. 
4.  The County Surveyor shall review the final plat and notify the subdivider's surveyor or final plat preparer of corrections that are to be made to the final plat. 
5.  Prior to approval of a final plat, the applicant shall have executed an agreement with the City controlling the installation of all required improvements. Said agreement will require all improvements to comply with approved engineering standards and applicable regulations. 
6.  The City Council shall take action on final plat not more than 60 days after the plat application is filed with the City Manager. If the final plat is not approved, the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the official proceedings of the City and shall be transmitted to the subdivider. The City Council's approval of the final plat shall be subject to its conformance with all the criteria found in Chapter 1003.02.E of this Ordinance. 
7.  Upon receiving an approved final plat in conformance with the requirements of the County Surveyor, representatives of the City shall sign the plat and the applicant, as a condition of approval, shall record it with the County Registrar of Titles within 120 days, or the approved final plat shall be considered void. 
8.  The applicant, immediately upon recording, shall furnish the City Manager with a reproducible copy of the recorded final plat, either chronoflex or its equivalent, and two prints. Failure to furnish such copies shall be grounds for refusal to issue building permits for the lots within a plat. 
9.  Upon receiving approval of a final plat for a portion of an approved preliminary plat, a continuation of the recognition of the preliminary plat is not required to maintain its approval. In the event a Zoning Ordinance amendment is adopted which required a larger minimum lot size for land not yet platted and recorded, the larger minimum lot size may be required for any additional platting. If the applicant is unable to file a final plat application within the required 100 days, such person shall file a written request for an extension of the preliminary plat approval with the City Manager and receive City Council approval prior to the end of the 100 days. Said request shall specify and the City shall approve the length of time the preliminary plat shall remain in full force and effect. 
CHAPTER 1004 - PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS 

1004.01 - Qualification. 
Any preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision deemed premature for development shall be denied by the City Council. 
1004.02 - Condition Establishing Premature Subdivisions. 
A subdivision may be deemed premature should any of the conditions set forth in the following provisions exist: 
A.  Lack of Adequate Drainage. A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed to exist if: 
1.  Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is such that it constitutes a danger to the structural security of the proposed structures. 
2.  The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water sources or damage from erosion and siltation on downhill or downstream land. 
3.  The proposed site grading and development will clause harmful and irreparable damage from erosion and siltation on downstream land. 
Factors to be considered in making these determinations may include: average rainfall for the area; the relation of the land to flood plains; the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support surface water runoff and waste disposal systems; the slope of the land and its effect on effluents; and the presence of streams as related to effluent disposal. 
B.  Lack of Adequate Water Supply. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack an adequate water supply if the proposed subdivision does not have adequate sources of water to serve the proposed subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible density without causing an unreasonable depreciation of existing water supplies for surrounding areas. 
C.  Lack of Adequate Roads or Highways to Serve the Subdivision. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate roads or highways to serve the subdivision when: 
1.  Roads which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a width, grade, stability, vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance and surface condition that an increase in traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general welfare, or aggravate an already hazardous condition, and when, with due regard to the advice of Hennepin County and/or the Minnesota Department of Transportation, said roads are inadequate for the intended use; or 
2.  The traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would create unreasonable highway congestion or unsafe conditions on highways existing at the time of the application or proposed for completion within the next two years. 
D.  Lack of Adequate Waste Disposal Systems. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate waste disposal systems if in subdivisions for which sewer lines are proposed, there is inadequate sewer capacity in the present system to support the subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible density indicated in the Wayzata Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended. 
E.  Inconsistency with Comprehensive Plan. The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the purposes, objectives and recommendations of the duly adopted Comprehensive Plan of Wayzata, as may be amended. 
F.  Providing Public Improvements. If public improvements, such as recreational facilities, streets and utilities, reasonably necessitated by the subdivision, which must be provided at public expense, cannot be provided for within the next two fiscal years. 
G.  MEQB Policies. The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the policies the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board (MEQB), as may be amended, and could adversely impact critical environmental areas or potentially disrupt or destroy historic areas which are designated or officially recognized by the City Council in violation of Federal and State historical preservation laws. 
1004.03 - Burden of Establishing. 
The burden shall be upon the applicant to show that the proposed subdivision is not premature. 
CHAPTER 1005 - PLAT AND DATA REQUIREMENTS 

1005.01 - Sketch Plan. 
Sketch plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
A.  Plat boundary. 
B.  North arrow. 
C.  Scale. 
D.  Street layout on and adjacent to plat. 
E.  Designation of land use and current and proposed zoning. 
F.  Significant topographical or physical features. 
G.  General lot locations and layout. 
H.  Preliminary evaluation by the applicant that the subdivision is not classified as premature based upon criteria established in 1004.02 of this Chapter. 
1005.02 - Preliminary Plat. 
The applicant shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat, together with any necessary supplementary information. The preliminary plat shall contain the information set forth in the subsections which follow: 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  The proposed name of subdivision; names shall not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the County. 
2.  Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section, quarter section or quarter-quarter section lines comprising a legal description of the property. 
3.  Name, address and phone number of the record owner, any agent having control of the land, the applicant, land surveyor, engineer and designer of the plan. 
4.  Graphic scale not less than one inch to 100 feet. 
5.  North point and key map of the area, showing well-known geographical points for orientation within a one-half mile radius. 
6.  Date of preparation. 
B.  Existing Conditions. 
1.  Boundary line and total acreage of proposed plat clearly indicated. 
2.  Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting the subdivision. 
3.  Approximate total acreage. 
4.  Location, right-of-way width and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks and other public lands, permanent buildings and structures, easements and section, corporate and school district lines within the plan, to a distance 100 feet beyond the plat. 
5.  Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the preliminary plat area and to a distance of 100 feet beyond. Such data as grades and locations of catch basins, manholes, hydrants and street pavement width and type also shall be shown. 
6.  Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land, within 100 feet, identified by name and ownership, including all contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider. 
7.  Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. Water courses, marshes, wooded areas, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines, and other significant features also shall be shown. U.S.G.S. datum shall be used for all topographic mapping where feasible. 
8.  A statement certifying the environmental condition of the site including the presence of any hazardous substance as defined in Minn. Stats.  115B.02, Subd. 8. Such statement may be required to be based upon an environmental audit of the site by an environmental engineering firm acceptable to the City. 
C.  Proposed Design Features. 
1.  Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths, centerline gradients, typical cross-sections, and proposed names of streets in conformance with City and County street identification policies. The name of any street heretofore used in the City or its environs shall not be used unless the proposed street is a logical extension of an already named street, in which event the same name shall be used. 
2.  Locations and widths of proposed pedestrian ways. 
3.  Locations and size of proposed sewer lines and water mains. 
4.  Gradients of proposed streets, sewer lines and water mains, as requested. 
5.  Location, dimension and purpose of all easements. 
6.  Layout, numbers, lot areas and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks. 
7.  Minimum front and side street building setback line. 
8.  When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building setback line. 
9.  Areas, other than streets, pedestrian ways and utility easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of such area or areas in acres. 
10.  Water Supply. Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension of the existing City water system. Service connections shall be stubbed to the property line and all necessary fire hydrants shall also be provided. Extensions of the public water supply system shall be designed so as to provide public water in accordance with the standards of the City. 
11.  Sewage Disposal. Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the City. 
12.  Grading plan which shall include the proposed grading and drainage of the site. Also to be stipulated are the garage floor and basement elevations of all structures. 
13.  Provisions for surface water ponding, drainage and flood control. 
D.  The items listed in this section shall be in conformance with all other applicable sections of this Chapter. 
E.  Supplementary Information. Any or all of the supplementary information requirements set forth in this subsection shall be submitted when deemed necessary by the City staff, consultants, advisory bodies and/or City Council. 
1.  Proposed protective covenants or private restrictions. 
2.  A survey prepared by a qualified person identifying tree coverage in the proposed subdivision in terms of type, weakness, maturity, potential hazard, infestation, vigor, density and spacing. A vegetation preservation and protection plan that shows those trees proposed to be removed, those to remain, the types and locations of trees and other vegetation that are to be planted may also be required. 
3.  Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of buildings with number of proposed dwelling units or type of business or industry, so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards, and congestion of population. The City may require the applicant or developer to have formal traffic or other studies performed to the City's satisfaction which show the effect of the proposed development on traffic, fire hazards and congestion. 
4.  If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas, including dimensions, shall be shown. Such proposed zoning plan shall be for information only and shall not vest any rights in the applicant. 
5.  Where the applicant owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision, it shall be required that the applicant submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and the future subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions shall be required to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions and land uses. 
6.  Where structures are to be placed on large or excessively deep lots which are subject to potential replat, the preliminary plat shall indicate a logical way in which the lots could possibly be resubdivided in the future. 
7.  A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during construction and after development has been completed. The plan shall include gradients of waterways, design of velocity and erosion control measures, design of sediment control measures, and landscaping of the erosion and sediment control system. Such plans are to be in accordance with the technical standards and specifications of the Soil Conservation Service, as provided by the Hennepin County Soil and Water Conservation District Office. 
8.  When the City has agreed to install improvements in a development, the developer may be required to furnish a financial statement satisfactory to the City indicating the developer's ability to develop the plat. 
9.  An environmental assessment worksheet shall be submitted if the City, City consultants, Minnesota Environmental Quality Board or other groups or agencies determine that one is required by law. 
10.  Statements and supporting documentation and plans for variances, conditional use permits or planned unit development approvals being sought for the subdivision. 
11.  Such other information as may be required by City staff. 
1005.03 - Final Plat. 
The owner or applicant shall submit a final plat together with any necessary supplementary information. The final plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State Statutes [1] and Hennepin County regulations, and such final plat shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any existing plat theretofore recorded in the County. 
B.  Location by section, township, range, County and State, and including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions. 
C.  The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat. Locations of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official monuments on the nearest established street lines, including true angles and distances to such reference points or monuments. 
D.  Location of lots, outlots, streets, public highways, and parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines. 
E.  Lots shall be numbered clearly; blocks are to be numbered, with numbers shown clearly in the center of the block. 
F.  The exact locations, widths and names of all streets to be dedicated. 
G.  Location, purpose and width of all easements to be dedicated. 
H.  Name and address of surveyor preparing the plat. 
I.  Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically on a bar scale), date and north arrow. 
J.  Statement dedicating all easements as follows: Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved over, under and along the strips marked "utility" easements. 
K.  Statement dedicating all streets, and other public areas not previously dedicated as follows: Streets and other public areas shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so dedicated. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
See State law provisions Minn. Stats.  462.358 and 501.01 et seq. 

1005.04 - Certification Required. 
A.  Certification by registered surveyor in the form required by Minn. Stats.  505.03, as amended. 
B.  Execution of all owners of any interest in the land and holders of a mortgage thereon of the certificates required by Minn. Stats.  505.03, as amended, and which certificate shall include a dedication of the utility easements and other public areas in such form as approved by the City Council. 
C.  Space for certificates of approval and review to be filled in by the signatures of the Mayor and City Manager in the form: 
For Approval of the City: 
This plat of (name of plat) was approved and accepted by the City Council of Wayzata, Minnesota, at a regular meeting thereof held this _____ day of __________, 
A.D. 20____. 
CITY COUNCIL OF WAYZATA, MINNESOTA 
By: _____________________________Mayor 
By: _____________________________City Manager 
CHAPTER 1006 - DESIGN STANDARDS 

1006.01 - Conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance. 
A proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and related policies adopted by the City and to the official Zoning Ordinance of the City. 
1006.02 - Land Requirements. 
A.  Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. No plan shall be approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes proposed by reason of potential flooding, topography or adverse soil or rock formation. 
B.  Land subject to hazards to life, health or property shall not be subdivided until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plan. 
C.  Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with existing nearby municipalities or neighborhoods, so that the City as a whole may develop efficiently and harmoniously. 
1006.03 - Blocks. 
A.  Block Length and Width. Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by the Zoning Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic. 
B.  Block Length. In general, intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals so as to serve cross-traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential subdivisions, other than those with lake frontage, should not exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 600 feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from this maximum. In blocks longer than 900 feet, ten-foot-wide pedestrian rights-of-way and/or easements through the block may be required in locations deemed necessary for the public health, convenience and necessity. Suitable surfacing and fencing shall be provided in pedestrian ways. 
C.  Block Width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth as required by the Zoning Ordinance except adjoining a lake, stream, railroad or arterial or where one tier or lot is necessary because of topographic conditions. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking, deliveries and loading. Such facilities shall be provided with safe and convenient limited access to the street system. 
1006.04 - Lots. 
A.  Area. The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that established by the City Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of the final plat. 
B.  Side Lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to street lines, radial to curved street lines, or radial to lake or stream shores unless topographic conditions necessitate a different arrangement. 
C.  Building Sites. Each lot shall provide an adequate building site at least one foot above the street grade. 
D.  Butt Lots. Butt lots in any subdivision are to be discouraged. Where such lots must be used to fit a particular type of design, they shall be platted at least 20 feet wider than the average width of interior lots in the block. 
E.  Frontage. Every lot must have the minimum frontage on a City approved Public Street other than an alley, as required in the City Zoning Ordinance. 
F.  Setback Lines. Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots and shall not be less than the setback required by the City Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended. 
G.  Watercourses. Lots abutting a watercourse, wetland, ponding area, drainage way, channel, or stream shall have additional depth and width, as required under the provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance to assure building sites that are not subject to flooding. 
H.  Lakeshore Frontage. Lots with lakeshore frontage shall be designed so that the lot lines extended shall maintain the closest approximation to riparian rights. 
I.  Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development. 
J.  Lot Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size for the respective zoning district in which they are located must be added to abutting lots or lots immediately adjoining, separated only by a public right-of-way. In those cases where parcels are separated by a public right-of-way, the lot remnant shall be designated an outlot. Lot remnants may be allowed if a plan for future use is found acceptable by the City Council. 
K.  Political Boundaries. No singular plat shall extend over a political boundary or school district line. 
L.  Frontage on Two Streets. Double-frontage or lots with frontage on two parallel or non-intersecting streets shall not be permitted except: where lots back on arterial streets or highways, or where topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable. Such double-frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least ten feet in order to allow space for screen planting along the rear lot line. 
M.  Turn-Around Access. Where proposed residential lots abut a collector street, they should be platted in such a manner as to encourage turn-around access and egress on each lot and discourage direct access onto such streets. 
N.  Access to Arterial Streets. In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway, other major highway, or other arterial street, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to such streets and roads. In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on limited access highways where there is no other alternative, a temporary entrance may be granted. As neighboring land becomes subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become possible, such temporary access permits shall become void. 
O.  Outlots. The creation of outlots is to be discouraged. In such cases where outlots are created or exist, their area shall not be utilized in calculating minimums for buildable lot area requirements. Said outlots are also prohibited from qualifying for building permits except for public uses and private recreational uses accessory to allowable uses within the respective zoning district and which are properties under common ownership. In those cases where outlots are located within the Shoreland Overlay District, they shall comply with the minimum Shoreland Overlay District requirements. 
P.  Flag Lots. Flag Lots shall be prohibited unless a minimum lot frontage per zoning district standards is created. In addition, in those instances where future subdivision of lots is feasible, a minimum public right-of-way pursuant to standards in the Ordinance shall be provided and dedicated to the City. 
1006.05 - Streets. 
A.  Proposed streets shall conform to State and County highway plans which have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law. 
B.  Streets shall be logically related to the topography, so as to produce usable lots and reasonable grades. 
C.  Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in a subdivision and to adjacent unsubdivided parcels, unless the topography clearly indicates that such connection is not feasible. Reserved strips and land-locked areas shall not be created. 
D.  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas. 
E.  Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations. Temporary turn around facility may be required at the closed end, in conformance with cul-de-sac requirements. 
F.  Local streets shall be laid cut to discourage their use by through traffic. The arrangement of arterial and collector streets shall be considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served. 
G.  Provisions for Resubdivision of Large Lots and Parcels. When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision. 
H.  Half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of these regulations and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured. 
I.  Wherever a tract to be subdivided adjoins an existing half or partial street, the part of the street within such tract shall be platted. 
J.  Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts with temporary cul-de-sacs, or when designed as cul-de-sac streets. 
K.  Private streets and reserve strips, except in the case of planned unit developments, shall be prohibited and no public improvements shall be approved for any private street. All streets shall be dedicated for public use. If any person applies to subdivide or replat any land or parcels adjoining an existing private street, the private street shall be required to be dedicated for public use and scheduled for improvement to public street standards at the time of final plat. 
L.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned major arterial or a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such arterial and right-of-way may be required for adequate protection of residential properties and separation of through and local traffic. Such service streets shall be located at a distance from the major arterial or railroad right-of-way suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial and industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances also shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
M.  The street design shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it. 
1006.06 - Cul-De-Sac Streets. 
A.  Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 600 feet in length, including a terminal turn around which shall be provided at the closed end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than 60 feet. The length shall be measured along the centerline from the nearest intersection to the center point of the cul-de-sac. 
B.  Where a temporary cul-de-sac is required, the turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a plat boundary line and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to said property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is extended, the acreage covered by the turnaround outside the boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property owner fronting on the temporary turnaround. 
1006.07 - Street Design. 
A.  Minimum right-of-way widths and pavement widths (face to face of curb) for each type of public street or road shall be as follows: 
Type of Street Right-of-Way Width Pavement Width Arterial 120 feet 44 feet, or as determined by traffic needs Collector Street 80 feet 44 feet Commercial or Industrial Service 
Street 80 feet 44 feet Local Street 50 feet 26 feet Marginal Access Street 50 feet 26 feet Cul-de-sac 60 feet turnaround radius 48 feet turnaround radius  
B.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate width, sufficient additional width shall be provided to meet the above standards. 
C.  Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions require it. 
D.  Restriction of Access. Access of local streets onto arterial and collector streets shall be discouraged at intervals of less than 500 feet. 
E.  Street Jog. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be allowed. 
F.  Deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet. 
G.  Grades. Centerline gradients shall be at least 0.4 percent and shall not exceed the following: 
Classification Gradient (In Percent) Arterial and Collector Streets Five Local Streets and Marginal Access Streets Eight  
H.  Vertical Curves. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum length, in feet, of these curves shall be 20 times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes. 
I.  Angle of Intersection. The angle formed by intersecting streets shall not be less than 60 degrees, with 90 degree intersections preferred. 
J.  Size of Intersection. Intersections of more than four corners shall be prohibited. 
K.  Corner Radii. Roadways of street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 15 feet. Corners at entrances to the turn-around portions of cul-de-sacs shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 15 feet. 
L.  Curb and Gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be included as part of the required street surface improvement and shall be designed for installation along both sides of all roadways. 
1006.08 - Sidewalks. 
A.  Widths. In subdivisions or areas where sidewalks are deemed necessary by the City Council, the sidewalk widths shall conform to the following standards: 
Zoning District Land Use Sidewalk Width R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3 Single-Family Residential 4 feet R-4, R-5, R-6, INS. Multiple Family Residential and Public Buildings 6 feet C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-4A Commercial Areas 8 feet R-D Industrial Areas 6 feet  
1006.09 - Public Utilities. 
A.  Water Supply. Extensions of the public water supply system, when available, shall be designed so as to provide public water service to each lot. 
B.  Sewage Disposal. Extension of the public sanitary sewer system, when available, shall be designed so as to provide public sewer service to each lot. 
1006.10 - Drainage. 
A complete and adequate drainage system design shall be required for the subdivision and may include a storm sewer system or system of open ditches, culverts, pipes, catch basins and ponding areas, or a combination thereof. 
1006.11 - Easements. 
A.  Provided for Utilities. Easements for drainage and utilities of at least ten feet wide shall be provided on all lot lines. In the case of side or rear lot lines, these may be centered on the lot line. 
B.  Provided for Drainage. Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any water course or drainage channel, whether or not shown on the Comprehensive Plan, to a sufficient width to provide proper maintenance and protection, to provide for stormwater runoff and to provide for installation and maintenance of storm sewers. 
C.  Continuous Utility Easement Locations. Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the City Council after a public hearing. 
D.  Dedication. All easements shall be dedicated for the required use and shall be shown on the final plat. 
E.  Lake Access Easements. The platting granting of private easements across private property or property lines for the purpose of providing private lakeshore access is prohibited. 
1006.12 - Street Names. 
Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names, unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted street. In that event, it shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street. Street names shall conform to the City's Street Naming and Property Numbering System as applicable. 
1006.13 - Erosion and Sediment Control. 
A.  The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion. 
B.  Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the different stages of construction. Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion. 
C.  Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one period of time. 
D.  When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time, as specified in the development agreement. 
E.  Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for respreading over the developed area. Top soil shall be restored or provided to a depth of four inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to development. 
F.  Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever possible. 
G.  Runoff water shall be diverted to a sedimentation basin before being allowed to enter the natural drainage system. Stormwater runoff from the development site shall not, at any time, exceed the existing runoff level. 
1006.14 - Protected Areas. 
Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed environmentally sensitive by the City, due to the existence of wetlands, drainage ways, watercourses, floodable areas or steep slopes, the design of said subdivision shall clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to ensure against adverse environmental impact. The City's Stormwater Management Plan shall be carefully referenced and adhered to when designing a subdivision. 
Based upon the necessity to control and maintain certain sensitive areas, the City shall determine whether said protection will be accomplished through lot enlargement and redesign or dedication of those sensitive areas in the form of outlots. 
In general, measures of protection shall include design solutions which allow for construction and grading involving a minimum of alteration to sensitive areas. Where these areas are to be incorporated into lots within the proposed subdivision, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that the proposed design will not require construction on slopes over 18 percent, or result in significant alteration to the natural drainage system such that adverse impacts cannot be contained within the plat boundary. 
1006.15 - Public Sites and Open Spaces (Parkland Dedication). 
A.  As a prerequisite to final plat approval, applicants for the subdivision of land shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces or trails and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City's Park Fund as provided by this Section. 
B.  Land to be dedicated shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use as determined by the City and shall be at a location convenient to the public to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access and location. 
C.  The applicant shall consult with the Planning Commission, at the time his preliminary plat is under consideration, to secure their recommendation as to the location of any property that should be dedicated to the public, such as parks, playgrounds or other public property. The preliminary plat shall show the location and dimensions of all areas to be dedicated in this manner. Such contribution requirement recommendations(s) will be sent to the City Council for their approval. 
D.  When a proposed park, playground, recreational area, or other public ground has been indicated in the City's official map or Comprehensive Plan and is located in whole or in part within a proposed plat, it shall be designated as an outlot on the final plat and shall be dedicated to the appropriate governmental unit. If the applicant elects not to dedicate an area in excess of the land required hereunder for a proposed public site that the City feels is in the public interest to acquire, the City may consider acquiring the excess land through purchase or condemnation. 
E.  Land area conveyed or dedicated to the City shall not be used in calculating density requirements of the City Zoning Ordinance and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for planned unit developments. 
F.  Where private open space for park and recreation purposes, is provided in a proposed subdivision, such areas may be used for credit, at the discretion of the City Council, against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, provided the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so. 
G.  The City, upon consideration of the particular type of development, may require larger or lesser parcels of land to be dedicated if the City determines that present or future residents would require greater or lesser land for park and playground purposes. In addition, the City Council may also require lots within the subdivision be held in escrow for future sale or development. The moneys derived from the sale of escrowed lots will be used to develop facilities or to purchase parkland in the future. 
H.  In all new subdivisions, ten percent of the gross area subdivided, or a different percentage as the Council shall determine to be reasonably necessary as a result of the subdivision approval, shall be dedicated for public recreation space or other public use as established by City Council resolution. In all new commercial and industrial subdivisions, six percent of the gross area subdivided, or a different percentage as the Council shall determine to be reasonably necessary as a result of the subdivision approval, shall be dedicated for public and recreation space or other public use as established by City Council resolution. The dedicated percent of the gross area subdivided shall be in addition to property dedicated for streets, alleys, easements or other public ways. No areas may be dedicated for public use until such areas have been approved by the governing body as suitable and necessary for the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the City. 
I.  When a subdivision is too small for practical dedication of public land, or if no land in the subdivision is suitable for such use, the applicant may be required to pay an equivalent cash fee for all or part of the portion to be dedicated, based on the fair market value of the land on the day of final plat approval subject to the following: 
1.  Each single-family lot is required to pay a minimum of $2,500.00 or ten percent of the determined land value, whichever is greater. 
2.  Each two-family lot is required to pay a minimum of $2,500.00 per unit or ten percent of the determined land value, whichever is greater. 
3.  All other residential construction is required to pay a minimum of $2,500.00 per unit or ten percent of the determined land value, whichever is greater. The City Council may, at its discretion, grant a credit towards this fee if the proposed development provides, when completed, recreation facilities for its residents' use. Such facilities shall include, but are not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts and open spaces suitable for active pastimes. The amount of any such credit shall be based on recommendations of City staff. 
4.  Commercial and industrial land is required to pay six percent of the established fair market land value. 
J.  The City may elect to receive a combination of cash, land and development of the land for park use. The fair market value of the land the City wants and the value of the development of land shall be calculated. That amount shall be subtracted from the cash contribution required by Subsection A above. 
K.  "Fair market value" shall be determined as of the time of the final plat approval in accordance with the following: 
1.  The City and the applicant may agree as to the fair market value based upon a current appraisal. 
2.  The market value of the property as determined by a recent selling price of the parcel(s) in question. 
L.  Planned unit developments with mixed land uses shall make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this Section based upon the percentage of land devoted to the various uses. 
M.  Park cash contributions are to be calculated at the time of final plat approval. The Council may require the payment at the time of final plat approval or at a later time under terms agreed upon in the development agreement. Delayed payment may include interest at a rate set by the City. 
N.  Park cash contributions shall be deposited in the City's Park and Recreation Development Fund and shall only be used for park acquisition or development. 
O.  If an applicant is unable to make a commitment to the City as to the type of building that well be constructed on lots in the proposed plat, then the land and cash contribution requirement will be a reasonable amount as determined by the City Council. 
P.  Wetlands, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the City may not be considered in the parkland and/or cash contribution to the City. 
Q.  A cash contribution required by the City shall be made at the time of final plat approval by the City Council or as specified by the applicable development contract. 
R.  Property being replatted with the same number of lots shall be exempt from all park land dedication requirements. If the number of lots is increased or if land outside the previously recorded plat is added, then the park land dedication and/or park cash contributions shall be based on the additional lots and on the additional land being added to the plat. If the additional land does not create additional lots, then each one-third acre added shall be considered a new lot for purposes of calculating the dedication requirements. 
1006.16 - Minimum Design Features. 
The design features set forth in this Chapter are minimum requirements. The City may impose additional or more stringent requirements concerning lot size, streets and overall design as deemed appropriate considering the property being subdivided based upon site considerations and the Wayzata Comprehensive Plan. 
CHAPTER 1007 - CONSTRUCTION 

1007.01 - Streets. 
A.  Street Grading. Streets shall be graded in accordance with a plan approved by the City Engineer. The grading shall include the entire width of the right-of-way and shall provide a boulevard section, in addition to the minimum pavement width. 
B.  Street Pavement. The design of street pavement for all streets covered by this regulation shall be in accordance with the State of Minnesota Department of Transportation Road Design Manual for flexible pavements. The designed thickness of the surfacing elements shall be in accordance with the flexible pavement design standard for road classifications as follows: 
Classification Pavement Design: Axle Load Arterial, Collector Streets and Commercial or Industrial Service Streets As determined by traffic needs Local Streets Seven-ton minimum  
C.  Soil Tests. To determine subgrade soil classifications, soil samples shall be collected and analyzed by a reputable testing laboratory. Reports of the soil analysis shall be submitted to the City Engineer with the pavement plans. Soil samples shall be taken along the centerline of the proposed road at intervals not exceeding 300 feet. 
D.  Curb and Gutter. Concrete curb and gutter, in accordance with the following provisions, shall be constructed on both sides of all streets. 
1.  In single-family residential districts, surmountable concrete curb and gutter of a City approved type and design shall be used. 
2.  In all other districts, concrete curb and gutter cross-sections shall be either MN D.O.T. Design No. B618 or MN D.O.T. Design No. S518. 
E.  Boulevards. All boulevards shall have four inches of top soil (black dirt) placed on them and then shall be seeded or sodded. 
1007.02 - Sidewalks. 
A.  All required sidewalks shall be concrete, four inches thick, placed on a four inch gravel base. 
B.  Sidewalks shall slope one-quarter inch per foot away from the property line and the profile grade shall not exceed eight percent. All grades shall be constructed as approved by the City Engineer. 
C.  Sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way. 
1007.03 - Public Utilities. 
A.  Water Main. A minimum water main of six-inch ductile iron pipe or other approved pipe shall be required. Mains over six inches in size may be required, and the additional cost shall be allocated pursuant to established City Council policies. 
B.  Sanitary Sewer. Unless otherwise required, a sanitary sewer of eight-inch pipe shall be installed as the minimum size, placed at grades approved by the City Engineer. Mains over eight inches in size may be required, and the additional cost shall be allocated pursuant to established City Council policies. Service wyes shall be four inches. 
C.  House Services. Each house service shall be run from the main to the property line, where a cap or plug shall be placed until the service is extended to the structure. A one-inch Type K copper water service, or approved equal; corporation cock, curb box and stop; and four-inch extra heavy cast iron soil pipe, or approved equal, sewer service shall be the minimum requirements, and they may be placed in a common trench. 
D.  "As-Built" Drawings. Reproducible "as-built" drawings showing all utilities and improvements shall be furnished to the City by the applicant of all required improvements. Such "as-built" drawings shall be certified to be true and accurate by the registered engineer responsible for the installation of the improvements. 
1007.04 - Sanitation. 
Water and sewer lines shall be installed and connected to the public system to serve all lots within the proposed subdivision under the provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances. The City Council shall require the installation of water and sewer mains, at the applicant's expense or under the provisions of applicable statutes an ordinances, unless said applicant can prove to the City Council that extension of the existing water system is not economically feasible in the development of the subdivision and that adequate water facilities will be otherwise provided, in which case the Council may permit the installation of individual wells. 
1007.05 - Water Supply. 
An individual well, if permitted by the City Council, shall be constructed in accordance with the Minnesota State Well Code. 
1007.06 - Drainage. 
All surface and underground drainage systems shall be installed to adequately remove all natural drainage that accumulates on the developed property. All such systems shall provide complete removal and a permanent solution for the removal of drainage water. 
1007.07 - Street Signs. 
All street signs shall be provided and installed by the City, at the expense of the applicant. 
1007.08 - Utilities Location. 
When feasible, all utilities shall be placed underground. All underground work shall be completed prior to street surfacing. All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles. 
1007.09 - Street Lighting Requirements. 
The minimum requirement for street lighting facilities shall be one 2,500-lumen light, or equal, at each street intersection within or abutting the subdivision. Light standards shall be approved by the City. 
1007.10 - Inspection. 
All required improvements shall be inspected by the City Engineer or City-approved consultant during construction, at the expense of the applicant. 
CHAPTER 1008 - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS 

1008.01 - Improvements Required. 
Prior to the approval of a plat by the City, the applicant shall have agreed, in the manner set forth below, to install the following improvements on the site, in conformity with approved construction plans and in conformity with all applicable standards and ordinances: 
A.  Survey Monuments. All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, road intersection corners and points of tangency and curvature shall be marked with survey monuments meeting the minimum requirements of State law. All U.S., State, County and other official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position, unless a relocation is approved by the controlling agency. All lot corner pipes or iron rods shall be a minimum of one-half inch in diameter, 18 inches in length, and shall be inscribed with the registration number of the land surveyor making the survey as prescribed in Minn. Stats. Ch. 505. 
B.  Grading. The full width of the right-of-way of each streets dedicated in the plat shall be graded as outlined in Section 1007.01.A of this Ordinance. 
C.  Pavement. All streets and alleys shall be improved with concrete or bituminous surface, except as may be approved by action of the City Council. Pavement standards are outlined in Section 1007.01.B of this Ordinance. 
D.  Curb and Gutter. There shall be concrete curb and gutter installed along both sides of all streets and alleys to the standards listed in Section 1007.01.D of this Ordinance. 
E.  Water Mains. In the case where mains from a public water system are available, the applicant shall be required to install water mains in the plat and connect the same to the public water system. 
F.  Public Sanitary Sewer. In all cases where trunk line sanitary sewer facilities are available, the applicant shall be required to install sanitary sewers in the plat and connect the same to the trunk line sewers. 
G.  Drainage Facilities. Such facilities and easements shall be installed as will adequately provide for the drainage of surface waters, and a storm sewer system may be required. Drainage way easements or land dedication may be required when such easements or land is needed in the public interest for purposes of flood plain management, proper drainage, prevention of erosion, pedestrian access to water bodies, or other public purpose. All surface water drainage must be approved by the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District. 
H.  Miscellaneous Facilities. Tree planting, street name signs, traffic control signs, oversized utility trunk lines, pedestrian ways and other improvements may be required to be furnished and installed by the applicant. 
1008.02 - Construction Plans and Inspection. 
A.  Construction plans for the required improvements confirming in all respects with the standards and ordinances of the City shall be prepared at the applicant's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota, and said plans shall contain his certificate. Such plans together with the quantities of construction items shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his approval and for his estimate of the total costs of the required improvements. Upon approval, such plans shall become a part of the required contract. The tracings of the plans approved by the Engineer, plus two prints, shall be furnished to the City to be filed as a public record. 
B.  All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the provisions of these regulations shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City Engineer at the applicants expense, and acceptance by the City shall be subject to the City Engineer's certificate of compliance with the contract. 
1008.03 - Payment for Installation of Improvements. 
The required improvements as listed elsewhere are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the applicant. If any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit to such lands, to be assessed against the same. In such a situation the applicant will be required only to pay for such portion of the whole cost of said improvement as will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision. 
1008.04 - Agreement Providing for the Installation of Improvements. 
Prior to the installation of any required improvements by the applicant and prior to approval of the plat, the applicant shall enter into a contract in writing with the City requiring the applicant to furnish and construct said improvements at his sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract conditions. This shall include provision for supervision of details of construction by the City Engineer and shall grant to the City Engineer authority to coordinate the work and improvements to be done under said contract by any subcontractor authorized to proceed there under and with any other work being done or contracted by the City in the vicinity. The agreement shall require the applicant to make an escrow deposit or furnish an irrevocable letter of credit or a certified check as is determined by the City Attorney, City Engineer and City Manager. The amount of the deposit or penal amount of the bond is to be equal to 125 percent of the Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the contract, including the cost of inspection. On request of the applicant, the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat. In such event, and if evidence is presented that the described work and improvements have been paid for, the amount of the deposit or bond may be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to the acceptance of the plat. The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be determined by the City Council, upon recommendation of the Engineer after consultation with the applicant. It shall be reasonable with relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper coordination with construction activities in the plat and subdivision. 
No applicant shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision without special approval of the City Council, if he has previously defaulted on work or commitments. 
1008.05 - Financial Guarantee. 
A.  The contract provided for in Section 1008.04 shall require the applicant to make an escrow deposit or provide a certified check or irrevocable letter of credit as determined by the City Attorney, City Engineer and City Manager. The escrow deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit shall conform to the requirements of this Section. 
B.  Escrow Deposit, Certified Check. If an escrow deposit or certified check is required, the escrow deposit or certified check shall be made with the City Treasurer in a sum equal to 125 percent of the total cost, as estimated by the City Engineer, of all the improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the contract, which have not been completed prior to approval of the plat. The total costs shall include costs of inspection by the City. The City shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said deposit or check for any cost and expense incurred by the City for completion of the work in case of default of the applicant under said contract, and for any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof. Upon completion of the work and termination of any liability, the balance remaining in said deposit or check shall be refunded to the applicant. 
C.  Irrevocable Letter of Credit. If the applicant is required to furnish an Irrevocable Letter of Credit, the penal sum shall be equal to 125 percent of the total cost as estimated by the City Engineer of all the improvements to be furnished and installed by subdivider pursuant to the contract, which have not been completed prior to the approval of the plat. The total costs shall include costs of inspection by the City. The Irrevocable Letter of Credit shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and filed with the City Manager. 
1008.06 - Improvements Completed Prior to Approval of the Final Plat. 
Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to application for approval of the final plat, or execution of the contract for installation of the required improvements, or execution of the contract for installation of the required improvements, shall be accepted as equivalent improvements in compliance with these requirements only if the City Engineer shall certify that he is satisfied that the existing improvements conform to applicable standards and if evidence of payment for the work that has been completed is presented in such form as the City reasonably requires. 
1008.07 - Trunk Facilities. 
Where a larger size water main, sanitary sewer, storm drain or similar facility is required to serve areas outside the subdivision, the larger facility required shall be constructed. Additional costs shall be allocated pursuant to established City policies. 
1008.08 - Alternate Installation. 
The City Council may elect to install any or all of the required improvements pursuant to a cash escrow agreement or other financial arrangements with the applicant. 
CHAPTER 1009 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

1009.01 - Registered Land Surveys. 
All registered land surveys shall be filed subject to the same procedure as required for the filing of a preliminary plat for platting purposes. The standards and requirements set forth in these regulations shall apply to all registered land surveys. Unless the City Council approves, a registered land survey shall not be used to divide a parcel of land into lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, if any of the tracts do not have the required frontage on a dedicated public street. 
1009.02 - Metes and Bounds. 
A.  Conveyances by metes and bounds shall be prohibited where any lot or lots involved are less than five acres in area or have a width of less than 300 feet at the building setback line. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued for any structure on any parcel of land less than five acres in area or having a width of less than 300 feet on an improved public street, at a building setback line which is described by metes and bounds until a plat describing such parcel of land is filed with the Hennepin County Recorder's Office and proof thereof is furnished to the local City Manager. 
C.  When a conveyance by metes and bounds is made and the parcels involved are between five acres and 20 acres in size, a survey of the parcels involved shall be submitted to the City Manager before any building permits will be issued for those parcels, and a copy of the survey should be attached to the deed when it is submitted to the Hennepin County Recorder's Office for recording. 
1009.03 - Unapproved Subdivisions. 
A.  No conveyance of land to which these regulations are applicable shall be filed or recorded, if the land is described in the conveyance by metes and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after April 21, 1961, or to an unapproved plat. The foregoing provision does not apply to a conveyance if the land described: 
1.  Was a separate parcel of record May 1, 1959. 
2.  Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to such time. 
3.  Was a separate parcel of not less than 21/2 acres on areas in area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966. 
4.  Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and 300 feet in width on July 1, 1980. 
5.  Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than five acres and has a width of not less than 300 feet, and its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet in width. 
6.  Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet, and its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area of 500 feet in width. 
1009.04 - Variances, City Council Approval, Standards. 
A.  Findings. The City Council may approve a variance from the minimum standards of this Chapter (not procedural provisions) when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In approving any variance, the City Council shall prescribe any conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its approval, the City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. A variance shall only be approved when the City Council finds: 
1.  That there are special circumstances or highly unique conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this Chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
2.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which property is situated. 
3.  That the variance is to correct inequities resulting from an extreme physical hardship such as topography. 
4.  Hardship relating to economic difficulties shall not be considered for the purpose of granting a variance. 
5.  That the hardship is not a result of an action or actions by the owner, applicant, developer or any agent thereof. 
B.  Procedures. 
1.  Requests for a variance or appeal shall be filed with the City Manager on an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution. Such application shall also be accompanied by four copies of detailed written and graphic materials including one plan no larger than 11 x 17 inches necessary for the explanation of the request. 
2.  Upon receiving said application, the City Manager shall refer the application, along with all related information, to the City Planning Commission for a report and recommendation to the City Council as outlined in Section 1003.02. 
3.  The Planning Commission shall consider the variance at its next regular meeting unless the filing date falls within 15 days of said meeting, in which case the request would be placed on the agenda and considered at the regular meeting following the next regular meeting. The City Manager shall refer said application, along with all related information, to the City Planning Commission for consideration and a report and recommendation to the City Council. 
4.  The variance application shall be referred to the City staff for a report and recommendation to be presented to the Planning Commission. 
5.  The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the variance or to retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant concerning said variance where said information is declared necessary to ensure preservation of health, safety and general welfare of the City. 
6.  The City Manager shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to said hearing, and individual notices shall be mailed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing to all owners of property within 350 feet of the parcel included in the request. 
7.  Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Chapter. 
8.  The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed variance request. 
9.  The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Chapter. 
10.  The City Council shall not grant a variance until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission and the City staff or until 30 days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the request was considered. 
11.  Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting. 
12.  Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and City staff, the City Council shall make a recorded finding of fact and impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
13.  The City Council shall decide whether to approve or deny a request for a variance or an appeal within 30 days after the public hearing on said request. 
14.  A variance of this Chapter or grant of an appeal shall be by a four-fifths vote of the full City Council. 
1009.05 - Building Permits. 
No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, demolition or moving of any building or structure on any lot or parcel until all the requirements of these regulations have been fully met. 
1009.06 - Violations and Penalty. 
A.  Sale of Lots from Unrecorded Plats. It shall be a misdemeanor to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located within the jurisdiction of this Chapter unless said plan, plat or replat shall have first been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Hennepin County. 
B.  Receiving or Recording Unapproved Plats. It shall be unlawful for a private individual to receive or record in any public office any plans, plats of land laid out in building lots and streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto, and located within the jurisdiction of this Chapter, unless the same shall bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the City Council. 
C.  Misrepresentations. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person owning an addition or subdivision of land within the City to represent that any improvement upon any of the streets, alleys or avenues of said addition or subdivision or any sewer in said addition or subdivision has been constructed according to the plans and specifications approved by the City Council, or has been supervised or inspected by the City, when such improvements have not been so constructed, supervised or inspected. 
D.  Penalty. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each month during which compliance is delayed shall constitute a separate offense. 
SELECT UNCODIFIED ORDINANCES 
Select uncodified ordinances are those that rezone property, name streets, and grant franchises. 
The following special uncodified ordinances are included as an appendix to this code. 
ORDINANCE NO. 602 Franchise Renewal to Triax Midwest Associates L.P. ORDINANCE NO. 674 Electric Distribution System and Transmission Lines ORDINANCE NO. 703 Electric Service Franchise Fee ORDINANCE NO. 754 Cable Television Franchise Ordinance  
ORDINANCE NO. 602 
ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE RENEWAL TO TRIAX MIDWEST ASSOCIATES L.P. FOR CABLE TV 
602.01. The City of Wayzata hereby grants Triax Midwest Associates, L.P. a franchise renewal to operate, construct, maintain and reconstruct a cable television system within the City, subject to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Franchise Agreement, a copy of which is available upon request. 
(Ord. 602 [8-26-1998]) 
ORDINANCE NO. 674 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA CORPORATION D/B/A/ XCEL ENERGY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, PERMISSION TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, REPAIR AND MAINTAIN IN THE CITY OF WAYZATA, MINNESOTA, AN ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND TRANSMISSION LINES, INCLUDING NECESSARY POLES, LINES, FIXTURES AND APPURTENANCES, FOR THE FURNISHING OF ELECTRIC ENERGY TO THE CITY, ITS INHABITANTS, AND OTHERS, AND TO USE THE PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS OF THE CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES. 

674-01. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Ordinance, the follow capitalized terms listed in alphabetical order have the following meanings: 
a.  City. The City of Wayzata, County of Hennepin, State of Minnesota. 
b.  City Clerk. The City Clerk for the City of Wayzata, 600 Rice Street, Wayzata, Minnesota 55391. 
c.  City Utility System. Facilities used for providing sewer, water, or any other public utility service owned or operated by the City or agency thereof, or facilities owned by a third party permitted by the City to be located in a Public Way or Public Ground, including, but not limited to, sewer, storm sewer, water service, street lighting, traffic signals and telecommunications equipment. 
d.  Commission. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or any successor agency or agencies, including an agency of the federal government which preempts all or part of the authority to regulate electric retail rates now vested in the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission. 
e.  Company. Northern States Power Company, a Minnesota corporation d/b/a Xcel Energy Company, its successors and assigns. 
f.  Electric Facilities. Electric transmission and distribution towers, poles, lines, guys, anchors, conduits, fixtures, and necessary appurtenances owned or operated by the Company for the purpose of providing electric energy for public use. 
g.  Non-Betterment Costs. Costs incurred by the Company from relocation, removal or rearrangement of Electric Facilities that do not result in an improvement to the Electric Facilities. 
h.  Notice. A writing served by any party or parties on any other party or parties. Notice to the Company shall be mailed to General Counsel, Suite 3000, 800 Nicollet Mall, Minneapolis, MN 55402. Notice to the City shall be mailed to City Manager, City of Wayzata, 600 Rice Street E, Wayzata, MN 55391. Any party may change its respective address for the purpose of this Ordinance by written notice to the other parties. 
i.  Public Grounds. Land owned by the City for park, open space or similar purpose, which is held for use in common by the public. 
j.  Public Ways. Any street, alley, walkway or other public right-of-way within the City. 
674.02. - Franchise. 
a.  Grant of Franchise. The City hereby grants the Company, for a period of twenty (20) years from the date this Ordinance is passed and approved by the City, the right to transmit and furnish electric energy for light, heat, power and other purposes for public and private use within and through the limits of the City as its boundaries now exist or as they may be extended in the future. For these purposes, the Company may construct, operate, repair and maintain Electric Facilities in, on, over, under and across the Public Ways and Public Grounds of the City, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. The Company may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes, subject, however, to such reasonable regulations as may be imposed by the City pursuant to ordinance, including Chapter 307 of the Wayzata City Code, as amended and to the further provisions of this franchise agreement. Two (2) years prior to the expiration of this franchise agreement, the parties shall meet and discuss renewal of this franchise agreement. 
b.  Effective Date, Written Acceptance. This franchise shall be in force and effect from and after its passage, its acceptance by the Company, and its publication as required by law. An acceptance by the Company must be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after adoption. 
c.  Service, Rates and Area. The service to be provided and the rates to be charged by the Company for electric service in City are subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission. The area within the City in which the Company may provide electric service is subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section 216B.40. 
d.  Publication Expense. The expense of publication of this Ordinance shall be reimbursed by the Company. 
e.  Dispute Resolution. If either party asserts that the other party is in default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the complaining party shall notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. The notification shall be written. Representatives of the parties must promptly meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the dispute. If the dispute is not resolved within thirty (30) days of the written notice, the parties may jointly select a mediator to facilities further discussion. The parties will equally share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a mediator is not used or if the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within thirty (30) days after first meeting with the selected mediator, either party may commence an action in District Court to interpret and enforce this franchise or for such other relief as may be permitted by law or equity, including the termination of this franchise and the reimbursement of reasonable attorney fees, or either party may take any other action permitted by law. 
f.  Continuation of Franchise. If the City and the Company are unable to agree on the terms of a new franchise by the time this franchise expires, this franchise will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon, or until ninety (90) days after the City or the Company serves written Notice to the other party of its intention to allow the franchise to expire. However, in no event shall this franchise continue for more than one year after expiration of the twenty (20) year term set forth in Section 674.02(a) 
674.03. - Location, Other Regulations. 
a.  Location of Facilities. Electric Facilities shall be located and constructed so as not to interfere with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel along and over Public Ways and so as not to disrupt normal operation of any City Utility System previously installed therein. Electric Facilities shall be located on Public Grounds as determined by the City. The Company's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance and location of Electric Facilities shall be subject to other reasonable regulations of the City to the extent not inconsistent with the terms of this Ordinance. Under this franchise agreement the City does not relinquish its police power regulatory authority and the Company does not relinquish its eminent domain authority. The Company shall comply with Wayzata City Code Chapter 307, as a mended. 
b.  Field Locations. The Company shall provide field locations for any of its underground Electric Facilities consistent with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216D. 
c.  Street Openings. The Company shall not open or disturb the paved surface of any Public Way or Public Ground for any purpose without first having obtained permission from the City, for which the City may impose a reasonable fee. Permit conditions imposed on the Company shall not be more burdensome than those imposed on other utilities for similar facilities or work. The Company may however, open and disturb the paved surface of any Public Way or Public Ground without permission from the City where an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of Electric Facilities. In such event the Company shall notify the City by telephone to the office designated by the City as soon as practicable. Not later than the second working day thereafter, the Company shall obtain any required permits and pay any required fees. The Company shall also post a construction performance bond consistent with the provisions of Minnesota Rules parts 7819.3000 and 7819.0100, subpart 6. The Company shall comply with Wayzata City Code Chapter 307, as amended. 
d.  Restoration. After undertaking any work requiring the opening of any Public Way or Public Ground, the Company shall restore the same, including paving and its foundation, to as good condition as formerly existed, and shall maintain any paved surface in good condition for two (2) years thereafter. The work shall be completed as promptly as weather permits, and if the Company shall not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and put the Public Way or Public Ground in the said condition, the City shall have, after demand to the Company to cure and the passage of a reasonable period of time following the demand, but not to exceed five (5) days, the right to make the restoration at the expense of the Company. The Company shall pay to the City the cost of such work done for or performed by the City, including its administration expense and overhead, plus ten (10) percent additional as liquidated damages. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the City for noncompliance with this Section 674.03(d). The Company shall also post a construction performance bond consistent with the provisions of Minnesota Rules parts 7819.3000 and 7819.0100, subpart 6. The Company shall comply with Wayzata City Code Chapter 307, as amended. 
e.  Shared Use of Poles. The Company shall make space available on its poles or towers for City fire, water utility, police, or other City facilities whenever such use will not interfere with the use of such poles or towers by the Company, or the existing use of such poles or towers by another electric utility, by a telephone utility, or by any cable television company or other form of communication company. In addition, the City shall pay for any added cost incurred by the Company because of such use by City. 
f.  Avoid Damage to Electric Facilities. Nothing in this Ordinance relieves any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging Electric Facilities while performing any activity. 
g.  Notice of Improvements. The City must give the Company reasonable notice of plans for improvements to Public Ways or Public Ground where the City has reason to believe that Electric Facilities may affect or be affected by the improvement. The notice must contain: (i) the nature and character of the improvements, (ii) the Public Way and Public Grounds upon which the improvements are to be made, (iii) the extent of the improvements, (iv) the time when the City will start the work, and (v) if more than one Public Way or Public Ground is involved, the order in which the work is to proceed. The notice must be given to the Company a sufficient length of time in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit the Company to make any necessary additions, alterations or repairs to its Electric Facilities. 
h.  Mapping Information. The Company must promptly provide complete and accurate mapping information for any of its Electric Facilities in accordance with the requirements of Minnesota Rules Parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. In addition, the Company will comply with Wayzata City Code Chapter 307, as amended. 
674.04. - Relocations. 
a.  Relocation of Electric Facilities in Public Ways. Except as provided in Section 674.04 (c), if the City determines to vacate a Public Way for a City improvement project, or at public cost to grade, re-grade, or change the line of any Public Way, or construct or reconstruct any City Utility System in any Public Way, it may order the Company to relocate its Electric Facilities located therein, if relocation is reasonably necessary to accomplish the City's proposed public improvement. The Company shall relocate its Electric Facilities at its own expense. The City shall give the Company reasonable notice of plans to vacate for a City improvement project, or to grade, re-grade, or change the line of any Public Way or to construct or reconstruct any City Utility System. Nothing in this Ordinance requires the Company to relocate, remove, replace or reconstruct at its own expense its Electric Facilities where such relocation, removal, replacement or reconstruction is solely for the convenience of the City and is not reasonably necessary for the construction or reconstruction of a Public Way or City Utility System or other City improvement. 
b.  Relocation of Electric Facilities in Public Ground. Except as may be provided in 674.03(c), the City may require the Company at the Company's expense to relocate or remove its Electric Facilities from Public Ground upon a finding by the City that the Electric Facilities have become or will becomes a substantial impairment to the existing or proposed public use of the Public Ground. 
c.  Projects with Federal Funding. Relocation, removal, or rearrangement of any Company Electric Facilities made necessary because of the extension into or through the City of a federally-aided highway project shall be governed by the provision of Minnesota Statues, Section 161.46 as supplemented or amended. 
d.  No Waiver. The provisions of Section 674.04 apply only to Electric Facilities constructed in reliance on a franchise and the Company does not waive its rights under an easement or prescriptive right, or State or County permit. 
674.05. - Tree Trimming. 
The Company may trim all trees and shrubs in the Public Ways and Public Grounds of the City interfering with the proper construction, operation, repair and maintenance of any Electric Facilities installed hereunder, provided that the Company conforms to the requirements of this Section. The Company shall provide the City with no less than thirty (30) days' written notification prior to any proposed trimming in order to allow sufficient time: (A) for the Company to meet with the City to forester to discuss the scope and method of the proposed trimming, (B) to allow the City the opportunity to authorize the burying of lines in order to either eliminate or minimize the impact of the proposed trimming and (C) to allow input from property owners impacted by the proposed trimming. The Company shall save and hold the City harmless from any liability arising from trimming operations allowed hereunder and such trimming operation shall be subject to permit or other reasonable regulation by the City. 
674.06. - Indemnification. 
a.  Indemnity of the City. The Company shall indemnify, keep and hold the City free and harmless from any and all liability on account of injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, the issuance of permits, or the operation of the Electric Facilities located in the Public Ways and Public Grounds. The City shall not be indemnified for losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or claims arising out of or alleging the City's negligence as to the issuance of permits for, or inspection of, the Company's plans or work. The City shall not be indemnified if the injury or damage results from the performance in a proper manner of acts reasonably deemed hazardous by the Company, and such performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by the City after notice of the Company's determination. 
b.  Defense of the City. In the event of a suit is brought against the City under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, the Company at its sole cost and expense shall defend the City in such suit if written notice thereof is promptly given to the Company within a period wherein the Company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. If the Company is required to indemnify and defend, it will thereafter have control of such litigation, but the Company may not settle such litigation without the consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the City; and the Company, in defending any action on behalf of the City shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the City could assert in its own behalf. This franchise agreement shall not be interpreted to constitute a waiver by the City of any of its defenses of immunity or limitations on liability under Minnesota Statues, Chapter 466. 
674.07. - Vacation of Public Ways. 
The City shall give the Company at least two (2) weeks' prior written notice of a proposed vacation of a Public Way. Except where required for the City street or other City improvement project (which is covered in 674..04 (a) above), the vacation of any Public Way, after the installation of Electric Facilities, shall not operate to deprive the Company of its rights to operate and maintain such Electric Facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocation the same and the loss and expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to the Company. In no case, however, shall the City be liable to the Company for failure to specifically preserve a right-of way under Minnesota Statutes, Section 160.29. The City and the Company shall comply with Minnesota Rules, 7819.3200 and applicable ordinances consistent with law, including Wayzata City Code 307, as amended. 
674.08. - Change in Form of Government. 
Any change in the form of government of the City shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance. Any governmental unit succeeding the City shall, without the consent of the Company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of the City provided in this Ordinance. 
674.09. - Franchise Fee. 
a.  Fee Schedule. During the term of the franchise hereby granted, and in lieu of any permit or other fees being imposed on the Company, the City may impose on the Company a franchise fee not to exceed an amount determined by collecting the amounts indicated in a Fee Schedule set forth in a separate ordinance from each customer in the designated Custom Classification for metered service at each and every customer location based on a Fee Schedule form similar to the following: 
Customer Classification Amount per Month Residential $_______ Small C&I and Municipal with No Demand Charge $_______ Small C&I and Municipal with Demand Charge $_______ Large C&I $_______  
b.  Separate Ordinance. The franchise fee shall be imposed by a separate ordinance duly adopted by the City Council, which ordinance shall not be adopted until at least sixty (60) days after written notice enclosing such proposed ordinance has been served upon the Company by certified mail. The fee shall not become effective until at least sixty (60) days after written notice enclosing such adopted ordinance has been served upon the Company by certified mail. Section 674.02 (e) shall constitute the sole remedy for solving disputes between the Company and the City in regard to the interpretation of, or enforcement of, the separate ordinance. No action by the City to implement a separate ordinance will commence until this Ordinance is effective. A separate ordinance which imposes a lesser franchise fee on the residential class of customers than an amount which in total collects at least two percent of the estimated total annual gross revenues from the residential class shall not be effective against the Company unless the fee imposed on each other Customer Classification in the Fee Schedule is reduced so that the total amount estimated to be collected in any other Customer Classification shall not, as a percentage of the estimated total annual gross revenues in that Customer Classification, exceed the percentage being collected from the residential class. The payment of a franchise fee as provided by this Section 674.09 does not relieve the Company from paying fees to the City unrelated to the installation, ownership or operation of Electric Facilities, such as building permit fees. 
c.  Terms Defined. For the purposed of this Section 674.09, the following definitions apply: 
1.  Customer Classification. The classes listed on the Fee Schedule and as defined or determined in the Company's electric tariffs on file with the Commission. 
2.  Fee Schedule. The schedule in Section 674.09 (a) setting forth the various customer classes from which a franchise fee would be collected if a separate ordinance were implemented immediately after the effective date of this franchise agreement. The Fee Schedule in the separate ordinance may include new Customer Classifications added by the Company to its electric tariffs after the effective date of this franchise agreement. 
d.  Collection of the Fee. The franchise fee shall be paid based on the amount collected by the Company during complete billing months during the period for which payment is to be made by imposing a surcharge ("additional fee") equal to the designated franchise fee for the applicable Customer Classification in all customer billings for metered service in each class. The payment shall be paid four (4) times a year and due the last business day of the calendar month following the end of each quarter (payments being due January 31, April 30, July 31, and October 31 during teach calendar year). The franchise fee may be changed by ordinance from time to time; however, each change shall meet the same notice requirements and not occur more often than annually, and no change shall require a collection from any customer for metered service in excess of the amounts specifically permitted by this Section 674.09. The time and manner of collecting the franchise fee is subject to the approval of the Commission, which the Company agrees to use its best efforts to obtain. No franchise fee shall be payable by the Company if the Company is legally unable to first collect an amount equal to the franchise fee from its customer in each applicable class of customers by imposing a surcharge in the Company's applicable rate for electric service. The Company may pay the City the fee based upon the surcharge billed subject to subsequent reductions to account for uncollectibles, refunds and correction of erroneous billings. The Company agrees to make its records available for inspection by the City at reasonable times provided that the City and its designated representative agree in writing not to disclose any information which would indicate the amount paid by any identifiable customer or customers or any other information regarding identified customers. 
e.  Equivalent Fee Requirement. The separate ordinance imposing the fee shall not effective against the Company unless it lawfully imposes and the City quarterly or more often collects a fee or tax of the same or greater equivalent amount on the receipts from sales or energy within the City by any other energy supplier, provided that, as to such a supplier, the City has the authority to require a franchise fee or to impose a tax. The "same or greater equivalent amount" shall be measured, if practicable, by comparing amounts collected as a franchise fee from each similar customer, or by comparing, as to similar customers, the percentage of the annual bill represented by the amount collected for the franchise fee purposes. The franchise fee or tax shall be applicable to energy sales for any energy use relating to heating, cooling, or lighting, as well as to the supply of energy needed to run machinery and appliances on premises located within or adjacent to the City, but shall not apply to energy sales for the for the purpose of providing fuel for vehicles 
f.  Exception to Equivalent Fee Requirement. The requirement in Section 674.09 (e) to impose an equivalent fee on any other energy supplier does not apply if the separate ordinance imposing the fee on the Company requires the City to use the franchise fee collected for no purpose other than betterment of Electric Facilities, including such things as placing the Electric Facilities underground or installing decorative lighting above ground, and incorporates the provisions of this Section 674.09 (f) by reference or restatement. If the City wishes to take advantage of this exception, the City must separately account for all franchise fees received from the Company. The City must provide a report to the Company no later than thirty (30) days after the due date for each franchise fee payment indicating the current balance of the franchise fee account, the expenditures from the account for the current calendar year, and the budgeted expenditures from the account for the current calendar year, and the amount committed by contract for expenditures in the current budget year. The City will promptly give Notice to the Company if and when the unallocated balance reaches $3,000,000.00. The unallocated balance means the balance minus any amounts committed by contract for expenditures. Upon receiving the Notice, the Company will cease collection at the end of the first full monthly billing cycle that occurs after receipt of the Notice, and thereafter the Company will have no further obligation to pay the franchise fee to the City until the first billing month commencing ninety (90) days after Notice that the unallocated balance has fallen below $1,000,000.00. The City will have no obligation to return any amount which exceeds the $3,000,000.00 unallocated balance or any balance remaining upon any repeal of the separate ordinance by the City, provided such balance will be reinstated by the City to the separate account if said separate ordinance is subsequently reenacted. Any franchise fee imposed on the Company as authorized by this Section 674.09 (f) shall be the exclusive fee payable by the Company under this franchise until the City, by ordinance, repeals the separate ordinance imposing the fee under this Section 674.09 (f). If the Company provides the services for the betterment of the Electric Facilities, the Company agrees to make its records regarding its costs available for inspection by the City at reasonable times and at the City's own expense. 
g.  Permitted Adjustments. If following the effective date of a separate ordinance adopted under Section 674.09 (b) the Commission by Final Order approves a change in the Company's electric rates resulting in a general rate increase for one or more Customer Classifications, the Company shall calculate and send to the City a letter setting forth the amount, as a percentage, of authorized increase for each classification of customer within sixty (60) days after the Company receives the Final Order. The amount of the franchise fee that may be imposed by the City may be increased from the Fee Schedule in Section 674.09 (a) to an amount not to exceed the percentage for the applicable Customer Classification stated in the Company's letter times each monthly amount set forth in the Fee Schedule and adding the resultant amount to the applicable amount set forth in the Fee Schedule. In this manner the franchise fee collected or permitted to be collected from each class of customer can increase by the same percentage as the Company's electric rate increase. During the period where the City has imposed a franchise fee by separate ordinance under Section 674.9 (a) there is no waiver of the right to impose the amendment if the City does not seek an increase in any franchise fee immediately after any such letter from the Company and, if the City, so chooses, the City can combine the percentages derived from more than one rate case, to the extent not previously applied by the City, in setting the amount of the Franchise fee, so that the City is not prejudiced by delaying any action to impose or increase the franchise fee. 
674.10. - Franchise Reopener. 
If at any time after the date hereof, the Company is collecting and paying an electric franchise fee in two or more other cities in the seven-county metropolitan area, based on an electric franchise ordinance adopted by such cities and accepted by the Company after the date of this franchise agreement, and in which cities may give the Company Notice to amend this franchise agreement to authorize collection of a franchise fee substantively identical to the franchise fee being collected in such two or more other cities identified in the Notice. If the Company refuses to do so within ninety (90) days after receiving said Notice from the City, the City may terminate this franchise agreement upon thirty (30) days prior written Notice unless the Company gives Notice to the City with said thirty (30) day period that it will immediately agree to accept an amendment to this Ordinance authorizing collection of a fee under this franchise agreement on the same terms and conditions and in an amount not exceeding the fee being collected in the two or more other cities as referenced in the City's Notice. In addition, after this franchise agreement has been in effect for ten (10) years, the City may give the Company Notice that it desires to amend this franchise agreement to incorporate specific provisions that the Company has agreed to in the electric franchise agreements for two or more other cities of the second, third, or fourth class in the seven-county metropolitan area, based on a franchise ordinance adopted by such cities after the date of this franchise agreement, which cities are identified in the Notice. If the Company refuses to do so within ninety (90) dates after receiving said Notice from the City, the City may terminate this franchise agreement upon thirty (30) days prior written Notice unless the Company gives Notice to the City within said thirty (30) day period that it will immediately agree to accept an amendment to this Ordinance incorporating the desired franchise provisions existing in the two or more other cities as referenced in the City's Notice. A termination will not be effective until after completion of any dispute resolution proceeding under Section 674.02(e), commenced by the Company within the applicable thirty (30) day period, which proceeding confirms the City's action to be in compliance with this Section 674.10. 
674.11. - Abandoned Facilities. 
The Company shall comply with City ordinances, including Wayzata City Code Chapter 307, as amended, Minnesota Statues, Section 216D.01 et seq. and Minnesota Rules Part 7819.3300, as they may be amended from time to time. The Company shall maintain records 
674.12. - Provisions of this Ordinance. 
a.  Severability. Every section, provision or part of this Ordinance is declared separate from every other section, provision or part, and if any section, provision, or part shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other section, provision, or part. Where a provision of any other City ordinance conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance, the provision of this Ordinance shall prevail. 
b.  Limitation on Applicability. This Ordinance constitutes a franchise agreement between the City and the Company as the only parties, and no provision of this franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any third person (including the public at large) so as to the constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person not a party hereto. 
674.13. - Amendment. 
This Ordinance may be amended at any time by the City passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provision of the amendment, which shall become effective after publication as required by law and after the filing of the Company's written consent thereto with the City Clerk within sixty (60) days after adoption. 
674.14. - Charter VII Requirements 
The Revised Charter of the City of Wayzata Chapter VII, requires the following part of this Ordinance: 
a.  Terms. The Company shall be subject to and will perform all the terms in Chapter VII of the Revised Charter of the City of Wayzata. 
b.  Stock. The Company shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or the value thereof, and the Company shall have no right to receive, upon condemnation proceedings brought by the City to acquire the public entity exercising such franchise, any return on account of the franchise or its value. 
c.  Sale. No sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective until the Company shall have filed in the office of the City Manager of the City, an instrument, duly executed, reciting the fact of such sale or lease, accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee thereunder. 
(Ord. 674 [11-23-2006]) 
ORDINANCE NO. 703 
(Electric Service Franchise Fee) 
AN ORDINANCE IMPLEMENTING AN ELECTRIC SERVICE FRANCHISE FEE ON NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA CORPORATION, D/B/A/ XCEL ENERGY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, FOR PROVIDING ELECTRIC SERVICE WITHIN THE CITY OF WAYZATA 
SECTION 1. The City of Wayzata Municipal Code is hereby amended to include reference to the following Special Ordinance. 

703.01. - Purpose. 
The Wayzata City Council has determined that it is in the best interest of the City to impose a franchise fee on those public utility companies that provide electric service within the City of Wayzata. This franchise fee will be used for no purpose other than for the operation and enhancement of the municipal street lighting system, to cover the City cost of electrical energy for and the maintenance and betterment of the electric facilities, including such things as placing the electric facilities underground or installing street lighting above ground. 
703.02. - Rates. 
Pursuant to City Ordinance No. 674, a Franchise Agreement between the City of Wayzata and Northern States Power Company, a Minnesota corporation, d/b/a Xcel Energy, its successors and assigns, in an amount and fee design as set forth in Section 0 of the Northern States Power Company Franchise and in the City fee schedule adopted. The City of Wayzata hereby reserves and retains the right and power to amend the rates established in the event the established rates are not sufficient to cover the costs of construction, electrical energy and maintenance. The amount of said charge shall be established by resolution after receipt of Xcel Energy's agreement to such amendment, but no more than once annually. 
703.03. - Franchise Fee Statement. 
A franchise fee is hereby imposed on Northern States Power Company, a Minnesota Corporation, d/b/a Xcel Energy, its successors and assigns, under its electric franchise in accordance with the schedule attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance, commencing with the Xcel Energy March 2010 billing month. 
A.  This fee is an account-based fee on each premise and not a meter-based fee. In the event that an entity covered by this ordinance has more than one meter at a single premise, but only one account, only one fee shall be assessed to that account. If a premise has two or more meters being billed at different rates, the Company may have an account for each rate classification, which will result in more than one franchise fee assessment for electric service to that premise. If the Company combines the rate classifications into a single account, the franchise fee assessed to the account will be the largest franchise fee applicable to a single rate classification for energy delivered to that premise. In the event any entities covered by this ordinance have more than one premise, each premise (address) shall be subject to the appropriate fee. In the event a question arises to the proper fee amount for any premise, the Company's manner of billing for energy used at all similar premises in the City will control. 
703.04. - Payment. 
The franchise fee shall be payable to the City on a quarterly basis in accordance with the terms set forth in Section 9 of the Franchise Ordinance No. 674. 
703.05. - Surcharge. 
The City recognizes that the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission allows the utility company to add a surcharge to customer rates to reimburse such utility company for the cost of the fee and that Xcel Energy will surcharge its own customers in the City the amount of the fee. This surcharge will be reflected on customer's bill as "City Fee." 
703.06. - Record Support for Payment. 
Xcel Energy shall make each payment when due and, if required by the City; shall provide at the time of each payment a statement summarizing how the franchise fee payment was determined, including information showing any adjustments to the total surcharge billed in the period for which the payment is being made to account for any uncollectibles, refunds, or error corrections. 
703.07a. - Enforcement. 
Any dispute, including enforcement of a default regarding this ordinance will be resolved in accordance with Section 2.5 of the Franchise Ordinance No. 674. 
703.08. - Effective Date of Franchise Fee. 
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be after its publication and sixth (60) days after the sending of written notice enclosing a copy of this adopted Ordinance to Xcel Energy by certified mail. Collection of the fee shall commence as provided in Subdivision 2. 
703.09. - Sunset Clause. 
This Ordinance shall automatically terminate November 30, 2026. 
703.10. - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall be in effect from and after its passage and publication according to law. 
(Ord. 703 [1-14-2010]) 
ORDINANCE NO. 754 
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE ORDINANCE 
City of Wayzata, Minnesota 
June 30, 2015 
Prepared by: 
BRIAN T. GROGAN, ESQ. 
Moss & Barnett 
A Professional Association 
150 South Fifth Street, Suite 1200 
Minneapolis, MN 55402 
(612) 877-5340 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
SECTION 1 SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS ..... 1 
SECTION 2 GRANT OF AUTHORITY ..... 6 
SECTION 3 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ..... 9 
SECTION 4 DESIGN PROVISION ..... 10 
SECTION 5 SERVICE PROVISIONS ..... 12 
SECTION 6 PUBLIC ACCESS PROVISIONS ..... 16 
SECTION 7 OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS ..... 16 
SECTION 8 GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS ..... 20 
SECTION 9 SALE, ABANDONMENT, TRANSFER and REVOCATION ..... 25 
SECTION 10 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ..... 29 
SECTION 11 PUBLICATION EFFECTIVE DATE; ACCEPTANCE AND EXHIBITS ..... 31 
Exhibit A Description of System 
Exhibit B PEG Access Facilities and Equipment 
Exhibit C Service to Public Facilities 
Exhibit D Public Buildings to be Provided with Two-Way Capability 
Exhibit E Franchise Fee Payment Worksheet 
ORDINANCE NO. 754 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO MEDIACOM MINNESOTA LLC TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, AND MAINTAIN A CABLE SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF WAYZATA, MINNESOTA; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF THE FRANCHISE; PROVIDING FOR REGULATION AND USE OF THE SYSTEM; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS. 
The City Council of the City of Wayzata ordains. 
STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSES 
    The City of Wayzata intends, by the adoption of this Franchise, to bring about the development of a Cable System, and the continued operation of it. Such a development can contribute significantly to the communications needs and desires of the residents and citizens of the City and the public generally. Further, City may achieve better utilization and improvement of public services and enhanced economic development with the development and operation of a Cable System. 
FINDINGS 
In the review of the request for renewal by Grantee and negotiations related thereto, and as a result of a public hearing, the City Council makes the following findings: 
1.  Grantee's technical ability, financial condition, legal qualifications, and character were considered and approved in a full public proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; 
2.  Grantee's plans for constructing and operating the Cable System were considered and found adequate and feasible in a full public proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; 
3.  The Franchise granted to Grantee by City complies with the existing applicable State statutes, federal laws and regulations; and 
4.  The Franchise granted to Grantee is nonexclusive. 
SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS 
    Short Title. This Franchise shall be known and cited as the Cable Television Franchise Ordinance. 
    Definitions. For purposes of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. All capitalized terms used in the definition of any other term shall have their meaning as otherwise defined in this section. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    "Applicable Laws" means any local law, City Code or federal or State statute, law, regulation or other final legal authority governing any of the matters addressed in this Franchise. 
    "Basic Cable Service" means any service tier which includes the lawful retransmission of local television broadcast signals. Basic Cable Service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C.  522(3). 
    "Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984) (codified at 47 U.S.C.  521-611 (1982 & Supp. V 1987)) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-458 and as the same may, from time to time, be amended. 
    "Cable Service" or "Service" means: 
    The one-way transmission to Subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service; and 
    Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    "Cable System" or "System" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
    A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; 
    A facility that serves Subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
    A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C.  201-226, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C.  541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to Subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
    An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act; or 
    Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    "Channel" or "Cable Channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a Cable System and which is capable of delivering a television Channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    "City" means the City of Wayzata, Minnesota. 
    "Converter" means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency acceptable to a television receiver of a Subscriber and by an appropriate selector permits a Subscriber to view all Subscriber signals included in the service. 
    "Council" means the City Council of the City of Wayzata, Minnesota. 
    "Demarcation Point" shall have the meaning set forth in FCC regulations 47 C.F.R.  76.5 (mm) as may from time to time be amended. Generally it shall mean a point agreed upon by Grantee and the City up to twelve (12) inches outside of the building wall. 
    "Drop" means the cable that connects the ground block on the Subscriber's residence to the nearest Feeder Cable of the System. 
    "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
    "Feeder Cable" means coaxial cables that run along Streets within the served area and connects between the individual Taps which serve the Drops. 
    "Franchise" means this Franchise and the regulatory and contractual relationship established hereby. 
    "Franchise Fee" means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the City or any other Governmental Authority on a Grantee or cable Subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term "Franchise Fee" does not include: (i) any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable Subscribers); (ii) capital costs which are required by the Franchise to be incurred by the Grantee for PEG Access Facilities; (iii) requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the Franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or (iv) any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code. 
    "GAAP" means generally accepted accounting principles as promulgated and defined by the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB"), Emerging Issues Task Force ("EITF") and/or the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). 
    "Governmental Authority" means any court or other federal, State, county, municipal or other governmental department, commission, board, agency or instrumentality. 
    "Grantee" is Mediacom Minnesota LLC, its lawful successors, transferees or assignees. 
    "Gross Revenues" means any and all revenues derived by the Grantee from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in the Service Area. Gross Revenues shall include, by way of example but not limitation, revenues from Basic Cable Service, all Cable Service fees, premium, pay-per-view, pay television, late fees, guides, home shopping revenue, Installation and reconnection fees, revenues from program guides and electronic guides, additional outlet fees, Franchise Fees required by this Franchise upgrade and downgrade fees, advertising revenue, Converter rental fees and lockout device fees. Revenues which are not directly attributable to specific customers, such as advertising revenue and home shopping commissions, shall be allocated to systems and jurisdictions on a per subscriber basis measured in a consistent manner from period to period. "Gross Revenues shall not include any bad debt, refundable deposits, investment income, FCC fees, taxes, fees or assessments of general applicability imposed or assessed by any Governmental Authority including any PEG Fee. A Franchise Fee is not such a tax, fee or assessment. The City acknowledges and accepts that Grantee shall maintain its books and records in accordance with GAAP. 
    "Installation" means the connection of the System from feeder cable to the point of connectivity. 
    "Normal Business Hours" means those hours during which most similar businesses in the City are open to serve customers. In all cases, "Normal Business Hours" must include some evening hours at least one (1) night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
    "Normal Operating Conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of the Grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the System. 
    "PEG" means public, educational and governmental. 
    "Person" means any individual or any association, firm, general partnership, limited partnership, joint stock company, joint venture, trust, corporation, limited liability company or other legally recognized entity, private or public, whether for-profit or not-for-profit. 
    "Public, Educational or Government Access Facilities" or "PEG Access Facilities" means: 
    Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use; and 
    Facilities and equipment for the use of such Channel capacity. 
    "Service Area" or "Franchise Area" means the entire geographic area within the City as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in this Franchise. 
    "Service Interruption" means the loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more Cable Channels. 
    "Standard Installation" means the first one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of a residential Drop. 
    "State" means the State of Minnesota. 
    "Street" means any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including general or utility easements in which the City has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the City. "Street" shall not include any real or personal City property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include City buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way. 
    "Subscriber" means any Person who lawfully elects to subscribe to Cable Service via the System. In the case of multiple office buildings or multiple dwelling units, the "Subscriber" means the lessee, tenant or occupant. 
    "Tap" means a device installed in the Cable System which connects a Drop to the Feeder Cable. 
    "Wireline MVPD" means a multichannel video programming distributor that utilizes the Streets to install cable or fiber and is engaged in the business of making available for purchase, by Subscribers, multiple Channels of video programming in the City. 
    Written Notice. The Grantee shall designate an agent upon whom process against it may be served on behalf of the City. All notices, reports or demands required or permitted to be given under this Franchise shall be in writing and shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to the party designated below, or when five (5) days have elapsed after it has been deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail, postage prepaid thereon, or on the next business day if sent by express mail or nationally recognized overnight air courier addressed to the party to which notice, report or demand is being given, as follows: 
If to City: City Manager 600 Rice Street Wayzata, MN 55391 If to Grantee: Mediacom Minnesota LLC 1504 Second Street SE PO Box 110 Waseca MN 56093 Non-binding Courtesy Copy to: Bruce Gluckman, Esq. Vice President and Deputy General Counsel Mediacom Communications Corporation One Mediacom Way Mediacom Park, NY 10918  
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as provided in this section. 
GRANT OF AUTHORITY 
    Franchise Required. It shall be unlawful for any Person, unless specifically required by Applicable Laws, to construct, install, operate or maintain a Cable System or to offer Cable Service in the City, unless such Person or the Person for whom such action is being taken shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise. 
    Grant of Franchise. This nonexclusive Franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein. The City hereby authorizes Grantee to occupy or use the City's Streets subject to: 1) the provisions of this non-exclusive Franchise to provide Cable Service within the City; and 2) all applicable provisions of the City Code. Said Franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide Cable Services as required by the provisions of this Franchise. Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to prohibit Grantee from: (1) providing services other than Cable Services to the extent not prohibited by Applicable Law; or (2) challenging any exercise of the City's legislative or regulatory authority in an appropriate forum. The City hereby reserves all of its rights to regulate such other services to the extent not prohibited by Applicable Law and no provision herein shall be construed to limit or give up any right to regulate. 
    Grant of Nonexclusive Authority. 
    The Franchise granted herein shall be nonexclusive. The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a Cable System as it deems appropriate provided, however, such additional grants shall not operate to materially modify, revoke, or terminate any rights previously granted to Grantee other than as described herein. If any other Wireline MVPD enters into any agreement with the City to provide multi-channel video programming or its equivalent to residents in the City, the City, upon written request of the Grantee, shall permit the Grantee to construct and/or operate its Cable System and provide multi-channel video programming or its equivalent to Subscribers in the City under a substantially similar agreement as determined in City's reasonable discretion, as applicable to the new MVPD. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the Grantee submits a written request to the City, the Grantee and the City shall enter into an agreement or other appropriate authorization (if necessary) containing the substantially similar terms and conditions, as determined in City's reasonable discretion, as are applicable to the new Wireline MVPD. 
    The Cable System constructed and maintained by Grantee or its agents shall not interfere with other uses of Streets. Grantee shall make use of existing poles and other facilities available to Grantee to the extent commercially reasonable. Nothing in this section authorizes the Grantee to construct poles in the City without prior City consent consistent with the City Code. 
    Notwithstanding the above grant to use Streets, no Street shall be used by Grantee if City, in its sole opinion, determines that such use is inconsistent with the terms, conditions, or provisions by which such Street was created or dedicated, or with the present use of the Street. 
    Grantee shall have the authority to use Streets for the distribution of Grantee's System. The City may require all developers of future subdivisions to allow and accommodate the construction of the System as part of any provisions for utilities to serve such subdivisions. 
    The Grantee specifically agrees to comply with the generally applicable and lawful provisions of the City's Right-of-Way Code and applicable regulations of the City. Subject to the police power exception below, in the event of a conflict between A) the lawful provisions of the City's Right-of-Way Code or applicable regulations of the City and B) this Franchise, the express provisions of the City's Right-of-Way Code shall govern. Subject to express federal and state preemption, the material terms and conditions contained in this Franchise may not be unilaterally altered by the City through subsequent amendments to the City Code, ordinances or any regulation of City, except in the lawful exercise of City's police power. Grantee acknowledges that the City may modify its regulatory policies by lawful exercise of the City's police powers throughout the term of this Franchise. Grantee agrees to comply with such lawful modifications to the City Code; however, Grantee reserves any rights it may have to challenge such modifications to the City Code whether arising in contract or at law. The City reserves all of its rights and defenses to such challenges whether arising in contract or at law. 
    Nothing in this Franchise shall (A) abrogate the right of the City to perform any public works or public improvements of any description, (B) be construed as a waiver of any codes or ordinances promulgated by the City, or (C) be construed as a waiver or release of the rights of the City in and to the Streets. 
    This Franchise complies with the Minnesota franchise standards set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 238.084. The City and the Grantee shall conform to Minnesota laws promulgated subsequent to the date of this Franchise. The City and the Grantee shall conform to federal laws and regulations as they become effective. 
    Term. The term of this Franchise shall be for the period of ten (10) years from the date of acceptance by Grantee, unless renewed, revoked or, terminated sooner as herein provided ("Initial Term"). Upon mutual agreement by City and Grantee, the Initial Term may be extended for an additional five (5) years. 
    Previous Franchise. Upon acceptance of this Franchise by Grantee as required in Section 11.2 herein, this Franchise shall supersede and replace any previous Franchise granting a franchise to Grantee to own, operate and maintain a Cable System within the City. Franchise Ordinance No. 916B is hereby repealed. 
    Rules of Grantee. The Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable said Grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under this Franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all of its Subscribers; provided that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with provisions hereto, the City Code or Applicable Law. 
    Territorial Area Involved. This Franchise is granted for the Service Area. 
(a)  Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the Cable System to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial building in the Service Area, subject to any Service Area line extension requirements of this Franchise. Grantee shall extend plant to all areas of the City where the density reaches or exceeds seven (7) homes per one-quarter (1/4) linear strand mile of cable as measured from the nearest Tap required to deliver a signal that complies with the FCC Technical Standards, if applicable. After Service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any Service Area, Grantee shall provide Cable Service to any requesting Subscriber within that Service Area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that the Grantee is able to secure access to all rights-of-way necessary to extend Service to such Subscriber within such thirty (30) day period on reasonable terms and conditions and Grantee can provide Cable Service using a Standard Installation. 
    If a Subscriber requires a non-Standard Installation (e.g. a Drop in excess of 250 feet), Grantee shall, upon request, provide a quote for construction of the non-Standard Installation and shall establish a mutually acceptable payment schedule not to exceed one (1) calendar year. For residential Installations only, Grantee shall be responsible for all costs of the Standard Installation and the Subscriber shall be responsible for one-half (1/2) of the Actual Cost of any construction required beyond the cost of the Standard Installation; Grantee shall be responsible for the balance of the costs for the non-Standard Installation. 
    Grantee shall promptly bury all Drops to Subscribers' dwellings when required by local construction standards. In the event the ground is frozen or otherwise unsuitable to permit immediate burial, Grantee shall be permitted to delay such burial until the ground becomes suitable for burial and shall complete said burial no later than June 1st of each year. 
    Governing Requirements and Non-waiver of Rights. City and Grantee shall comply with all lawful requirements of this Franchise and Applicable Law. Grantee acknowledges that it has had an opportunity to review the terms and conditions of this Franchise and has the right to enter into, execute and perform its obligations under this Franchise and that Grantee believes that said terms and conditions are not unreasonable and are valid and binding obligations. Subject to the foregoing, nothing in this Franchise shall be construed as a waiver of any rights of the City or Grantee. 
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
    Grantee's Facilities and Equipment. 
    In those areas of the City where transmission or distribution facilities of all the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the Grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground. 
    Grantee shall be granted access to any easements granted to a public utility, municipal utility or utility district in any areas annexed by City or new developments. 
    In those areas of the City where Grantee's cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the Grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground in accordance with the City Code. Certain of Grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above-ground closures; however, the City specifically reserves all of its rights to approve above-ground or underground locations for pedestals subject to Applicable Laws. Grantee shall be responsible for any costs associated with these obligations to the same extent other users of the Streets in accordance with Applicable Laws. 
    System Extensions. Grantee shall obtain all necessary permits from City before commencing any construction upgrade or extension of the System, including the opening or disturbance of any Street, or private or public property within City. Grantee shall strictly adhere to all generally applicable, Applicable Law regarding the construction, operation or maintenance of the System in City in accordance with Applicable Law. 
    Repair of Streets and Property. Consistent with any generally applicable Applicable Law, any and all Streets or public property or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the System shall be promptly and fully restored by Grantee. 
    Conditions on Street Use. 
    Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to prevent City from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any Street; constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or other public work. 
    The Grantee shall furnish to and file with City Manager strand maps of the System, including the location of any underground plant and Grantee shall file with City updates of such map annually if changes have been made in the System. City shall have the right to travel to Grantee's office, which shall be located no further than the Lake Minnetonka region or the City of Chanhassen, to review as-built maps to be made available by the Grantee in accordance with Section 7.5 of this Franchise. 
    The Grantee shall, on request of any Person holding a moving permit issued by City, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the Person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall be given not less than ten (10) days advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes. 
    Tree Trimming. Grantee shall have the authority, pursuant to the City Code, to trim trees upon and hanging over Streets and public places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of Grantee. 
    Protection of facilities. Nothing contained in this section shall relieve any Person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging Grantee's facilities while performing any work connected with grading, regrading or changing the line of any Rights-of-Way or public place or the construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system. 
    Use of Grantee's Facilities. The City shall, at its own expense, have the right to install and maintain upon the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits owned by Grantee, any wires and fixtures desired by the City only to the extent and under such terms and conditions as are mutually agreed upon by City and Grantee. 
DESIGN PROVISION 
    Minimum Channel Capacity. 
    As of the effective date of this Franchise, Grantee currently operates a System utilizing a 750 MHz fiber/coaxial hybrid Cable System which shall be capable of delivering a minimum of eighty (80) video program Channels. 
    All programming decisions remain the sole discretion of Grantee subject to City's rights pursuant to 47 U.S.C.  545. Grantee shall comply with federal law regarding notice to City and Subscribers prior to any Channel additions, deletions, or realignments. 
    Technical Standards. The System shall at all times meet the technical standards established by the FCC as they may be amended from time to time and shall be operated so as to minimize disruption of signal to Subscribers. The System specifications are outlined in Exhibit A for information purposes. 
    Special Testing. City may require special testing of a location or locations within the System if there is a particular matter of controversy or unresolved complaints pertaining to such location(s). Demand for such special tests may be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or noncompliance. Such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy or unresolved complaints. The City shall endeavor to so arrange its request for such special testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to Grantee or to the Subscribers caused by such testing. Before ordering such tests, Grantee shall be afforded thirty (30) days to correct problems or complaints upon which tests were ordered. The City shall meet with Grantee prior to requiring special tests to discuss the need for such and, if possible, visually inspect those locations which are the focus of concern. If, after such meetings and inspections, City wishes to commence special tests and the thirty (30) days have elapsed without correction of the matter in controversy or unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted by a qualified engineer selected by City. In the event that special testing is required by City to determine the source of technical difficulties, the cost of said testing shall be borne by the Grantee if the testing reveals the source of the technical difficulty to be within Grantee's reasonable control. If the testing reveals the difficulties to be caused by factors which are beyond Grantee's reasonable control then the cost of said test shall be borne by City. 
    FCC Reports. The results of tests required to be filed by Grantee with the FCC shall also be copied to City within ten (10) days of the conduct of the date of the test. 
    Emergency Alert Capability. At all times during the term of this Franchise, Grantee shall provide and maintain an Emergency Alert System (EAS) consistent with applicable federal law and regulations including 47 C.F.R., Part 11, and any Minnesota State Emergency Alert System requirements. The City may identify authorized emergency officials for activating the EAS consistent with the Minnesota State Emergency Statewide Plan ("EAS Plan"). The City may also develop a local plan containing methods of EAS message distribution, subject to Applicable Laws and the EAS Plan. Nothing in this section is intended to expand Grantee's obligations beyond that which is required by the EAS Plan and Applicable Law. 
    Parental Control Lock. Grantee shall provide, for sale or lease, to Subscribers, upon request, a parental control locking device or digital code that permits inhibiting the video and audio portions of any Channels offered by Grantee. 
    Right of Inspection. City shall have the right to inspect all construction, reconstruction or installation work performed by Grantee pursuant to all applicable provisions of the City Code. 
SERVICE PROVISIONS 
    Rate Regulation. The City reserves the right to regulate rates for Basic Cable Service and any other services offered over the Cable System, to the extent not prohibited by Applicable Laws. The Grantee shall be subject to the rate regulation provisions provided for herein, and those of the FCC at 47 C.F.R., Part 76, Subpart N, as the same may be amended from time to time. The City shall follow the rules relating to cable rate regulation promulgated by the FCC at 47 C.F.R., Part 76, Subpart N, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
    Leased Channel Service. Grantee shall offer leased channel service on reasonable terms and conditions and in accordance with Applicable Laws. 
    Consumer Protection and Service Standards. Grantee shall maintain a convenient local customer service or bill payment location for receiving Subscriber payments; provided, however, this section does not require Grantee to maintain an office in the City. Grantee shall also maintain or arrange for a location where equipment can be dropped off or exchanged as is necessary or, in the alternative, establish a system for having Subscriber equipment picked up at the Subscriber residence free-of-charge. Grantee shall also comply with the following consumer protection standards for Cable Service under Normal Operating Conditions: 
    Cable System office hours and telephone availability. 
    Grantee will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its Subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
    Trained Grantee representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during Normal Business Hours. 
    After Normal Business Hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after Normal Business Hours must be responded to by a trained Grantee representative on the next business day. 
    Under Normal Operating Conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under Normal Operating Conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
    Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
    Under Normal Operating Conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time. 
    Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during Normal Business Hours and will be conveniently located. 
    Installations, Outages and Service Calls. Under Normal Operating Conditions, each of the following standards will be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
    Standard Installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. "Standard" Installations are those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system. 
    Excluding conditions beyond the control of Grantee, Grantee will begin working on "Service Interruptions" promptly and in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. Grantee must begin actions to correct other Service problems the next business day after notification of the Service problem. 
    The "appointment window" alternatives for Installations, Service calls, and other Installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four (4) hour time block during Normal Business Hours. (Grantee may schedule Service calls and other Installation activities outside of Normal Business Hours for the express convenience of the customer.) 
    Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
    If Grantee's representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
    Communications between Grantee and Subscribers. Grantee shall comply with the provisions of 47 CFR  76.1601-1604 regarding communications with Subscribers in the City: 
    Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either: 
    The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or 
    The return of the equipment supplied by Grantee if Cable Service is terminated. 
    Credits. Credits for Cable Service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
    Billing: 
    Consistent with 47 C.F.R.  76.1619, bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, Basic Cable Service and premium Cable Service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
    In case of a billing dispute, Grantee must respond to a written complaint from a Subscriber within thirty (30) days. 
    Subscriber Information. Grantee will provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of Installation of Service, at least annually to all Subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
    Products and Services offered; 
    Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
    Installation and Service maintenance policies; 
    Instructions on how to use the Cable Service; 
    Channel positions of programming carried on the System; and 
    Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the City's cable office. 
Subscribers shall be advised of the procedures for resolution of complaints about the quality of the television signal delivered by Grantee, including the address of the responsible officer of the City. Subscribers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or Channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to Subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of Grantee. In addition, Grantee shall notify Subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the information required by this Section 5.3(e). 
    Notice or Rate Programming Change. In addition to the requirement of this subparagraph (f) regarding advance notification to Subscribers of any changes in rates, programming services or Channel positions, Grantee shall give thirty (30) days written notice to both Subscribers and the City before implementing any rate or Service change consistent with applicable federal law. Such notice shall state the precise amount of any rate change and briefly explain in readily understandable fashion the cause of the rate change (e.g., inflation, change in external costs or the addition/deletion of Channels). When the change involves the addition or deletion of Channels, each Channel added or deleted must be separately identified. For purposes of the carriage of digital broadcast signals, Grantee need only identify for Subscribers, the television signal added and not whether that signal may be multiplexed during certain dayparts. 
    Subscriber Contracts. Grantee shall, upon written request, provide the City with any standard form residential Subscriber contract utilized by Grantee. If no such written contract exists, Grantee shall file with the City a document completely and concisely stating the length and terms of the Subscriber contract offered to customers. The length and terms of any standard form Subscriber contract(s) shall be available for public inspection during Normal Business Hours. A list of Grantee's current Subscriber rates and charges for Cable Service shall be maintained on file with City and shall be available for public inspection. 
    Refund Policy. If a Subscriber's Cable Service is interrupted or discontinued, without cause, for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours, Grantee shall, upon request by the Subscriber, credit such Subscriber pro rata for such interruption. For this purpose, every month will be assumed to have thirty (30) days. 
    Late Fees. Grantee shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws with respect to any assessment, charge, cost, fee or sum, however characterized, that Grantee imposes upon a Subscriber for late payment of a bill. The City reserves the right to enforce Grantee's compliance with all Applicable Laws to the maximum extent legally permissible. 
    Disputes. All Subscribers and members of the general public may direct complaints, regarding Grantee's Service or performance to the chief administrative officer of the City or the chief administrative officer's designee, which may be a board or Commission of the City. 
    Failure to Resolve Complaints. Grantee shall resolve a complaint within thirty (30) days. In addition, Grantee shall respond to written complaints from the City in a timely manner, and provide a copy of each response to the City within fifteen (15) days. 
    Notification of Complaint Procedure. Grantee shall have printed clearly and prominently on each Subscriber bill and in the customer service agreement provided for in Section 5.3(e), the twenty-four (24) hour Grantee phone number for Subscriber complaints. Additionally, Grantee shall provide information to customers concerning the procedures to follow when they are unsatisfied with measures taken by Grantee to remedy their complaint. This information will include the phone number of the City office or Person designated to handle complaints. Additionally, Grantee shall state that complaints should be made to Grantee prior to contacting the City. 
    Grantee Identification. Grantee shall provide all customer service technicians and all other Grantee employees entering private property with appropriate picture identification so that Grantee employees may be easily identified by the property owners and Subscribers. 
PUBLIC ACCESS PROVISIONS 
    Public, Educational and Government Access. City or its designee is hereby designated to operate, administer, promote, and manage public, educational, and governmental programming (hereinafter "PEG Access") to the Cable System established pursuant to this Section 6. Grantee shall have no responsibility whatsoever for PEG Access except as expressly stated in this Section 6 and Exhibit B attached hereto and herby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
    Grantee Support for PEG Usage. In accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act and Minnesota Statutes Section 238.084, Grantee shall provide and make available for PEG Access usage within the Service Area the following: 
    Provision and use of the grant funds and Channels designated in Exhibit B of this Franchise for local educational and governmental programming and access use at no charge in accordance with the requirements of Exhibit B. 
    Maintenance of the PEG Access Facilities and Channels, and support of educational and governmental programming to the extent specified in Exhibit B of this Franchise. 
    Provision of free public building Installation and Cable Service and the provision of two-way capability as more clearly specified in Exhibit B. 
    PEG Access Facilities shall be operated by the City. 
OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS 
    Franchise Fee. 
    During the term of the Franchise, Grantee shall pay quarterly to the City a Franchise Fee of five percent (5%) of Gross Revenues. In the event Grantee bundles or combines Cable Services (which are subject to the Franchise Fee) with non-Cable Services (which are not subject to the Franchise Fee) so that Subscribers pay a single fee for more than one (1) class of service resulting in a discount on Cable Services, Grantee agrees that for the purpose of calculation of the Franchise Fee, it shall allocate to Cable Service revenue no less than a pro rata share of the revenue received for the bundled or combined services. The pro rata share shall be computed on the basis of the published charge for each service in the bundled or combined classes of services when purchased separately. 
    Each Franchise Fee payment shall be paid quarterly not later than thirty (30) days following the end of a given quarter and each payment shall be accompanied by a Franchise Fee Payment Worksheet substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit E. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the City shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable as a Franchise Fee under this Franchise or for the performance of any other obligation of the Grantee. 
    Any Franchise Fees owing pursuant to this Franchise which remain unpaid more than thirty (30) days after the end of a given quarter shall be delinquent and shall immediately thereafter accrue interest at twelve percent (12%) per annum or two percent (2%) above prime lending rate as quoted by the Wall Street Journal, whichever is greater. Enforcement of unpaid Franchise Fees shall be handled in accordance with Section 9.6; however, Grantee shall in all cases be subject to interest on any payment more than thirty (30) days after the end of a given quarter. 
    Upon ten (10) days prior written notice, City shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of Grantee's records. If such audit indicates a Franchise Fee underpayment of five percent (5%) or more, the Grantee shall assume all of City's out-of-pocket costs associated with the conduct of such an audit and shall remit to City all applicable Franchise Fees due and payable together with interest at twelve percent (12%) per annum or two percent (2%) above prime lending rate as quoted by the Wall Street Journal, whichever is greater. 
    Not Franchise Fees. 
    Grantee acknowledges and agrees that the Franchise Fees payable by Grantee to the City pursuant to Section 7.1 hereof shall take precedence over all other payments, contributions, Services, equipment, facilities, support, resources or other activities to be provided or performed by the Grantee pursuant to this Franchise and that the Franchise Fees provided for in Section 7.1 of this Franchise shall not be deemed to be in the nature of a tax, and shall be in addition to any and all taxes of general applicability and other fees and charges which the Grantee shall be required to pay to the City and/or to any other Governmental Authority, all of which shall be separate and distinct obligations of Grantee. 
    Grantee shall not apply or seek to apply or make any claim that all or any part of the Franchise Fees or other payments or contributions to be made by Grantee to City pursuant to this Franchise and shall be deducted from or credited or offset against any taxes, fees or assessments of general applicability levied or imposed by the City or any other Governmental Authority, including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services. 
    Grantee shall not apply or seek to apply all or any part of any taxes, fees or assessments of general applicability levied or imposed by the City or any other Governmental Authority (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services) as a deduction or other credit from or against any of the Franchise Fees each of which shall be deemed to be separate and distinct obligations of the Grantee 
    Periodic Evaluation, Review and Modification. City and Grantee acknowledge and agree that the field of cable television is rapidly changing and one which may see many regulatory, technical, financial, marketing and legal changes during the term of this Franchise. Therefore, in order to provide for the maximum degree of flexibility in this Franchise, and to help achieve a continued, advanced and modern Cable System, the following evaluation provisions will apply: 
    Grantee shall be subject to the procedures and the subjects described in this Section 7.3. 
    The City may require, in its sole discretion, that the Grantee participate in evaluation sessions with the City at any time and from time to time during the term of this Franchise; provided, however, there shall not be more than one (1) evaluation session during any three (3) year period. 
    Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session include, but are not limited to, rates, Channel capacity, the System performance, programming, PEG Access, municipal uses of the System, Subscriber complaints, judicial rulings, FCC rulings and any other topics the City or Grantee may deem relevant. 
    During an evaluation session, Grantee shall fully cooperate with the City and shall provide without cost and in a timely manner such information and documents as the City may request to perform the evaluation. 
    As a result of an evaluation session, the City or Grantee may determine that an amendment in the terms of this Franchise may be mutually agreed upon. 
    Reports. 
    All reports and records required under this Franchise shall be furnished at the sole expense of Grantee, except as otherwise provided in this Franchise. 
    Grantee shall provide City with an annual statement, within ninety (90) days of the close of each calendar year end, certified by an officer of the Grantee, reflecting the total amounts of Gross Revenues and all payments, and computations of the Franchise Fee for the previous calendar year. 
    Grantee shall, upon written request of the City Manager, provide City with a quarterly customer service compliance report which shall, at a minimum, demonstrate Grantee's compliance with the terms and provisions of Section 5.3 of this Franchise. 
    Upon request of the City and in no event later than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of such request, Grantee shall make available to City such reports, maps and information or data with respect to Grantee's compliance with this Franchise. Neither City nor Grantee shall unreasonably demand or withhold information requested pursuant to this section. 
    Records Required and City's Right to Inspect 
    Grantee shall at all times maintain the following records and information relating specifically to the Cable System serving the City as identified by the FCC Community Unit Identifier ("CUID") as opposed to a regional cable system or other operating unit of Grantee and shall provide such information to City upon no less than thirty (30) days advance written request: 
    A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" drawings and/or maps which shall be updated annually showing the location of the Cable System installed or in use in the City, exclusive of Subscriber service Drops and equipment provided in Subscribers' homes. 
    A summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, in a form reasonably acceptable to the City; and 
    A summary of Grantee's compliance with the terms and provision of the customer service requirements set forth in Section 5.3 of this Franchise. 
    Upon request of the City and in no event later than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of such request, Grantee shall, free of charge, prepare and furnish to the City such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions, or property, as may be reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Franchise. Neither City nor Grantee shall unreasonably demand or withhold information requested pursuant with the terms of this Franchise. 
    The City agrees to request access to only those books and records, in exercising its rights under this section, which it deems reasonably necessary for the enforcement and administration of this Franchise. 
    Recovery of Processing Costs. To aid in the analysis and resolution of any future disputed matters relative to this Franchise, the City and Grantee may, by mutual written agreement (both as to whether to hire and whom to hire), employ the services of technical, financial and/or legal consultants, as mediators. All reasonable fees of the consultants incurred by the City and/or the Grantee in this regard shall, unless the parties otherwise agree, be borne equally by City and Grantee. 
    Confidentiality. Subject to Applicable Law, Grantee may choose to provide any confidential or proprietary records that it is obligated to make available to the City pursuant to this Franchise, by allowing the City, or its designated representative(s), to view the records at a conference room in City Hall or at Grantee's office located in the City or a location no further than the Lake Minnetonka region or the City of Chanhassen, without City obtaining its own copies of such records. Grantee may also choose to provide any confidential or proprietary records pursuant to a mutually acceptable non-disclosure agreement with a City designated agent. The intent of the parties is to work cooperatively to insure that those records reasonably necessary for City's monitoring and enforcement of Franchise obligations are provided to City. City agrees to keep said records confidential and proprietary to the fullest extent permitted by Applicable Law. Grantee shall be responsible for clearly and conspicuously identifying the records confidential or proprietary. Grantee acknowledges that the Minnesota Data Practices Act ("MDPA") places limitations on the ability of the City to protect certain information unless such information meets the statutory requirements set forth in the MDPA. If the City believes it must release any such confidential or proprietary records in the course of enforcing this Franchise, or for any other reason including compliance with the MDPA, it shall advise Grantee in advance so that Grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. The City agrees that, to the extent permitted by the MDPA and Applicable Law, it shall deny access to any of Grantee's Records marked confidential, as set forth above, to any Person and that it shall furnish only that portion of the Grantee's records required under the MDPA and Applicable Law. 
    Administration of Franchise. The City Manager or its designee shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the Cable System and the Grantee's operation under the Franchise. The City Manager shall have authority to issue notice of franchise violations to Grantee under this Franchise; provided, however, the Council shall have sole authority to conduct any required hearings regarding such alleged violations and issue any decisions regarding enforcement the Franchise. 
GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS 
    Security Fund. 
    Upon acceptance of this Franchise, Grantee shall establish and provide to City a security fund, as security for the full and timely payment and performance by Grantee of all of its obligations under this Franchise in the amount of Ten Thousand and No/100 Dollars ($10,000) in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit, established in a local bank and maintained throughout the term of this Franchise. City may, in its sole discretion, reduce the amount of the letter of credit. If, at any time during the term of this Franchise, Grantee seeks consent to a transfer or assignment of its rights hereunder, City may unilaterally increase the security fund up to Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000) if it so chooses. 
    The security fund may be drawn upon by City for those purposes specified in Section 8.1(d) hereof. Grantee's recourse, in the event Grantee believes that City's actions in taking any security funds is improper, shall be through legal action after the security has been drawn upon. Actions brought by Grantee hereunder may be subject to 47 U.S.C.  555A - Limitations of Franchising Authority Liability - which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
    Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of the normal permit requirements made of all contractors working within the City's rights-of-way. 
    In addition to recovery of any monies owed by Grantee to City or damages to City as a result of any acts or omissions by Grantee pursuant to the Franchise, City in compliance with this section may charge to and collect from the letter of credit the following penalties: 
    For failure to provide data, documents, reports or information or to cooperate with City during an application process or system review or as otherwise provided herein, the penalty shall be One Hundred Fifty and No/100 Dollars ($150) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues. 
    For failure to comply with construction, operation or maintenance standards the penalty shall be One Hundred Twenty-five and No/100 Dollars ($125) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues. 
    For failure to provide the services Grantee has proposed including, but not limited to, the implementation and the utilization of the access channels and the maintenance and/or replacement of the equipment and other facilities, the penalty shall be One Hundred Fifty and No/100 Dollars ($150) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues. 
    For failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Franchise, or other City ordinance related to Franchise operations for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically provided pursuant to this subparagraph (d), the penalty shall be One Hundred Fifty and No/100 Dollars ($150) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues. 
    Each violation of any provision of this Franchise shall be considered a separate violation for which a separate penalty can be imposed. 
    Whenever City finds that Grantee has violated one (1) or more terms, conditions or provisions of this Franchise, or for any other violation contemplated in subparagraph (d), above, a written notice shall be given to Grantee informing it of such violation. At any time after thirty (30) days (or such longer reasonable time which, in the sole determination of City, is necessary to cure the alleged violation) following local receipt of notice, provided Grantee remains in violation of one (1) or more terms, conditions or provisions of this Franchise, in the opinion of City, City may draw from the letter of credit all penalties and other monies due City from the date of the local receipt of notice. Nothing herein is intended to modify the standard of review applicable to the City's determination. 
    Upon receipt of the violation notice from the City, the Grantee may within thirty (30) days of such receipt, notify City in writing that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has in fact occurred. Such written notice by Grantee to City shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by Grantee. Such notice by Grantee shall toll the accrual of all penalties from the security fund and the timeframe allowed for cure until the City issues a decision following the required hearing in Section 8.1(g) (i) herein. If Grantee does not dispute the alleged violation set forth in the violation notice, Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the violation notice to cure the alleged default before the City may impose damages as set forth Section 8.1(d) herein. 
    City shall hear Grantee's dispute within sixty (60) days and render a final decision within sixty (60) days thereafter. 
    Upon the determination of City that no violation has taken place, City shall refund to Grantee, without interest, all monies drawn from the letter of credit by reason of the alleged violation. 
    If said letter of credit or any subsequent letter of credit delivered pursuant thereto expires during the term of this Franchise, it shall be renewed or replaced during the term of this Franchise. The renewed or replaced letter of credit shall be of the same form and with a bank authorized herein and for the full amount stated in subparagraph (a) of this section. 
    If City draws upon the letter of credit or any subsequent letter of credit delivered pursuant hereto, in whole or in part, Grantee shall replace or replenish to its full amount the same within ten (10) days and shall deliver to City a like replacement letter of credit or certification of replenishment for the full amount stated in Section 8.1(a) as a substitution of the previous letter of credit. This shall be a continuing obligation for any draws upon the letter of credit. 
    The failure to replace or replenish any letter of credit may also, at the option of the City, be deemed a default by Grantee under this Franchise. The drawing on the letter of credit by City, and use of the money so obtained for payment or performance of the obligations, duties and responsibilities of Grantee which are in default, shall not be a waiver or release of such default. 
    The collection by City of any damages, monies or penalties from the letter of credit shall not affect any other right or remedy available to City, nor shall any act, or failure to act, by City pursuant to the letter of credit, be deemed a waiver of any right of City pursuant to this Franchise or otherwise. 
    Liability Insurance. 
    Grantee shall with its acceptance of this Franchise, and at its sole expense, take out and maintain during the term of this Franchise public liability insurance with a company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota with a rating by A.M. Best & Co. of not less than "A-" that shall protect the Grantee, the City and their officials, officers, directors, employees and agents from claims which may arise from operations under this Franchise, whether such operations be by the Grantee, its officials, officers, directors, employees and agents or any subcontractors of Grantee. This liability insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, protection against claims arising from bodily and personal injury and damage to property, resulting from Grantee's vehicles, products and operations. The amount of insurance for single limit coverage applying to bodily and personal injury and property damage shall not be less than Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000.00). The following endorsements shall be attached to the liability policy: 
    The policy shall provide coverage on an "occurrence" basis. 
    The policy shall cover personal injury as well as bodily injury. 
    The policy shall cover blanket contractual liability subject to the standard universal exclusions of contractual liability included in the carrier's standard endorsement as to bodily injuries, personal injuries and property damage. 
    Broad form property damage liability shall be afforded. 
    The City shall be named as an additional insured on the policy. 
    An endorsement shall be provided which states that the coverage is primary insurance and that no other insurance maintained by the City will be called upon to contribute to a loss under this coverage. 
    Standard form of cross-liability shall be afforded. 
    An endorsement stating that the policy shall not be canceled without thirty (30) days' notice of such cancellation given to the City. 
    Grantee shall submit to City documentation of the required insurance, including a certificate of insurance signed by the insurance agent and companies named, as well as all properly executed endorsements. 
    Indemnification. 
    Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees (collectively the "Indemnified Parties") harmless from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liabilities, demands, damages, judgments, settlements, disability, losses, expenses (including attorney's fees and disbursements of counsel) and costs of any nature that any of the Indemnified Parties may at any time suffer, sustain or incur arising out of, based upon or in any way connected with the grant of this Franchise, the operation of Grantee's System, the breach by Grantee of its obligations under this Franchise and/or the activities of Grantee, its subcontractor, employees and agents hereunder. Grantee shall be solely responsible for and shall indemnify, defend and hold the Indemnified Parties harmless from and against any and all matters relative to payment of Grantee's employees, including compliance with Social Security and withholdings. 
    The indemnification obligations of Grantee set forth in this Franchise are not limited in any way by the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for Grantee under Workers' Compensation, disability or other employee benefit acts, acceptance of insurance certificates required under this Franchise, or the terms, applicability or limitations of any insurance held by Grantee. 
    City does not, and shall not, waive any rights against Grantee which it may have by reason of the indemnification provided for in this Franchise, because of the acceptance by City, or the deposit with City by Grantee, of any of the insurance policies described in this Franchise. 
    The indemnification of City by Grantee provided for in this Franchise shall apply to all damages and claims for damages of any kind suffered by reason of any of the Grantee's operations referred to in this Franchise, regardless of whether or not such insurance policies shall have been determined to be applicable to any such damages or claims for damages. 
    Grantee shall not be required to indemnify City for negligence or misconduct on the part of City or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees. City shall hold Grantee harmless, subject to the limitations in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 466, for any damage resulting from the negligence or misconduct of the City or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees in utilizing any PEG Access Channels, equipment, or facilities and for any such negligence or misconduct by City in connection with work performed by City and permitted by this Franchise, on or adjacent to the Cable System. 
(a)  In order for City to assert its rights to be indemnified, defended, and held harmless, City must, with respect to each claim: 
(i)  Promptly notify Grantee within ten (10) business days in writing of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right; 
    Afford Grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding; and 
    Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of Grantee, at Grantee's expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement or resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to subparagraph (ii) above. 
    Grantee's Insurance. Grantee shall not commence any Cable System reconstruction work or permit any subcontractor to commence work until all insurance required under this Franchise has been obtained. Said insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect until the expiration of this Franchise. 
    Workers' Compensation Insurance. Grantee shall obtain and maintain Workers' Compensation Insurance for all of Grantee's employees, and in case any work is sublet, Grantee shall require any subcontractor similarly to provide Workers' Compensation Insurance for all of their employees, all in compliance with State laws, and to fully indemnify the City from and against any and all claims arising out of occurrences on the work. Grantee hereby indemnifies City for any and all costs, expenses (including attorneys' fees and disbursements of counsel), damages and liabilities incurred by City as a result of any failure of either Grantee or any subcontractor to take out and maintain such insurance. Grantee shall provide the City with a certificate of insurance indicating Workers' Compensation coverage upon its acceptance of this Franchise. 
SALE, ABANDONMENT, TRANSFER and REVOCATION 
    Franchise Non-transferable. 
    Grantee shall not voluntarily or involuntarily, by operation of law or otherwise, sell, assign, transfer, lease, sublet or otherwise dispose of, in whole or in part, the Franchise and/or Cable System or any of the rights or privileges granted by the Franchise, without the prior written consent of the Council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Council with regard to the proposed transferee's legal, technical and financial qualifications, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, assign, transfer, lease, sublet or otherwise dispose of all or any part of the Franchise and/or Cable System or Grantee's rights therein without the prior written consent of the Council shall be null and void and shall be grounds for termination of the Franchise pursuant to Section 9.6 hereof and the applicable provisions of any Franchise. 
    Without limiting the nature of the events requiring the Council's approval under this section, the following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other transfer of the Franchise and/or Cable System requiring compliance with this section: (i) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of Grantee's assets or the assets comprising the Cable System to any Person; (ii) the merger of the Grantee or any of its parents with or into another Person (including the merger of Grantee or any parent with or into any parent or subsidiary corporation or other Person); (iii) the consolidation of the Grantee or any of its parents with any other Person; (iv) the creation of a subsidiary corporation or other entity; (v) the sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interests in Grantee or any of its parents by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to create a new Controlling Interest in Grantee; (vi) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interest by Grantee or any of its parents so as to create a new Controlling Interest in Grantee; and (vii) the entry by the Grantee into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of the Grantee, any of Grantee's parents and/or the System or the subsequent amendment thereof. The term "Controlling Interest" as used herein is not limited to majority equity ownership of the Grantee, but also includes actual working control over the Grantee, any parent of Grantee and/or the System in whatever manner exercised. 
    Grantee shall notify City in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the property and assets comprising the Cable System of the Grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said property and assets. Such notification shall be considered by City as notice that a change in control or ownership of the Franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of City to such change in control or ownership shall apply. 
    For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, City may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and Grantee shall assist City in any such inquiry. In seeking City's consent to any change of ownership or control, Grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the transferee completes an application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to City, which application shall include the information required under this Franchise and Applicable Laws. The transferee shall be required to establish to the satisfaction of the City that it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and maintain the System and comply with all Franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of this Franchise. If, after considering the legal, financial, character and technical qualities of the transferee and determining that they are satisfactory, the City finds that such transfer is acceptable, the City shall permit such transfer and assignment of the rights and obligations of this Franchise as may be in the public interest. The consent of the City to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied. 
    Any financial institution having a security interest in any and all of the property and assets of Grantee as security for any loan made to Grantee or any of its affiliates for the construction and/or operation of the Cable System must notify the City that it or its designee satisfactory to the City shall take control of and operate the Cable System, in the event of a default in the payment or performance of the debts, liabilities or obligations of Grantee or its affiliates to such financial institution. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation of the System within thirty (30) days of assuming such control that will insure continued service and compliance with all Franchise requirements during the term the financial institution or its designee exercises control over the System. The financial institution or its designee shall not exercise control over the System for a period exceeding one (1) year unless extended by the City in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the City to transfer the Franchise to another Grantee. 
    In addition to the aforementioned requirements in this Section 9.1, the City and Grantee shall, at all times, comply with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes Section 238.083 regarding the sale or transfer of a franchise and with all other Applicable Laws. 
    City's Right to Purchase System. 
    The City shall have a right of first refusal to purchase the Cable System in the event the Grantee receives a bona fide offer to purchase the Cable System from any Person. Bona fide offer as used in this section means a written offer which has been accepted by Grantee, subject to the City's rights under this Franchise. The price to be paid by the City shall be the amount provided for in the bona fide offer, including the same terms and conditions as the bona fide offer. The City shall notify Grantee of its decision to purchase within sixty (60) days of the City's receipt from Grantee of a copy of the written bona fide offer and such other relevant and pertinent information as the City shall deem appropriate. 
    Consistent with Section 627 of the Cable Act and all other Applicable Laws, at the expiration, cancellation, revocation or termination of this Franchise, the City shall have the option to purchase, condemn or otherwise acquire and hold the Cable System. 
    Abandonment or Removal of Franchise Property. 
    Grantee may not abandon the Cable System or any portion thereof without having first given three (3) months written notice to the City. Grantee may not abandon the Cable System or any portion thereof without compensating the City for damages resulting from the abandonment. 
    In the event that the use of any property of Grantee within the Franchise Area or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, Grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that property. 
    City, upon such terms as City may impose, may give Grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any System facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained in, on, under or over the Franchise Area. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this Franchise, the Grantee shall remove all abandoned facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from City and shall restore any affected Street consistent with Applicable Law. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, Grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation made by or on behalf of Grantee and shall leave all Streets and other public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. City shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the Streets, public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this Franchise and any security fund provided for in this Franchise shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by Grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
    Upon abandonment of any Franchise property in place, the Grantee, if required by the City, shall submit to City a bill of sale and/or other an instrument, satisfactory in form and content to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of the Franchise property abandoned. 
    At the expiration or termination of the term for which this Franchise is granted, or upon its earlier revocation or termination, as provided for herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the City shall have the right to require Grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above-ground portions of the Cable System from all Streets and public ways within the City within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Franchise, the Grantee may, with the consent of the City, abandon any underground Franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the Street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable operator. 
    Nothing herein shall require the removal of any portion of the System lawfully used to provide non-Cable Services in the City. 
    Extended Operation and Continuity of Services. 
    Upon termination or forfeiture of this Franchise, Grantee shall remove its cable, wires, and appliances from the Streets, alleys, or other public places within the Service Area if the City so requests. Failure by the Grantee to remove its cable, wires, and appliances as referenced herein shall be subject to the requirements of Section 9.3 of this Franchise. 
    Receivership and Foreclosure 
    The Franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of City, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of Grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless: (1) such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this Franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all the defaults and violations under this Franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults and violations which is satisfactory to the City; and (2) such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of this Franchise. 
    In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the Franchise property, or any material part thereof, City may give notice of termination of this Franchise upon Grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which the event this Franchise and all rights and privileges of the Grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after such notice has been given, unless (1) City shall have approved the transfer of the Franchise in accordance with the provisions of this Franchise; and (2) such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with City to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of this Franchise. 
    Procedures for Revocation, Termination or Cancellation. 
    City shall provide Grantee with written notice of a cause for revocation, termination, or cancellation and the intent to revoke, terminate or cancel and shall allow Grantee thirty (30) days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the Franchise. In the notice required therein, City shall provide Grantee with the basis of the revocation, termination or cancellation. 
    Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording due process before the City Council prior to the effective date of revocation, termination, or cancellation, which public hearing shall follow the thirty (30) day notice provided in subparagraph (a) above. City shall provide Grantee with written notice of its decision together with written findings of fact supplementing said decision. 
    Only after the public hearing and upon written notice of the determination by City to revoke, terminate or cancel the Franchise may Grantee appeal said decision with an appropriate state or federal court or agency. 
    During the appeal period, the Franchise shall remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires or unless continuation of the Franchise would endanger the health, safety and welfare of any Person or the public. 
    Reservation of Rights. City and Grantee reserve all rights that they may possess under Applicable Laws unless expressly waived herein. 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
    Franchise Renewal. Any renewal of this Franchise shall be in accordance with Applicable Laws. The term of any renewed Franchise shall be limited to a period not to exceed fifteen (15) years. 
    Amendment of Franchise. Grantee and City may agree, from time to time, to amend this Franchise. Such written amendments may be made subsequent to a review session pursuant to Section 7.3 or at any other time if City and Grantee agree that such an amendment will be in the public interest or if such an amendment is required due to changes in Applicable Laws. City shall act pursuant to local law pertaining to the ordinance amendment process. 
    Right of Individuals. 
    Grantee shall comply at all times with all other Applicable Laws, relating to nondiscrimination. Access to Cable Service shall not be denied to any group of potential Subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area. 
    Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of Applicable Laws, as now written or as amended from time to time including 47 U.S.C.  554. 
    Subscriber Privacy. To the extent required by Minn. Stat.  238.084 Subd. 1(s) Grantee shall comply with the following: 
(i)  No signals including signals of a Class IV Channel may be transmitted from a Subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the Subscriber. The request for permission must be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the Subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provisions. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed one (1) year which may be renewed at the option of the Subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a Subscriber's failure to provide or renew such permission. The permission shall be revocable at any time by the Subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. 
(ii)  No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of a signal from a Subscriber terminal, including but not limited to lists of the names and addresses of Subscribers or any lists that identify the viewing habits of Subscribers shall be sold or otherwise made available to any party other than to Grantee or its agents for Grantee's business use, and also to the Subscriber subject of that information, unless Grantee has received specific written permission from the Subscriber to make such data available. 
(iii)  Written permission from the Subscriber shall not be required for the conducting of system wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for the purpose of verifying System integrity or monitoring for the purpose of billing. Confidentiality of such information shall be subject to the provision set forth in subparagraph (ii) of this section. 
(iv)  "Class IV Cable Communications Channel" means a signaling path provided by a Cable System to transmit signals of any type from a Subscriber terminal to another point in the System. 
    Grantee shall at all times comply with 47 U.S.C.  551 regarding protection of Subscriber's personally identifiable information. 
    Rights Reserved to City. In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the City by this Franchise, the City reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of this Franchise. 
    Severability. If any provision of this Franchise is held by any Governmental Authority of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any Applicable Laws now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such Governmental Authority to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such Applicable Laws, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this Franchise, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such Applicable Laws are subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such laws, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on City and Grantee, provided that City shall give Grantee thirty (30) days written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for Grantee to comply with such provision. 
    Force Majeure. In the event Grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations or requirements of this Franchise is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused for the period of such inability and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof provided Grantee has notified City in writing within a reasonable time of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond Grantee's reasonable control shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts of God, civil emergencies and labor unrest or strikes, untimely delivery of equipment, inability of Grantee to obtain access to an individual's property and inability of Grantee to secure all necessary permits to utilize utility poles and conduit so long as Grantee utilizes due diligence to timely obtain said permits. 
PUBLICATION EFFECTIVE DATE; ACCEPTANCE AND EXHIBITS 
    Publication; Effective Date. This Franchise shall be published in accordance with Applicable Law. This Franchise shall take effect upon publication subject to Grantee's acceptance. 
    Acceptance. 
    Grantee shall accept this Franchise within thirty (30) of its enactment by the City Council, unless the time for acceptance is extended by City. Such acceptance by the Grantee shall be deemed the grant of this Franchise for all purposes. In the event acceptance does not take place, this Franchise and any and all rights previously granted to Grantee shall be null and void. 
    Upon acceptance of this Franchise, Grantee shall be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein. 
    Grantee shall accept this Franchise in the following manner: 
    This Franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by Grantee and delivered to City. 
    With its acceptance, Grantee shall also deliver any performance bond, security fund and insurance certificates required herein that have not previously been delivered. 
CITY OF WAYZATA, MINNESOTA 
By:___________ 
Its: Mayor 
ATTEST: 
By:___________ 
Its: City Manager 
1st Reading: July 7, 2015 
2nd Reading: July 21, 2015 
Publication Date: August 4, 2015 
ACCEPTED: This Franchise is accepted, and we agree to be bound by its terms and conditions. 
MEDIACOM MINNESOTA LLC 
Dated:________, 2015 
By:___________ 
Its:___________ 
SWORN TO BEFORE ME this 
_____day of ________, 2015 
___________ 
Notary Public 
EXHIBIT A - DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM 
For Information only 
1.  The Cable System shall be designed, constructed, routinely inspected, and maintained to guarantee that the Cable System meets or exceeds the requirements of the most current editions of the National Electrical Code (NFRA 70) and the National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI C2). In all matters requiring interpretation of either of these codes, the City's interpretation shall control over all other sources and interpretations. 
2.  General Description. The Cable System shall provide Subscribers with a technically advanced and reliable Cable System. The System shall have at least 750 MHz of bandwidth capacity, capable of delivering approximately 80 analog Channels of programming. 
3.  Design. The design of the System shall be based upon a "Fiber to the node" architecture that will deliver the signals by fiber optics directly to each neighborhood. Grantee's initial design includes a minimum of six (6) fibers to each node site having a neighborhood group average of approximately three hundred (300) homes. If Grantee splits nodes into smaller sizes, fewer fibers will extend to such smaller nodes. There shall be no more than seven (7) active amplifiers in a cascade from each node to the residential dwelling. The incorporation of stand-by power supplies, strategically placed throughout the system including all hubs, will further reduce the likelihood of Service Interruptions. 
3.  Technical Standards. The System shall meet or exceed FCC requirements. In no event shall the System fall below the following standards: 
a.  The System shall be capable of meeting the following distortion parameters: 
1.  Carrier to RMS Noise ..... 48 dB 
2.  Carrier to Second Order ..... 53 dB 
3.  Carrier to Cross Modulation ..... 51 dB 
4.  Carrier to Composite Triple Beat ..... 53 dB 
b.  The frequency response of a single Channel as measured across any 6 MHz analog Channel shall not exceed +/- 2 dB. 
c.  The frequency response of the entire passband shall not exceed N/10+ 2 dB for the entire System where N is the number of amplifiers in cascade. 
d.  The System shall be designed such that at a minimum all technical specifications of this Franchise are met. 
e.  The System shall be designed such that no noticeable degradation in signal quality will appear at the Subscriber terminal. 
EXHIBIT B - PEG ACCESS FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT 
1.  PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT (PEG) ACCESS CHANNELS. 
a)  Grantee shall continue to provide two (2) channels for use by the City to provide educational and governmental access ("PEG Channels"). In the event access channels programmed by the Lake Minnetonka Cable Commission ("LMCC") are made available to the City and the City elects to provide such LMCC access channels, Grantee shall, upon 120 days advance written notice from City, carry up to two (2) of the LMCC access channels on the Basic Cable Service tier in the City for a total of four (4) PEG channels. 
b)  Whenever the PEG Channels are in use during eighty percent (80%) of the weekdays, Monday to Friday, for eighty percent (80%) of the time for any consecutive three (3) hour period for six (6) weeks running, and there is demand for use of an additional Channel for the same purpose, the Grantee shall then have six (6) months in which to provide a new PEG Channel for the same purpose, provided that provision of the additional Channel or Channels must not require the Cable System to install Converters. 
c)  The PEG Channels shall be dedicated for PEG use for the term of the Franchise, provided that Grantee may, utilize any portions of the PEG Channels not scheduled for PEG use. City shall establish rules and procedures for such scheduling in accordance with Section 611 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C.  531). 
d)  Grantee shall designate the standard Channel 6 for uniform regional channel usage currently provided by "Metro Channel 6" as required by Minnesota Statutes Section 238.43. Programming on this regional channel shall include a broad range of informational, educational, and public service programs and materials to cable television subscribers throughout the Twin Cities metropolitan area. 
2.  ANALOG, DIGITAL AND HD PEG CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS. 
a)  Grantee shall provide the Access Channels on the Basic Cable Service tier or the lowest tier of service offered by Grantee in accordance with the Cable Act. At such time as Grantee no longer offers Basic Cable Service in an analog format, Grantee shall carry all PEG Access Channels in a standard digital format in Grantee's Basic Cable Service package, unless the parties agree to an earlier conversion date. Thereafter, but no earlier than April 1, 2016, and upon ninety (90) days' notice from the City, which notice may be sent by City on or before October 31, 2015, Grantee shall make one (1) PEG Access Channel available in high definition (HD) format and discontinue carriage on that same PEG channel in SD format, provided that Grantee receives a satisfactory HD signal from the program originator and provided City understands HD Channels may not be available on the Basic Cable tier of service. Grantee shall have no obligation to carry any PEG Access Channels in more than one format; i.e. dual carriage. Grantee shall be responsible for all costs associated with the transport and distribution of the PEG HD Channel on its side of the Demarcation Point including any required Head end equipment or hubs/node equipment or similar distribution facilities necessary to deliver the PEG HD Channel(s) to Subscribers. The City shall be responsible for all costs associated with the creation and production of the PEG HD Channel on its side of the Demarcation Point. 
b)  The City acknowledges that receipt of an HD format Access Channel may require Subscribers to buy or lease special equipment, or pay additional HD charges applicable to all HD services. 
3.  ACCESS CHANNEL LOCATIONS. 
a)  Grantee shall make every reasonable effort to coordinate the cablecasting of PEG Access programming on the Cable System on the same Channel designations as such programming is currently cablecast within the City. In no event shall any PEG Access Channel reallocations be made prior to ninety (90) days written notice to the City by Grantee, except for circumstances beyond Grantee's reasonable control. The PEG Access Channels will be located in the channel neighborhood within reasonable proximity (4-7 channel slots) to other commercial video or broadcast Channels in Grantee's reasonable discretion, excluding pay-per-view programming offered by Grantee in the City. 
b)  Grantee agrees not to encrypt the PEG Access Channels differently than other commercial Channels available on the Cable System. 
c)  In conjunction with any occurrence of any Access Channel(s) relocation, Grantee shall provide a minimum of Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000) of in-kind air time per event on advertiser supported Channels (e.g. USA, TNT, TBS, Discovery Channel, or other comparable Channels) for the purpose of airing City's, or its designees', pre-produced thirty (30) second announcement explaining the change in location. 
4.  ANCILLARY EQUIPMENT. Any ancillary equipment operated by Grantee for the benefit of PEG Access Channels on Grantee's fiber paths or Cable System, whether referred to switchers, routers or other equipment, will be maintained by Grantee, at no cost to the City or schools for the life of the Franchise. Grantee is responsible for any ancillary equipment on its side of the Demarcation Point and the City or school is responsible for all other production/playback equipment. 
5.  PEG TECHNICAL QUALITY. 
a)  Grantee shall not be required to carry a PEG Access Channel in a higher quality format than that of the Channel signal delivered to Grantee, but Grantee shall not implement a change in the method of delivery of PEG Access Channels that results in a material degradation of signal quality or impairment of viewer reception of PEG Access Channels, provided that this requirement shall not prohibit Grantee from implementing new technologies also utilized for commercial Channels carried on its Cable System. 
i)  Grantee shall meet FCC signal quality standards when offering Access Channels on its Cable System and shall continue to comply with closed captioning pass-through requirements. There shall be no significant deterioration in an Access Channels signal from the point of origination upstream to the point of reception downstream on the Cable System. 
ii)  Within twenty-four (24) hours of a written request from City to the Grantee identifying a technical problem with a Access Channel and requesting assistance, Grantee will provide technical assistance or diagnostic services to determine whether or not a problem with a PEG signal is the result of matters for which Grantee is responsible and if so, Grantee will take prompt corrective action. If the problem persists and there is a dispute about the cause, then the parties shall meet with engineering representation from Grantee and the City in order to determine the course of action to remedy the problem. 
b)  Grantee shall cablecast the entire programming stream of each PEG channel including any Program Related Material, as defined below in this Paragraph 6(d)), "Program Related Material" shall mean (i) closed-captioning information, (ii) program identification codes, (iii) program ratings information, (iv) such other material as may be essential, necessary or appropriate for the delivery or distribution of the signal, and (v) information and material that is directly related to the subject matter of the programs on the PEG channels, if such information or material is transmitted concurrently or substantially concurrently with its associated program content. 
6.  CHANGE IN TECHNOLOGY. In the event Grantee makes any change in the Cable System and related equipment and facilities or in its signal delivery technology, which requires new equipment in order to transport PEG Channel programming, Grantee shall be responsible for any equipment, free of charge to the City, required on its side of the Demarcation Point. 
7.  RELOCATION OF GRANTEE'S HEADEND. In the event Grantee relocates its headend, Grantee will be responsible for replacing or restoring the existing dedicated fiber connections at Grantee's cost so that all the functions and capacity remain available, operate reliably and satisfy all applicable technical standards and related obligations of the Franchise free of charge to the City or its designated entities. 
8.  PEG OPERATIONS. City may in its sole discretion, negotiate agreements with neighboring jurisdictions served by the same Cable System, educational institutions or others to share the operating expenses of the PEG Channels. City and Grantee may negotiate an agreement for management of PEG Access Facilities, if so desired by both parties. 
9.  TITLE TO PEG EQUIPMENT. City shall retain title to all PEG equipment and facilities purchased or otherwise acquired. 
10.  PROMOTION OF PEG ACCESS. Grantee shall allow the City to place bill stuffers in Grantee's Subscriber statements at a cost to the City as specified by Grantee's third party vendor, no less frequently than twice per year upon the written request of the City and at such times that the placement of such materials would not materially and adversely affect Grantee's cost for the production and mailing of such statements. The City agrees to pay Grantee or Grantee's third party vendor in advance for the actual cost of such bill stuffers. Grantee shall also make available access information provided by City in Subscriber packets at the time of Installation and at the counter in the System's business office within the Service Area. Grantee shall also identify the PEG Access Channels in or on any program guide of services for the Cable System. 
11.  PEG ACCESS OPERATING SUPPORT. 
a)  Upon Grantee's acceptance of this Franchise, Grantee shall collect on behalf of City a per Subscriber fee of One Dollar and 20/100 ($1.20) per month solely to fund public, educational and governmental access expenditures (hereinafter "PEG Fee"). 
b)  The City Council may vote to increase the PEG Fee at any time five (5) years after the effective date of this Franchise up to a per Subscriber fee of One Dollar and 50/100 ($1.50) per month. 
c)  The PEG Fee shall be used by City in its sole discretion to fund PEG Access expenditures in a manner consistent with federal law. 
d)  The PEG Fee is not intended to represent part of the Franchise Fee and is intended to fall within one (1) or more of the exceptions in 47 U.S.C.  542. The PEG Fee may be categorized, itemized, and passed through to Subscribers as permissible, in accordance with 47 U.S.C.  542 or other Applicable Laws. Grantee shall pay the PEG Fee to the City quarterly at the same time as the payment of Franchise Fees under Section 7.1 of the Franchise. Grantee agrees that it will not offset or reduce its payment of past, present or future Franchise Fees required as a result of its obligation to remit the PEG Fee. 
e)  Any PEG Fees owing pursuant to this Franchise which remain unpaid more than thirty (30) days after the end of a given quarter shall be delinquent and shall immediately thereafter accrue interest at twelve percent (12%) per annum or two percent (2%) above prime lending rate as quoted by the Wall Street Journal, whichever is greater. Enforcement of unpaid PEG Fees shall be handled in accordance with Section 9.6 of the Franchise; however, Grantee shall in all cases be subject to interest on any payment more than thirty (30) days after the end of a given quarter. 
12.  SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS. 
a)  Subject to subparagraph 12(d) of this Exhibit B, throughout the term of this Franchise Grantee shall provide, free of charge, one (1) service Drop, one (1) Converter, if necessary and requested, and Basic Cable Service and the next highest penetrated level of Cable Service generally available to all Subscribers (as of the effective date referred to as Expanded Basic Cable Service) ("Complimentary Service"), to all of the sites listed on Exhibit C attached hereto. 
b)  The City or the building occupant shall have the right to extend Cable Service throughout the building to additional outlets for the provision of Complimentary Service to such additional outlets. If ancillary equipment, such as a Converter, is required to receive the signal at additional outlets beyond the one (1) complimentary Converter referenced in paragraph a) above, the institution shall be required to pay the same monthly rate that Subscribers pay. 
c)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, Grantee shall not be required to provide Complimentary Service to such buildings unless it is technically feasible. 
d)  Notwithstanding subparagraph 12(a) of this Exhibit B, Grantee may implement fees or charges for Complimentary Service or additional outlets in the City (or seek to offset or deduct from Franchise Fees) only if Grantee also imposes the same fees or charges in other municipalities located within the Lake Minnetonka region. 
e)  Grantee shall, in any public building hereinafter built, provide all materials, design specifications and technical advice to provide Complimentary Service to such building. If the Installation to such building exceeds three hundred fifty (350) feet, Grantee will accommodate the Installation up to three hundred fifty (350) feet if the City or other agency provides the necessary attachment point for aerial service or conduit pathway for underground service. If the necessary pathway is not provided, the City or other agency shall pay the incremental cost of such Installation in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet for an aerial service Installation or in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet for an underground service Installation. For purposes of this paragraph, "incremental cost" means Grantee's actual cost to provide the Installation beyond the applicable distances, with no mark-up for profit. The recipient of the service will secure any necessary right of entry. 
f)  Dedicated Fiber Return Lines for PEG. Grantee shall provide and maintain, free of charge, throughout the life of this Franchise all existing fiber return lines and other return lines and associated equipment that are in place as of the effective date of this Franchise in order to enable the distribution of PEG Access programming to Grantee's Subscribers. Additional two-way capability allowing for live transmission of PEG programming upstream to Grantee's Headend shall be provided in accordance with the terms of Exhibit D attached hereto. The City shall ensure PEG Channels and signals leaving the playback facilities are in compliance with applicable FCC technical standards. 
EXHIBIT C - SERVICE TO PUBLIC FACILITIES 
FACILITY NAME ADDRESS City Council Chambers 600 Rice Street Wayzata West Junior High 149 Barry Avenue North Fire Station 600 Rice Street Wayzata Public Works 299 Wayzata Boulevard West Wayzata Public Library 620 Rice Street Historic Depot 402 East Lake Street Water Treatment Plant 3 408 Gardner Street Water Treatment Plant 2 499 Lake Street West  
EXHIBIT D - PUBLIC BUILDINGS TO BE PROVIDED WITH TWO-WAY CAPABILITY 
1.  As of the effective date of this Franchise, the Wayzata West Junior High (149 Barry Avenue North) and City Hall (600 Rice Street) have been activated and equipped with two-way capability. Grantee shall have no obligation to provide any additional or replacement equipment to these locations after the effective date of this Franchise. 
2.  At the below listed sites, two-way capability shall be satisfied by establishing a cable modem connection allowing upload speeds of 5 mbps or faster. Grantee and the City shall enter a separate agreement establishing the terms and conditions for such cable modem service or other means and System extension if required as mutually agreed upon at the below listed locations. The parties agree that the purpose of such agreement shall be to facilitate live PEG programming from such locations to avoid the need for the installation of costly infrastructure to accomplish the same purpose using capital dollars. The parties further agree that any periodic costs associated with the System extension or provision of such cable modem equipment and cable modem service to facilitate live PEG programming may be paid for by the City out of the PEG Fee and such use of the PEG Fee for this purpose shall not be deducted from or credited or offset against the Franchise Fee. 
FACILITY NAME ADDRESS Fire Station 600 Rice Street Wayzata Public Works 299 Wayzata Boulevard West Wayzata Public Library 620 Rice Street  
EXHIBIT E - FRANCHISE FEE PAYMENT WORKSHEET 
TRADE SECRET/CONFIDENTIAL - TO THE EXTENT PERMISSIBLE UNDER APPLICABLE LAW 
Month/Year Month/Year Month/Year Total Cable Service Revenue Installation Charge Franchise Fee Revenue Advertising Revenue Home Shopping Revenue Equipment rental Other Revenue REVENUE Fee Calculated Franchise Fees  
Fee Factor: 5% 
RENUMBERED SECTIONS TABLE 
Provisions for Zoning and Subdivisions have been converted from appendices to the Code to chapters of the Code during this Republication. This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Zoning and Subdivisions provisions which have been renumbered as a result of this change. 
Previous 
Section Section 
this Code Part IX - Zoning Section 1 Chapter 901 801.01 901.01 801.01.1 901.02 801.01.2 901.03 801.01.3 901.04 801.01.4 901.05 801.01.5 901.06 801.01.6 901.07 801.01.7 901.08 801.01.8 901.09 801.01.9 901.10 801.01.10 901.11 Section 2 Chapter 902 801.02.1 902.01 801.02.2 902.02 Section 3 Chapter 903 801.03.1 903.01 801.03.2 903.02 801.03.3 903.03 Section 4 Chapter 904 801.04.1 904.01 801.04.2 904.02 801.04.3 904.03 801.04.4 904.04 801.04.5 904.05 801.04.6 904.06 801.04.7 904.07 801.04.8 904.08 Section 5 Chapter 905 801.05.1 905.01 801.05.2 905.02 801.05.3 905.03 801.05.4 905.04 Section 6 Chapter 906 801.06.1 906.01 801.06.2 906.02 801.06.3 906.03 801.06.4 906.04 801.06.5 906.05 801.06.6 906.06 Section 7 Chapter 907 801.07.1 907.01 801.07.2 907.02 Section 8 Chapter 908 801.08.1 908.01 801.08.2 908.02 Section 9 Chapter 909 801.09.1.1 909.01 801.09.1.2 909.02 801.09.1.4 909.03 801.09.1.5 909.04 801.09.2 909.05 801.09.3 909.06 801.09.4 909.07 801.09.5 909.08 801.09.6 909.09 801.09.7 909.10 801.09.8 909.11 801.09.9 909.12 801.09.10 909.13 801.09.11 909.14 801.09.12 909.15 801.09.13 909.16 801.09.14 909.17 801.09.15 909.18 801.09.16.1 909.19 801.09.16.2 909.20 801.09.17 909.21 801.09.18.1 909.22 801.09.18.2 909.23 801.09.19 909.24 801.09.20.1 909.25 801.09.20.2 909.26 801.09.20.3 909.27 801.09.20.4 909.28 801.09.21.1 909.29 801.09.22 909.30 Section 10 Chapter 910 801.10.1 910.01 801.10.2 910.02 801.10.3 910.03 Section 11 Chapter 911 801.11.1 911.01 801.11.2 911.02 801.11.3 911.03 801.11.4 911.04 801.11.5 911.05 801.11.6 911.06 801.11.7 911.07 Sections 12-14 (RESERVED) Chapters 912-914 (RESERVED) Section 15 Chapter 915 801.15.1 915.01 801.15.2 915.02 Section 16 Chapter 916 801.16.1 916.01 801.16.2 916.02 801.16.3 916.03 801.16.4 916.04 801.16.5 916.05 801.16.6 916.06 801.16.7 916.07 801.16.8 916.08 801.16.9 916.09 801.16.10 916.10 801.16.11 916.11 801.16.12 916.12 801.16.13 916.13 801.16.14 916.14 801.16.15 916.15 801.16.16 916.16 801.16.17 916.17 801.16.18 916.18 801.16.19 916.19 Section 17 Chapter 917 801.17.1 917.01 801.17.2 917.02 801.17.3 917.03 801.17.4 917.04 801.17.5 917.05 801.17.6 917.06 801.17.7 917.07 801.17.8 917.08 801.17.9 917.09 Section 18 Chapter 918 801.18.1 918.01 801.18.2 918.02 801.18.3 918.03 801.18.4 918.04 Section 19 Chapter 919 801.19.1 919.01 801.19.2 919.02 801.19.3 919.03 801.19.4 919.04 801.19.5 919.05 801.19.6 919.06 801.19.7 919.07 801.19.8 919.08 801.19.9 919.09 801.19.10 919.10 801.19.11 919.11 801.19.12 919.12 Section 20 Section 920 801.20.1 920.01 801.20.2 920.02 801.20.3 920.03 801.20.4 920.04 801.20.5 920.05 801.20.6 920.06 801.20.7 920.07 801.20.8 920.08 801.20.9 920.09 801.20.10 920.10 801.20.11 920.11 801.20.12 920.12 801.20.13 920.13 Section 21 Chapter 921 801.21.1 921.01 801.21.2 921.02 801.21.3 921.03 801.21.4 921.04 Section 22 Chapter 922 801.22.1 922.01 801.22.2 922.02 801.22.3 922.03 801.22.4 922.04 801.22.5 922.05 Section 23 Chapter 923 801.23.1 923.01 801.23.2 923.02 801.23.3 923.03 801.23.4 923.04 801.23.5 923.05 801.23.6 923.06 Section 24 Chapter 924 801.24.1 924.01 801.24.2 924.02 801.24.3 924.03 801.24.4 924.04 801.24.5 924.05 801.24.6 924.06 801.24.7 924.07 Section 25 Chapter 925 801.25.1 925.01 801.25.2 925.02 801.25.3 925.03 Section 26 (RESERVED) Chapter 926 (RESERVED) Section 27 Chapter 927 801.27.01 927.01 801.27.02 927.02 801.27.03 927.03 801.27.04 927.04 801.27.05 927.05 801.27.06 927.06 801.27.07 927.07 801.27.08 927.08 801.27.09 927.09 801.27.10 927.10 801.27.11 927.11 Section 28 Chapter 928 801.28.1 928.01 801.28.2 928.02 801.28.3 928.03 801.28.4 928.04 Section 29 Chapter 929 801.29.1 929.01 801.29.2 929.02 801.29.3 929.03 Section 30 Chapter 930 801.30.1 930.01 Section 31 Chapter 931 801.31.1 931.01 801.31.2 931.02 801.31.3 931.03 801.31.4 931.04 801.31.5 931.05 801.31.6 931.06 801.31.7 931.07 801.31.8 931.08 801.31.9 931.09 801.31.10 931.10 801.31.11 931.11 Section 32 Chapter 932 801.32.1 932.01 801.32.2 932.02 Section 33 Chapter 933 801.33.1 933.01 801.33.2 933.02 801.33.3 933.03 801.33.4 933.04 801.33.5 933.05 801.33.6 933.06 801.33.7 933.07 801.33.8 933.08 801.33.9 933.09 801.33.10 933.10 Section 34 Chapter 934 801.34.1 934.01 801.34.2 934.02 801.34.3 934.03 801.34.4 934.04 Section 35 Chapter 935 801.35.1 935.01 801.35.2 935.02 801.35.3 935.03 801.35.4 935.04 Section 36 Chapter 936 801.36.1 936.01 801.36.2 936.02 801.36.3 936.03 801.36.4 936.04 801.36.5 936.05 801.36.6 936.06 801.36.7 936.07 801.36.8 936.08 801.36.9 936.09 801.36.10 936.10 Sections 37-49 (RESERVED) Chapters 937-949 (RESERVED) Section 50 Chapter 950 801.50.1 950.01 801.50.2 950.02 801.50.3 950.03 801.50.4 950.04 801.50.5 950.05 Section 51 Chapter 951 801.51.1 951.01 801.51.2 951.02 801.51.3 951.03 801.51.4 951.04 801.51.5 951.05 801.51.6 951.06 801.51.7 951.07 Section 52 Chapter 952 801.52.1 952.01 801.52.2 952.02 801.52.3 952.03 801.52.4 952.04 801.52.5 952.05 801.52.6 952.06 801.52.7 952.07 Section 53 Chapter 953 801.53.1 953.01 801.53.2 953.02 801.53.3 953.03 801.53.4 953.04 801.53.5 953.05 801.53.6 953.06 801.53.7 953.07 Section 54 Chapter 954 801.54.1 954.01 801.54.2 954.02 801.54.3 954.03 801.54.4 954.04 801.54.5 954.05 801.54.6 954.06 801.54.7 954.07 Section 55 Chapter 955 801.55.1 955.01 801.55.2 955.02 801.55.3 955.03 801.55.4 955.04 801.55.5 955.05 801.55.6 955.06 801.55.7 955.07 Section 56 Chapter 956 801.56.1 956.01 801.56.2 956.02 801.56.3 956.03 801.56.4 956.04 801.56.5 956.05 801.56.6 956.06 801.56.7 956.07 Section 57 Chapter 957 801.57.1 957.01 801.57.2 957.02 801.57.3 957.03 801.57.4 957.04 801.57.5 957.05 801.57.6 957.06 801.57.7 957.07 Section 58 Chapter 958 801.58.1 958.01 801.58.2 958.02 801.58.3 958.03 801.58.4 958.04 801.58.5 958.05 801.58.6 958.06 801.58.7 958.07 Section 59 Chapter 959 801.59.1 959.01 801.59.2 959.02 801.59.3 959.03 801.59.4 959.04 801.59.5 959.05 801.59.6 959.06 801.59.7 959.07 801.59.8 959.08 Sections 60-69 (RESERVED) Chapters 960-969 (RESERVED) Section 70 Chapter 970 801.70.1 970.01 801.70.2 970.02 801.70.3 970.03 801.70.4 970.04 801.70.5 970.05 801.70.6 970.06 801.70.7 970.07 Sections 71-73 (RESERVED) Chapters 971-973 (RESERVED) Section 74 Chapter 974 801.74.1 974.01 801.74.2 974.02 801.74.3 974.03 801.74.4 974.04 801.74.5 974.05 801.74.6 974.06 801.74.7 974.07 Section 75 Chapter 975 801.75.1 975.01 801.75.2 975.02 801.75.3 975.03 801.75.4 975.04 801.75.5 975.05 801.75.6 975.06 801.75.7 975.07 Section 76 Chapter 976 801.76.1 976.01 801.76.2 976.02 801.76.3 976.03 801.76.4 976.04 801.76.5 976.05 801.76.6 976.06 801.76.7 976.07 801.76.8 976.08 Section 77 Chapter 977 801.77.1 977.01 801.77.2 977.02 801.77.3 977.03 801.77.4 977.04 801.77.5 977.05 801.77.6 977.06 Section 78 Chapter 978 801.78.1 978.01 801.78.2 978.02 801.78.3 978.03 801.78.4 978.04 801.78.5 978.05 801.78.6 978.06 801.78.7 978.07 Section 79 Chapter 979 801.79.1 979.01 801.79.2 979.02 801.79.3 979.03 801.79.4 979.04 801.79.5 979.05 801.79.6 979.06 801.79.7 979.07 Section 80 Chapter 980 801.80.1 980.01 801.80.2 980.02 801.80.3 980.03 801.80.4 980.04 801.80.5 980.05 801.80.6 980.06 801.80.7 980.07 801.80.8 980.08 Sections 81-84 (RESERVED) Chapters 981-984 (RESERVED) Section 85 Chapter 985 801.85.1 985.01 801.85.2 985.02 Section 86 Chapter 986 801.86.1 986.01 801.86.2 986.02 801.86.3 986.03 801.86.4 986.04 801.86.5 986.05 801.86.6 986.06 Sections 87-89 (RESERVED) Chapters 87-89 (RESERVED) Section 90 Chapter 990 801.90.1 990.01 801.90.2 990.02 801.90.3 990.03 Section 91 Chapter 991 801.91.1 991.01 801.91.2 991.02 801.91.3 991.03 801.91.4 991.04 801.91.5 991.05 801.91.6 991.06 801.91.7 991.07 801.91.8 991.08 801.91.9 991.09 801.91.10 991.10 801.91.11 991.11 801.91.12 991.12 801.91.13 991.13 801.91.14 991.14 801.91.15 991.15 801.91.16 991.16 801.91.17 991.17 801.91.18 991.18 801.91.19 991.19 801.91.20 991.20 801.91.21 991.21 801.91.22 991.22 801.91.23 991.23 Section 92 Chapter 992 801.92.1 992.01 801.92.2 992.02 801.92.3 992.03 801.92.4 992.04 801.92.5 992.05 801.92.6 992.06 801.92.7 992.07 801.92.8 992.08 Section 93 Chapter 993 801.93.1 993.01 801.93.2 993.02 801.93.3 993.03 801.93.4 993.04 801.93.5 993.05 801.93.6 993.06 801.93.7 993.07 801.93.8 993.08 801.93.9 993.09 801.93.10 993.10 801.93.11 993.11 801.93.12 993.12 801.93.13 993.13 801.93.14 993.14 801.93.15 993.15 801.93.16 993.16 Part X - Subdivisions - Chapter 1001 805.01 1001.01 805.02 1001.02 805.03 1001.03 805.04 1001.04 805.05 1001.05 805.06 1001.06 805.07 1001.07 805.08 1001.08 - Chapter 1002 805.09 1002.01 805.10 1002.02 805.11 1002.03 805.12 1002.04 - Chapter 1003 805.13 1003.01 805.14 1003.02 805.15 1003.03 - Chapter 1004 805.16 1004.01 805.17 1004.02 805.18 1004.03 - Chapter 1005 805.19 1005.01 805.20 1005.02 805.21 1005.03 805.22 1005.04 - Chapter 1006 805.23 1006.01 805.24 1006.02 805.25 1006.03 805.26 1006.04 805.27 1006.05 805.28 1006.06 805.29 1006.07 805.30 1006.08 805.31 1006.09 805.32 1006.10 805.33 1006.11 805.34 1006.12 805.35 1006.13 805.36 1006.14 805.37 1006.15 805.38 1006.16 - Chapter 1007 805.39 1007.01 805.40 1007.02 805.41 1007.03 805.42 1007.04 805.43 1007.05 805.44 1007.06 805.45 1007.07 805.46 1007.08 805.47 1007.09 805.48 1007.10 - Chapter 1008 805.49 1008.01 805.50 1008.02 805.51 1008.03 805.52 1008.04 805.53 1008.05 805.54 1008.06 805.55 1008.07 805.56 1008.08 - Chapter 1009 805.57 1009.01 805.58 1009.02 805.59 1009.03 805.60 1009.04 805.61 1009.05 805.62 1009.06  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the City used in this Code beginning with Supplement 1. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 767  2-16-2017 1 205.02 2 504.03.C. 769  4-13-2017 1       Added 502.01.E. 2 502.03 3 502.09.D-F. 4 502.10.I. 770  4-13-2017 1       Rpld 202.13 2       Rpld 203.13 771  4-27-2017 1 802.01-802.05       Rpld 802.09 773  6-29-2017 1 309.01-309.04 309.06 774 10-12-2017 1 301.09 777 12-14-2017 1 523.01-523.14 781  8- 9-2018       Rpld 306.01, 306.02       Rpld 307.01-307.04       Rpld 308.01-308.04       Rpld 315.01-315.09       Added 315.01-315.22 782  8- 9-2018 1 931.02 931.04 2       Added 976.04.E.       Added 977.04.E.       Added 978.04.G. 978.05 979.05 980.05 786 11-29-2018 1       Added 804.08.K.  
REFERENCES 
Statutes 
Minn. Stat. 15.99 ..... 903.02 Minn. Stat. 18.022 ..... 710.03 Minn. Stat. 65B.48, Subd. 5 ..... 721.02 Minn. Stat. 65B.49, Subd. 3(1) ..... 721.02 Minn. Stat. 84.92, Subd. 10 ..... 721.01 Minn. Stat. 84.922 ..... 721.02 Minn. Stat. 103B ..... 408.05 Minn. Stat. 103D ..... 408.01 Minn. Stat. 104.485 ..... 991.03 Minn. Stat. 105.42 ..... 991.14 Minn. Stat. 115B.02, Subd. 8 ..... 1005.02 Minn. Stat. 116.06, Subd. 13 ..... 720.01 Minn. Stat. 116.07 ..... 707.01 Minn. Stat. 144.1222 ..... 604.04 Minn. Stat. 145.22 ..... 602.06 Minn. Stat. 145.23 ..... 602.06 Minn. Stat. 152.01-152.025 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 152.02 ..... 713.01 Minn. Stat. 152.027, Subd. 1 and 2 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 157.01 ..... 507.01 Minn. Stat. 157.15 ..... 506.08 Minn. Stat. 157.20 ..... 507.05 Minn. Stat. 157.20 ..... 603.03 Minn. Stat. 157.20 ..... 603.04 Minn. Stat. 168B.04, Subd. 4 ..... 709.02 Minn. Stat. 168B.051 ..... 709.08 Minn. Stat. 169.045, Subd. 1(3) ..... 721.01 Minn. Stat. 169.22 ..... 719.01 Minn. Stat. 169.522 ..... 721.02 Minn. Stat. 169.67 ..... 706.03 Minn. Stat. 16B.59-16B.75 ..... 802.01 Minn. Stat. 16B.59-16B.75 ..... 802.05 Minn. Stat. 16B.62, Subd. 1 ..... 802.02 Minn. Stat. 16B.62, Subd. 1 ..... 802.03 Minn. Stat. 16B.65 ..... 802.02 Minn. Stat. 16B.69 ..... 802.04 Minn. Stat. 16B.70 ..... 802.03 Minn. Stat. 18.022 ..... 710.04 Minn. Stat. 211B.045 ..... 927.07 Minn. Stat. 216C.06, Subd 14 ..... 905.01 Minn. Stat. 216D.01 ..... 315.05 Minn. Stat. 237.162 ..... 315.16 Minn. Stat. 237.163 ..... 315.16 Minn. Stat. 245.782, Subd. 5 ..... 902.02 Minn. Stat. 304A.301 ..... 524.03 Minn. Stat. 304A.301, Subd. 6 ..... 524.03 Minn. Stat. 304A.301, Subd. 7(b) ..... 524.01 Minn. Stat. 307.08 ..... 902.02 Minn. Stat. 326B.082, Subd. 16 ..... 802.04 Minn. Stat. 326B.121 ..... 802.02 Minn. Stat. 326B.133, Subd. 1 ..... 802.02 Minn. Stat. 326B.148 ..... 802.03 Minn. Stat. 340A.101 ..... 502.01 Minn. Stat. 340A.101 ..... 524.01 Minn. Stat. 340A.301 ..... 524.03 Minn. Stat. 340A.301, Subd. 6 ..... 524.03 Minn. Stat. 340A.301, Subd. 6b ..... 524.03 Minn. Stat. 340A.301, Subd. 6c ..... 524.03 Minn. Stat. 340A.301, Subd. 6d ..... 524.03 Minn. Stat. 340A.301, Subd. 7(b) ..... 902.02 Minn. Stat. 340A.315 ..... 524.03 Minn. Stat. 340A.401 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 340A.409, Subd. 1 ..... 502.13 Minn. Stat. 340A.503 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 340A.504 ..... 502.10 Minn. Stat. 347.50 through Minn. Stat. 347.55 ..... 702.04 Minn. Stat. 349.12 (1984) ..... 716.02 Minn. Stat. 349.214, Subd. 1 (1984) ..... 716.04 Minn. Stat. 364.06 ..... 202.11 Minn. Stat. 364.09 ..... 202.11 Minn. Stat. 35.67 through Minn. Stat. 35.69 ..... 702.04 Minn. Stat. 35.71 ..... 702.38 Minn. Stat. 429.101 ..... 720.08 Minn. Stat. 443.015 ..... 605.03A Minn. Stat. 444.075 ..... 406.01 Minn. Stat. 444.075, Subd. 3 ..... 403.04 Minn. Stat. 444.075, Subd. 3 ..... 406.03 Minn. Stat. 462.351 ..... 408.01 Minn. Stat. 462.351 ..... 1001.03 Minn. Stat. 462.351-462.363 ..... 901.11 Minn. Stat. 462.357 ..... 717(A).02 Minn. Stat. 462.358 ..... 1001.03 Minn. Stat. 462.358 ..... 1005.03 Minn. Stat. 462.3593 ..... 917.09 Minn. Stat. 501.01 et seq. ..... 1005.03 Minn. Stat. 505.01 et seq. ..... 1001.03 Minn. Stat. 505.02, Subd. 1 ..... 991.21 Minn. Stat. 505.03 ..... 1005.04 Minn. Stat. 515A.1-101-515A.4-118 ..... 902.02 Minn. Stat. 518B.01 ..... 717(A).06 Minn. Stat. 518B.01, Subd. 2 ..... 815.20 Minn. Stat. 561.04 ..... 710.12 Minn. Stat. 561.04 ..... 710.18 Minn. Stat. 561.04 ..... 936.10 Minn. Stat. 609.02, Subd. 3 ..... 710.13 Minn. Stat. 609.02, Subd. 3 ..... 710.19 Minn. Stat. 609.02, Subd. 3 ..... 936.10 Minn. Stat. 609.185 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.19 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.195 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.20, ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.205 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.221 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.222 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.223 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.2231 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.293-609.352 ..... 717(A).06 Minn. Stat. 609.321-609.324 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.342 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.343 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.344 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.345 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.3451 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.52 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.561 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.562 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.563 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.5631 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.5632 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.582 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.595 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.66-609.67 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.72 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.746-609.749 ..... 717(A).06 Minn. Stat. 609.75-609.76 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 609.79 ..... 717(A).06 Minn. Stat. 617.241 ..... 902.02 Minn. Stat. 624.712-624.716 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 626.862 ..... 208.01 Minn. Stat. 97B.021 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. 97B.045 ..... 815.19 Minn. Stat. Chapter 12 ..... 204.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 12 ..... 204.08 Minn. Stat. Chapter 13 ..... 202.11 Minn. Stat. Chapter 84C ..... 911.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103F ..... 806.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103F ..... 993.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103G ..... 806.17 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103G ..... 806.33 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103G.005, Subd. 14 ..... 902.02 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103G.005, Subd. 14 ..... 993.04 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103G.005, Subd. 15 ..... 902.02 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103G.245 ..... 993.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 103G.245 ..... 993.11 Minn. Stat. Chapter 105 ..... 991.02 Minn. Stat. Chapter 169 ..... 105.02 Minn. Stat. Chapter 169 ..... 301.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 169 ..... 302.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 169 ..... 721.02 Minn. Stat. Chapter 216D ..... 315.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 303 ..... 523.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 326B ..... 802.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 333 ..... 523.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 502.14 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 503.11 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 504.12 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 505.11 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 524.11 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 976.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 977.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 978.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 979.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 340A ..... 980.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 349 ..... 716.04 Minn. Stat. Chapter 429 ..... 206.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 429 ..... 814.06 Minn. Stat. Chapter 429 ..... 927.11 Minn. Stat. Chapter 429 ..... 1001.03 Minn. Stat. Chapter 462 ..... 806.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 462 ..... 906.06 Minn. Stat. Chapter 462 ..... 991.02 Minn. Stat. Chapter 462 ..... 993.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 463 ..... 911.05 Minn. Stat. Chapter 505 ..... 1008.01 Minn. Stat. Chapter 645 ..... 103.03  
Other Authorities 
Minnesota Condominium Act, Section 515.215, Subd. 6 ..... 813.10 Minnesota Plumbing Code, SS 4715.1100 ..... 402.09  
Rules 
Minn. Rules Chapter 1300 ..... 802.03 Minn. Rules 4625.0400-4625.2355 ..... 507.02 Minn. Rules Chapter 4626 ..... 603.02 Minn. Rules Chapter 4717 ..... 604.02 Minn. Rules Chapter 7045 ..... 720.01 Minn. Rules 7050.0130, subpart F ..... 409.03 Minn. Rules 7077.0105, subpart 41b ..... 409.03 Minn. Rules Chapter 7080.2270 ..... 993.09 Minn. Rules Chapter 7560 ..... 315.05 Minn. Rules Chapter 7560.0150, subp. 2 ..... 315.15 Minn. Rules Chapter 7810.0100, subps. 1-23 ..... 315.02 Minn. Rules 7819.1100 ..... 315.10 Minn. Rules 7819.1100 ..... 315.11 Minn. Rules 7819.3000 ..... 315.08 Minn. Rules 7819.3100 ..... 315.16 Minn. Rules 7819.4000 ..... 315.15 Minn. Rules 7819.4100 ..... 315.15 Minn. Rules 7819.5000 ..... 315.16 Minn. Rules 7819.5100 ..... 315.16 Minn. Rules, 1987, 7860.0010-7860.0310 ..... 716.04  
Regulations 
44 Code of Federal Regulations Part 65 ..... 806.24 Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's "Air Pollution Control Regulations and Ambient Air Quality Standards" (APC 1-15) ..... 707.01 Minnesota Regulations 1983, Parts 6120.5000-6120.6200 ..... 806.24  
