ORDINANCE NO. 5
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 5 OF THE TOWN
OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA, BEING AN ORDINANCE
LICENSING AND REGULATING THE KEEPING OF DOGS AND OTHER
ANIMALS, ADOPTED SEPTEMBER 21, 1981, AS AMENDED
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
The Ordinance relating to the licensing and regulating and keeping of dogs and
other animals, passed and approved September 11, 1981, as amended, is
hereby amended to read as follows, and all other Ordinances or parts of
Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. In all other respects all
other Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 2. DUTIES OF OWNERS OF ANIMALS TO PROVIDE FOR THEIR
WELL-BEING; ABUSE OF ANIMALS; ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS; ETC.
2-1. No owner of an animal shall fail to provide such animal with sufficient
good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the
weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care
and treatment.
2-2. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or
otherwise abuse any animal, or cause or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight
or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
2-3. No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the terms
defined herein shall have the following meanings:
3-1. ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. This provisions of this Ordinance
shall be enforced by the Town Board of Supervisors hereinafter referred to as the
TOWN BOARD.
3-2. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person or persons employed by
the Town Board as its enforcement officer.
3-3. ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designed by action of the Town
for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large in
violation of this Ordinance.
2
3-4. ANIMAL UNIT. Animal unit means a unit of measure used to
compare differences in the production of animal manure that employs as a
standard the amount of manure produced on a regular basis by a slaughter steer
or heifer. The following equivalents shall apply:
A. One mature dairy cow, 1.4 animal unit.
B. One slaughter steer or heifer, 1.0 animal unit.
C. One horse, 1.0 animal unit.
D. One swine over 55 lbs., .4 animal unit.
E. One duck, .2 animal unit.
F. One sheep, .1 animal unit.
G. One swine under 55 lbs., .5 animal unit.
H. One turkey, .18 animal unit.
I. One chicken, .1 animal unit.
For animals not listed in items A to I, the number of animal units shall be
defined as the average weight of the animal divided by 1000 lbs.
3-5. DANGEROUS DOG. “Dangerous Dog” means any dog that has:
3-5.1. without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human
being on public or private property.
3-5.2. killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner’s
property; or
3-5.3. been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
3-6. DISEASED ANIMAL. Any animal which has been found to be
infected with any disease which may create a public safety risk.
3-7. DOMESTIC ANIMAL. A domestic animal shall be any dog or cat.
3-8. LIVESTOCK. Includes, but not limited to: cows, goats, horses,
sheep, swine, and other hoofed animals.
3-9. NUISANCE. Any domestic animal which habitually or frequently
barks or cries, frequents school grounds, parks or public benches, chases
vehicles, molests or annoys any person away from the property, is repeatedly at
large or attacks other animals.
3-10. OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or
keeping a dog or other domestic animal for three (3) or more consecutive days.
3
3-10.A. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. “Potentially Dangerous
Dog” means any dog that:
3-10.A(1). When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or
domestic animal on public or private property;
3-10.A(2). when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person,
including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any
public or private property, other than the dog owner’s property, in
an apparent attitude of attack; or
3-10.A(3). Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
3-11. Repealed by Amendment to this Ordinance.
3-12. RESTRAINT. A dog or cat is under restraint within the meaning of
this Ordinance if it is controlled by a leash which does not extend beyond the
boundaries of the private property or within a vehicle being driven or parked on
the streets or within the property of its owner keeper, in a fenced area, if within
an electronic fence with signage, controlled by a chain, or under owner’s control
and supervision.
3-13. RUNNING AT LARGE. Any domestic animal which is off the
property of its owner and not effectively restrained by the use of a chain or leash.
3-13.A. SPECIAL THREE DOG LICENSE. A license for the keeping of
three dogs.
3-14. STABLES UNDER ROOF. An enclosed building (4-sided) for
keeping horses.
3-15. WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS. Any mammal, amphibian, reptile or
bird which is of a species not usually domesticated and of a species which, due
to size, wild nature or other characteristics, is dangerous to humans and would
ordinarily be confined in a zoo or found in the wild. The term includes animals
and birds, the keeping of which is licensed by the State or Federal government,
such as wolves, raptors and pheasants. By way of example and not limitation,
the term includes: snakes, eagles, ocelots, jaguars, cougars, weasels, wild
ferrets, badgers, monkeys, chimpanzees, deer and bison. The term also
includes crossbreeds such as the cross between dogs and coyotes and dogs and
wolves. Examples include but are not limited to:
4
3-15.1. Any large cat of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers, jaguars,
leopards, cougars, bobcats, lynxes and ocelots, except commonly
accepted domesticated house cats.
3-15.2. Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, coyotes,
dingoes, and jackals, except domesticated dogs.
3-15.3. Any crossbreed such as crossbreeds between dogs and coyotes,
or dogs and wolves, but does not include crossbreed domesticated
animals.
3-15.4. Any snake that is a member of the pit viper or biodae family,
including but not limited to, copperheads, water moccasins, rattlesnakes,
fer-de-lances, bushmasters, asps, cobras, mambas, kraits, coral snakes,
sea snakes, South American anacondas, Asian reticulated pythons, boa
constrictors, tree boas and sand boas.
3-15.5. Any snake or reptile which by its size, vicious nature or other
characteristic is dangerous to human beings.
3-15.6. Any skunk, raccoon or fox whether captured in the wild,
domestically raised, descented or not descented, vaccinated against
rabies or not vaccinated against rabies.
3-15.7. Any bear, ape, gorilla, monkey (except as exempted by this
ordinance), ferrets, weasels, mink, or badger.
3-15.8. Any Vietnamese pot-bellied pig.
3-15.9. Any raptors, pheasants, grouse.
3-15.10. Any poisonous spiders.
3-15.11. Any other animal or reptile which is commonly considered wild
and not domesticated or prohibited by Federal or Minnesota Law.
SECTION 4. VACCINATION REQUIRED.
4-1. Every dog and cat over three (3) months old shall be vaccinated
against rabies.
4-2. Unvaccinated dogs and cats acquired or moved into the Township
must be vaccinated within thirty (30) days of acquisition or arrival if over three (3)
months old.
5
4-3. Vaccination tag: A metal or durable plastic tag, serially numbered,
issued by the rabies control authority, shall be securely attached to the collar or
harness of the dog or cat. Whenever the dog or cat is out-of-doors, whether on
or off the owner’s premises, the collar or harness with the vaccination tag must
be worn.
SECTION 5. LICENSING.
5-1. LICENSE FEE. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog over
three (3) months old within the Township unless such dog is licensed as herein
provided. Written application for such license shall be made to the Town and
shall state the name and address of the owner and the name, breed, color, age
and sex of the dog. The application must be accompanied by a current certificate
from a qualified licensed Veterinarian certifying that the dog has been vaccinated
with anti-rabies vaccine. The license fee shall be as established in Ordinance
No. 54 (Fees & Charges), and shall be paid at the time of making application,
and a numbered receipt.
5-2. SPECIAL THREE DOG LICENSE.
5-2.1. No person shall keep three (3) dogs within a dwelling unit without
obtaining a Special Three Dog License using the procedure established
under this section. The license fee shall be as established in Ordinance
No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
5-2.2. APPLICATION. Any person desiring a Special Three Dog license
shall make written application therefore to the Town Board upon the
application form prescribed by and containing such information as
required by the Town Clerk. Among other things, the application shall
contain the following information:
5-5.1(a). A current rabies certificate and list of dog tags for each
dog in the dwelling unit and/or kennel.
5-5.1(b). The species and number of dogs over the age of three (3)
months to be maintained on the premises.
5-5.1(c). Such other information as may be required by the Town
Clerk and/or Town Animal Control Officer.
5-5.3. Upon receipt of the Application by the Township and a site visit by
the Town Animal Control Officer, a public hearing shall be held by the
Town Board on this matter. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the
hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the Town, at least
ten (10) days prior to the day of hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed,
at least ten (10) days before the day of the hearing to each owner of
6
property lying within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the property to which
the application relates. At the hearing the Town Board may grant, deny or
refuse to review any application for license under this section, and may
impose conditions to the granting of the license.
5-5.4. If granted, the license shall be issued by the Town Clerk. The
license shall specify the restrictions deemed reasonably necessary to
protect any person or neighboring use from unsanitary conditions,
unreasonable noise or odors or annoyance or to protect the public health
and safety. Such license may be modified from time to time or revoked by
the Township for failure to conform to such restrictions, limitations or
prohibitions. Such modification or revocation shall be effective from and
after ten (10) days following the mailing of written notice thereof by
certified mail to the person or persons keeping or maintaining the license.
5-5.5. The Town Board may refuse a license to keep or maintain animals
hereunder for failure to comply with the provisions of this section, if the
facilities for the keeping of the animals are or become inadequate for their
purpose, if the conditions of the license are not met, if a nuisance
condition is created, or if the public health and safety would be
unreasonably endangered by the granting of such license.
5-6. EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
5-6.1. DOG LICENSES. All dog licenses in even numbered years.
Licenses which have less than one year remaining on this term shall pay
one-half of the license fee. Applications for licenses may be made prior to
and for 30 days after the start of the licensing term without penalty, but
when application is made after 30 days of the licensing term has elapsed,
the applicant shall be assessed a penalty of 50 percent of the license fee
which amounts shall be added to and collected with the regular license
fee; provided, however, if the dog or kennel did not become subject to
license until after the start of the licensing term, then no penalty shall be
assessed if application is made within 30 days after becoming subject to
licensing.
5-6.2. SPECIAL THREE DOG LICENSES. All Special Three Dog
Licenses shall expire four (4) years after date of issuance and may be
reissued without a public hearing provided no complaints have been
received and upon receipt of a completed application, payment of the fee,
and a site visit by the Town Animal Control Officer.
5-7. LOST LICENSE FEE. In the event that a metallic license tag issued
for a dog shall be lost, the owner may obtain a duplicate tag upon the payment of
$1.00.
7
5-8. LICENSE TRANSFER FEE. If there is a change in ownership of a
dog during the license term, the new owner may have the current license
transferred to their name upon application and the payment of a transfer fee of
$1.00.
5-9. No person shall use for any dog, a license receipt or license tag
issued for another dog or counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit license tags.
SECTION 6. TAG AND COLLAR.
6-1. Upon complying with the provisions of Section 5 of this Ordinance,
there shall be issued to the applicant a numbered metallic tag stamped with the
number and the year of expiration and labeled “DOG LICENSE WITH WHITE
BEAR TWP”.
6-2. Every owner is required to see that the tag is securely fastened to the
dog’s choke chain, collar or harness of durable material which must be worn by
the dog at all times.
6-3. The fact that a dog is without a license attached to a collar shall be
presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed.
SECTION 7. RUNNING AT LARGE – CONTROL.
7-1. DOGS. No owner or custodian of any dog, whether licensed
or unlicensed, shall permit such dog to run at large, with the exception of within a
designated off-leash dog area. It shall be the obligation of the owner or
custodian of any dog in the Town, whether permanently or temporarily therein, to
prevent any such dog at anytime to be on any street, public park (with the
exception of a park within an off-leash dog area as designated by Ramsey
County), school grounds, or public place without being effectively restrained by a
chain or leash not exceed eight (8) feet in length.
7-2. CATS. No owner or keeper of any cat shall permit such cat to run at
large. It shall be the obligation and responsibility of the owner or custodian of
any cat in the Town, whether permanently or temporarily therein, to prevent any
such cat at any time to be on any private property, street, public park, school
grounds, or public place without being effectively restrained by a chain or leash
not exceeding eight (8) feet in length.
7-3. CONFINEMENT; NOTIFICATION; RECLAMATION; AND
DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED DOGS. Unrestrained dogs running at large that are
not within the designated off-leash dog area may be taken by the Animal Control
Officer or the Humane Society and impounded in an animal shelter, and there
confined in a humane manner. Impounded dogs shall be kept for not less than
five (5) days, unless reclaimed by their owners. If by a permit tag or by other
8
means the owner can be identified, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately,
upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or mail of the impoundment of
the animal. Dogs not claimed by their owners within five (5) days may be
humanely disposed of.
7-4. DOG FOUND AT LARGE MAY BE RETURNED TO KNOWN
OWNER; NOTIFICATION OF CLERK OF VIOLATION, ETC. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this section, if any animal is found at large, with the exception of
dogs in an off-leash dog area as designated by Ramsey County, and its owner
can be identified and location, such animal need not be impounded but may,
instead, be taken to the owner. In such case, the Sheriff’s Department, Animal
Control Officer or other office shall notify the Clerk of the violation of this section,
and may proceed against the owner for violation of this section.
SECTION 8. OWNER TO CLEAN UP AFTER DOG.
8-1. Any owner having custody or control of any dog on public property
shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the animal and for disposing of
such feces in a sanitary manner; and shall have in their possession, a device or
equipment for picking up and removal of animal feces.
8-2. Any owner having custody or control of any dog on private property
shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the animal and for disposing of
such feces in a timely manner, but in no case shall the feces remain for longer
than a seven (7) day period.
8-3. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying a blind person or to a dog when used in police or rescue activities.
SECTION 9. OWNER TO PREVENT NUISANCES. The owner or custodian of
any dog shall prevent the dog from committing in the Town, any act which
constitutes a nuisance as defined in Section 3-10 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 10. HABITUAL HOWLING AND BARKING DOGS UNLAWFUL. An
owner having custody and/or control of a dog shall prevent it from barking,
howling, whining, or making other noises which unreasonably disturbs the peace
and quiet of any person. The phrase “unreasonably disturb the peace and quite”
shall include, but is not limited to, the creation of any noise by any animals which
can be heard by any person, including a law enforcement officer or animal
control officer, from a location outside of the building or premises where the
animal is being kept and which animal noise occurs repeatedly over a five minute
period of time with one minute or less lapse of time between each animal noise
during the five minute period.
9
SECTION 11. DISEASED OR VICIOUS DOGS. No owner shall keep or allow to
run at large any diseased dog or any dog of a ferocious or vicious character,
habit or disposition.
SECTION 12. DANGEROUS/POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS. The
provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Sections 347.50 through 347.56, inclusive, are
hereby adopted as the potentially dangerous and dangerous dog regulations for
the Town of White Bear. Where a conflict exists between the provisions of the
Town Ordinances and the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Sections 347.50
through 347.56, inclusive, the provisions of the Minnesota Statutes shall apply.
12-1. INITIAL DETERMINATION. The Town's designated Animal
Control Authority shall be responsible for initially determining (Initial
Determination) whether a dog is a potentially dangerous dog or a dangerous dog.
The Animal Control Authority may retain custody of a dog which has been initially
determined to be a dangerous dog pending the hearing as hereinafter provided.
The Initial Determination shall be conclusive unless the owner appeals the Initial
Determination as hereinafter provided.
12-2. NOTICE OF INITIAL DETERMINATION. The Notice of Initial
Determination shall be personally served on the owner of the dog or on a person
of suitable age at the residence of such owner. The Notice of Initial
Determination shall describe the dog deemed to be potentially dangerous or
dangerous; shall identify the officer making the Initial Determination; and shall
inform the owner of the owner’s right to appeal the Initial Determination.
12-3. REQUEST FOR HEARING AND HEARING. An owner may appeal
the Initial Determination by filing a Request for Hearing with the Town Clerk
within five (5) days of the owner’s receipt of the Notice of Initial Determination. A
hearing shall be held within seven (7) days after the Town’s receipt of the
Request for Hearing. The Town Clerk shall assign a Hearing Officer who shall
not be the person who made the Initial Determination. At the hearing, the
Hearing Officer shall consider the reports and comments of the Animal Control
Authority, the testimony of any witnesses, witness statements, and the comments
of the owner of the dog. After considering all of the evidence submitted, the
Hearing Officer shall make written findings and shall determine whether the dog
is a potentially dangerous dog or a dangerous dog (Final Determination). The
findings shall be made within five (5) days of the date of the hearing and shall be
personally served upon the owner of the dog or upon a person of suitable age at
the residence of the owner.
12-4. SEIZURE OF DANGEROUS DOG. The Animal Control Authority
shall immediately seize any dangerous dog if, within fourteen (14) days after the
service of the Notice of Final Determination declaring a dog to be a dangerous
dog:
10
12-4.1. The owner has not registered the dog in compliance with the
provisions of Section 12-7.
12-4.2. The owner does not secure the proper liability insurance
pursuant to Section 12-7.3.
12-4.3. The dangerous dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure.
12-4.4. The dangerous dog is outside a proper enclosure and not
under the physical restraint of a responsible person.
12-5. RECLAIMING A DANGEROUS DOG. A dangerous dog may be
recliamed by the owner of the dog upon payment of the impounding and
boarding fees, and upon presentation of proof to the Animal Control Authority
that the requriements of Section 12-7 have been satisfied. A dangerous dog not
reclaimed under this provision within seven (7) days may be disposed of as
provided in Minnesota Statutes, and the owner shall be liable to the Animal
Control Authority for costs incurred in confining and disposing of the dangerous
dog.
12-6. SUBSTANTIAL/GREAT BODILY HARM. Upon a Final
Determination and not withstanding the provisions of Section 12 through 12-5, a
dangerous dog that inflicted substantial bodily harm or great bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property without provocation may be destroyed
in a proper and humane manner by the Animal Control Authority.
12-7. DANGEROUS DOG RESTRICTIONS.
12-7.1. Registration Required. No person may keep a dangerous
dog in the Town of White Bear unless the dog is registered with the
Animal Control Authority as provided in this chapter. The Animal Control
Authority shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of the
dangerous dog if the owner presents the following information:
12-7.2. Proper Enclosure. A Proper Enclosure exists for the
dangerous dog and there is a posting on the premises with a clearly
visible warning sign, including a warning symbol to inform children, that
there is a dangerous dog on the property.
12-7.3. Bond/Insurance. A surety bond issued by a surety
company authorizing to conduct business in the State of Minnesota in a
form acceptable to the Animal Control Authority in the sum of at least
$50,000.00, payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog, or a
policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to
conduct business in the State of Minnesota in the amount of at least
11
$50,000.00, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog.
12-7.4. Microchip. The owner has had a microchip identification
implanted in the dangerous dog, and the name of the microchip
manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be provided
to the Animal Control authority. If the microchip is not implanted by the
owner, it may be implanted by the Animal Control Authority with the costs
borne by the dog’s owner.
12-7.5. Warning Symbol. The owner has posted a warning symbol
to inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The
design of the warning symbol must have been approved by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety.
12-7.6. Tag. The dangerous dog must have a standardized, easily
identifiable tag identifying the dog as dangerous and containing the
Uniform Dangerous Dog symbol, affixed to the dog’s collar at all times.
12-7.7. Photograph. The owner of the dangerous dog shall make
the dog available to be photographed for identification by the Animal
Control Authority at a time and place specified by the Animal Control
Authority.
12-8. DANGEROUS DOG REGULATIONS.
12-8.1. Annual Fee. The owner of a dangerous dog shall pay an
annual fee as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges), in addition
to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a certificate of registration for a
dangerous dog under this section.
12-8.2. Annual Renewal. The owner of a dangerous dog must
renew the registration of the dog annually until the dog is deceased. If the
dog is removed from the Township it must be registered as a dangerous
dog in its new jurisdiction.
12-8.3. Death/Transfer from City. The owner of any dangerous
dog must notify the Animal Control Authority in writing of the death of the
dog; of its transfer to a residence outside of the Town of White Bear or of
its transfer within the Town of White Bear within thirty (30) days of the
death or transfer.
12-8.4. Notice to Landlord. The owner of a dangerous dog who
rents property from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the
property owner, prior to entering into the lease agreement and at the time
12
of any lease renewal that the person owns a dangerous dog that will
reside at the property.
12-8.5. Sale. The owner of a dangerous dog must notify the
purchaser that the Animal Control Authority has identified the dog as a
dangerous dog. The seller must also notify the Animal Control Authority in
writing of the sale and provide the Animal Control Authority with the new
owner’s name, address and telephone number.
12-8.6. Muzzling. If the dangerous dog is outside a Proper
Enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by substantial chain
or leash and be under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The
muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting
any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere
with its vision or respiration.
12-8.7. Sterilization. The Animal Control Authority may require a
dangerous dog to be sterilized at the owner’s expense. If the owner does
not have the dangerous dog sterilized, the Animal Control Authority may
have the animal sterilized at the owner’s expense.
12-9. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG RESTRICTIONS.
12-9.1. Registration Required. No person may keep a potentially
dangerous dog in the Town of White Bear unless the dog is registered
with the Animal Control Authority as provided in this section. The Animal
Control Authority shall issue a Certificate of Registration to the owner of a
potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents the following information:
12-9.1(a). Microchip. The owner has had a microchip
identification implanted in the dangerous dog, and the name of
the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the
microchip must be provided to the Animal Control Authority. If
the microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted
by the Animal Control Authority with the costs borne by the
dog’s owner.
12-9.1(b). Warning Symbol. The owner has posted a warning
symbol to inform children that there is a potentially dangerous
dog on the property. The Animal Control Authority shall
approve the warning symbol and its location on the property.
12-9.2. The Animal Control Authority may also require any of the
following items to register a potentially dangerous dog:
13
12-9.2(a). Proper Enclosure. A proper enclosure exists
for the potentially dangerous dog and there is a posting on
the premises with a clearly visible warning sign, including a
warning symbol to inform children, that there is a potentially
dangerous dog on the property.
12-9.2(b). Bond/Insurance. A surety bond issued by a
surety company authorizing to conduct business in the State
of Minnesota in a form acceptable to the Animal Control
Authority in the sum of at least $50,000.00, payable to any
person injured by the potentially dangerous dog, or a policy
of liability insurance issued by an insurance company
authorized to conduct business in the State of Minnesota in
the amount of at least $50,000.00, insuring the owner for any
personal injuries inflicted by the potentially dangerous dog.
12-9.2(c). Photograph. The owner of the potentially
dangerous dog shall make the dog available to be
photographed for identification by the Animal Control
Authority at a time and place specified by the Animal Control
Authority.
12-10. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG REGULATIONS.
12-10.1. Annual Fee. The owner of a potentially dangerous
dog shall pay an annual fee as set forth in Ordinance NO. 54 (Fees
& Charges), in addition to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain
a certificate of registration for a potentially dangerous dog under
this section.
12-10.2. Annual Renewal. The owner of a potentially
dangerous dog must renew the registration of the dog annually until
the dog is deceased. If the dog is removed from the Town of White
Bear it must be registered as a potentially dangerous dog in its new
jurisdiction.
12-10.3. Death/Transfer from Township. The owner of any
potentially dangerous dog must notify the Animal Control Authority
in writing of the death of the dog; of its transfer to a residence
outside of the Town of White Bear or of its transfer within the Town
of White Bear within thirty (30) days of the death or transfer.
12-10.4. Notice to Landlord. The owner of a potentially
dangerous dog who rents property from another where the dog will
reside must disclose to the property owner, prior to entering into the
lease agreement and at the time of any lease renewal that the
14
person owns a potentially dangerous dog that will reside at the
property.
12-10.5. Sale. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must
notify the purchaser that the Animal Control Authority has identified
the dog as potentially dangerous. The seller must also notify the
Animal Control Authority in writing of the sale and provide the
Animal Control Authority with the new owner’s name, address and
telephone number.
SECTION 13. QUARANTINE OF ANIMAL WHICH HAS BITTEN A PERSON
AND DESTRUCTION OF RABID ANIMALS.
13-1. Any dog or cat that has bitten a person and caused an abrasion or
puncture of the skin shall immediately be quarantined for a minimum of ten (10)
days. Such an animal may be confined by the owner or other responsible person
as required by the Animal Control Officer, if the dog or cat has a current rabies
certification. If such animal does not have a current rabies certification, the
animal shall be quarantined in an animal control facility obtained by the Animal
Control Officer. When the dog or animal is quarantined as stated above, it shall
be at the owner’s expense. A quarantine report must be completed by the
Animal Control Officer or a licensed veterinarian which must, at the end of the
quarantine period, detail the disposition of the dog. Stray animals that have
bitten a person shall be quarantined through the Animal Control Officer.
13-2. No law enforcement officer or other persons shall kill, or cause to be
killed, any domestic animal suspected of being rabid, except after the domestic
animal has been placed in a quarantine and visibility of the clinical signs of rabies
are made by a qualified veterinarian.
13-3. EXEMPTION. Police canines are exempt from the provisions of this
section.
SECTION 14. WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS. It shall be unlawful to keep any
wild or exotic animal within the limits of the Town of White Bear, except as
permitted pursuant to the provisions of this section.
14-1. EXCEPTIONS – PERMIT REQUIRED.
14-1.1. Any person desiring to keep a wild animal prohibited by this
Ordinance may apply for a temporary Wild Animal Permit from the Town
Board. Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days and shall specify conditions under which such animals shall be kept.
Provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued unless such
prohibited wild animal is brought into the Town for entertainment,
exhibition, or show purposes only, or by persons keeping wild animals for
15
a public zoo as volunteers, docents or otherwise. A public zoo or other
institution engaged in a permanent display of animals, any bona fide
research institution or veterinary hospital may be issued a permanent Wild
Animal Permit provided applicable zoning requirements are met.
14-1.2. Non-poisonous snakes or snakes not prohibited by this
Ordinance, birds kept indoors, hamsters, mice, rabbits, gerbils, white rats,
guinea pigs, chinchillas, or lizards, and similar small animals capable of
being kept in cages continuously, are also exempt and do not require a
permit.
14-2. IMPOUNDING OF WILD ANIMALS.
14-2.1. Any wild animal kept in violation of this Ordinance may be
impounded by the Township. Unless such impounded animal is reclaimed
and removed from the Township, or unless the owner petitions the District
Court for a determination that the animal is exempt from the provisions of
this Ordinance, the animal may be destroyed or sold five (5) days
following notice to the owner of such animal or its impoundment and the
provisions of this Ordinance.
14-2.2. Any person reclaiming any such wild animal shall pay the costs of
impounding and boarding the same at the time of its release.
SECTION 15. KEEPING OF HORSES, COLTS AND PONIES.
15-1. STABLE PERMITS.
15-1.1. Horses, colts and ponies may be stabled, harbored or maintained
within the Township only in areas that meet the requirements of Ordinance
No. 35 (Zoning), Section 7-12 – Agricultural Operations.
15-1.2. No person, firm or corporation shall keep, stable, harbor or
maintain horses, colts or ponies within the Township limits without first
obtaining a permit from the Town Clerk to so keep, stable, harbor or
maintain said animals.
15-1.3. Application for permits shall be made in writing, by the owner or
lessee of the lands where the animals are to be kept, on blank forms
furnished by the Town Clerk. Each application shall contain the correct
legal description of the property of which the animal or animals will be kept
and the name of the owner or lessee of the lot, the amount of contiguous
area available for the animal or animals; the total number of animals and
information identifying each animal to be kept or stabled on said land; and
a description of the shelter to be provided for the animal or animals. The
16
premises are subject to inspection by the Township or its designated
representatives and all stables shall be inspected at least annually.
15-1.4. The owner or lessee of the premises where the animals will be
kept or stabled shall pay an initial permit fee to the Township. This fee will
be used to reimburse the costs of issuing the permit and inspecting the
premises. Each permit shall expired on December 31st of each year after
its granted, unless renewed on or before such date. The fee shall not be
refunded if the application for the permit is denied or, if issued, the permit
is later revoked by the Township. The fee shall be as established in
Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
15-1.5. ACREAGE REQUIREMENTS. The raising or keeping of livestock
is permitted only if there are a minimum of two (2) acres fenced property
available. The ratio of livestock shall not exceed four (4) animal units per
each two (2) acres.
15-1.6. TRACT ENCLOSURES. The fenced tract where animals are
pastured shall be enclosed by a sturdy wood, metal or electrical fence
which will keep the animal or animals confined therein. The enclosure
fence shall be installed no closer than 5 feet from the property lines of the
applicant. Extra care must be taken to insure that stallions are properly
enclosed. The enclosed area shall be no closer than 75 feet from any
structure used for residential purposes, other than the applicants.
15-1.7. CORRAL OR STABLE. Pens or corrals shall contain at least 800
square feet per animal including a stable under roof of at least 100 square
feet per animal unit. The pen or corral shall be no closer than 100 feet
from any structure, other than the applicants, which is used for residential
purposes, and shall be so located as not to create a nuisance to neighbors
or the public.
15-2. SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
15-2.1. Manure and other waste material must be removed often enough
to eliminate unsightliness, odors, fly and rodent problems, and at last
every three (3) months. If it is found that the manure and other waste
materials create a nuisance by attracting flies, other insects and rodents or
by creating offensive odors, the Code Enforcement Officer or Animal
Control Officer may order that the manure and other waste materials (by
written notice to the holder of the permit) be removed within four (4) days.
15-2.2. Stables and paddock areas shall be cleaned daily. Corral, pens,
or similar enclosure areas shall be cleaned at least weekly. All areas shall
be maintained in a clear and sanitary manner to prevent the breeding of
flies and insects.
17
15-2.3. No person shall permit accumulations of manure from any horse
under his control to remain on any street, sidewalk or alley, nor upon any
open area or lot in any residential area in the Township.
15-2.4. Manure shall be handled or treated in such a manner so as not to
create a public nuisance.
15-2.5. Manure shall not be burned.
15-3. CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF HORSES.
15-3.1. No horse, colt or pony shall be treated cruelly, or inhumanely, by
any person or in violation of Minnesota Statutes, Sections 343.20-343.28,
relating to cruelty to animals.
15-3.2. No person, firm or corporation shall keep any horse, colt or pony
in a manner creating a public or private nuisance.
15-3.3. Permits issued pursuant to this Section may be revoked by the
Town Board if the Board finds, after investigation and after holding a
public hearing (written notice of said hearing to be mailed or delivered to
the holder of the permit and other interested parties at least five (5) days
prior to the hearing date), that there has been a violation of any provision
contained in this section hereof.
15-3.4. No person, firm or corporation shall allow any horse they own to
have control of to go upon any public park within the Township.
SECTION 16. CITATIONS AND IMPOUNDMENT.
16-1. AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND, ISSUE CITATIONS. Any domestic
animal found in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance may be seized and
impounded by any police officer or the Animal Control Officer, provided, however,
that if the owner of the animal is known or can be ascertained from available
information, it shall be returned to its owner and a citation for the violation shall
be issued to the owner or keeper of the animal (unless otherwise provided in this
Ordinance).
16-2. REDEMPTION BY OWNER; FEE. Any domestic animal
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance may be redeemed from
the pound by the owner thereof within five (5) regular business days after the
impoundment upon payment to the Animal Control Officer of an impoundment
fee as is from time to time established by the Town Board, plus the license fee, in
the event the domestic animal is not licensed.
18
16-3. RELEASE. Upon the presentation of proof of a valid license for the
domestic animal and payment of the fees provided in the previous section hereof,
the Animal Control Officer shall release the domestic animal to its owner. The
Animal Control Officer shall further take such steps as are necessary to cause
the owner of the domestic animal to be charged with any violation of this
Ordinance which gave rise to the impoundment of the domestic animal.
16-4. REDEMPTION BY PERSON OTHER THAN OWNER. If the owner
of any domestic animal impounded under this Ordinance shall fail to redeem
such domestic animal within five (5) regular business days after its impoundment,
not including Sunday or holidays, any other person may, upon complying with the
provisions of this Ordinance, redeem the domestic animal from the shelter and
be the lawful owner of the domestic animal thereafter. If the domestic animal has
been requested by a licensed educational or scientific institution under Minnesota
Statutes, then it shall be given to the institution and shall not be sold.
16-5. DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED DOMESTIC ANIMALS. All
domestic animals impounded under this section which have not been redeemed
or purchased as authorized in this section, may be disposed of in a humane
manner by the Animal Control Officer or any police officer.
16-6. INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS. It shall be unlawful for any
unauthorized person to break open the pound or to attempt to do so, or to take or
let out any domestic animal therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from any
officer any domestic animal taken by him/her in compliance with this Ordinance,
or in any manner to interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his/her
duties under this Ordinance.
SECTION 17. COMMERCIAL ANIMAL OPERATIONS. Hospitals, clinics and
other premises operated by licensed veterinarians and in compliance with
Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning), for the care and treatment of animals, are exempt
from the provisions of this Ordinance except where such duties are expressly
stated.
SECTION 18. EXEMPTIONS.
18-1. The licensing and vaccination requirements of this Ordinance shall
not apply to any dog or cat belonging to a non-resident of the Town and kept
within the Town for less than thirty days, provided all such dogs or cats shall at
all times while in the Town, be kept within a building enclosure or vehicle or be
under restraint by the owner.
18-2. The keeping of miniature horses shall be exempt from the
requirements of Section 16-1.1 and 16-1.5 of this Ordinance, and the
requirements of 7-12 of Ordinance No. 35. Miniature horses shall only be
permitted on properties of 1.2 acres in size or larger, after an application is
19
completed by the owner, and approval by the Town Board of a Miniature Horse
Stabling Agreement is given.
SECTION 19. RECORDS.
19-1. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep or cause to
be kept accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all
animals coming into his custody for a period of three (3) years.
19-2. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep or cause to
be kept accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him and his
investigation reports of these cases.
19-3. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep or cause to be kept
accurate and detailed records of all licenses and moneys belonging to the Town
of White Bear, which records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by
such persons responsible for similar records of the Town of White Bear annually
in the same manner as other Town records are audited.
SECTION 20. ENFORCEMENT. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be
enforced by such persons as the Town Board shall from time-to-time designate.
SECTION 21. PENALTY. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision
of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided in Ordinance No. 26.
SECTION 22. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part hereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 23. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 20th day of October, 2003.
APPROVED:
___________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
__________________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
20
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chair
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Supervisor
Synopsis Published in the White Bear Press October 29, 2003.
Historical Notes
2016
Section 3 and 5 passed August 3, 2016, and effective August 10, 2016 by Kermes
(Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2013
Section 12-5 and 16-4 passed October 21, 2013, and effective October 30, 2013 by
Mample (Chair), Kermes and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2008
Section 12 passed October 6, 2008, and effective October 22, 2008 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 3-5, 3-10, and 12 passed June 16, 2008, and effective June 25, 2008 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 3-11, 5-2, 5-2.2, 5-3, 5-4, 5-5, 5-5.1 and 5-8 passed May 19, 2008, and effective
June 4, 2008 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2007
Section 5-5 passed December 18, 2006, and effective January 17, 2007 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2004
Section 7-1, 7-3, and 7-4 passed June 7, 2004, and effective June 16, 2004 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2003
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, and 23
passed October 20, 2003, and effective October 29, 2003 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and
Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2000
Section 18-3 passed June 19, 2000, and effective July 19, 2000 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1998
Section 4-4 passed December 21, 1998, and effective January 6, 1999 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1989
Section 17-6 passed January 3, 1989, and effective January 25, 1989 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1983
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
and 25 passed December 12, 1983, and effective December 28, 1983 by Jungkunz (Chair),
Weisenburger and Hamilton; Webber (Clerk).
1977
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21 passed
June 13, 1977, and effective June 16, 1977 by Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk).
1976
Section 3(b), 3(c), 3(d), 3(f), and 4(a) passed February 9, 1976, and effective February
19, 1976 by Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk).
1975
Section 7(a), 7(b), 8 (c) and 9 passed March 24, 1975, and effective April 3, 1975 by
Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk).
21
1963
Section 5(a) passed August 26, 1963, and effective August 29, 1963 by Kumm (Chair),
______________; Pope (Clerk).
1961
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21 passed
September 11, 1961, and effective September 21, 1961 by Kumm (Chair), Hovey and Rooney;
Pope (Clerk).
1957
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 originally passed December 5,
1957, and effective February 4, 1960 by Blair (Chair), Linear and Jansen; Wright (Clerk).
ORDINANCE NO. 8
Table of Contents
SECTION TITLE
1 General
2 Definitions
3 Permits Required
4 Permit Fees
5 Building Site Requirements
6 Structural Requirements
7 Materials
8 Electrical Requirements
9 Licenses and Bonds
10 Penalty
11 Date Effective
2
Section 1 General
1-7 Building Inspector
1-12 Plumbing Inspector
1-16 Heating Inspector
1-33 Condemnation
1-48 Expiration of Building Permits
1-48 Time Limit On Building Permit for Exterior Work
1-54 Adoption of MN State Building Code and UBC
1-54.a Fire Extinguishing Systems
1-55 Construction Debris
Section 2 Definitions
2-38 Gas Burners
2-42 Habitable Room
2-53 Municipality
2-54 Natural Waterway
2-70 Sewage
2-75 Story
2-75.a. 1st Story
2-78 Structure
2-90 House Trailer
Section 3 Permits Required
3-5, 3-6 Applications for Permits
3-13 House Moving Permits
3-26 The Business of Mining Sand, Gravel, Clay, Stone
3-30, 3-31 Certificate of Occupancy
Section 4 Permit Fees
4-31 Plan Checking Fees
Section 5 Building Site Requirements
5-1 Access to Public Street
5-3 Obstruct Natural Drainage Waterway
5-7 Permit for Private Waterway
5-9 Placement of Building on Property
5-14 Removal of Wheels from any Trailers
5-15 Railroad Coaches, Street Cars and Buses
5-19 Fences
5-25 Variance Provisions
5-27 Flooding and Flood Hazard
3
5-29 Garages, Attached or Detached – Accessory Buildings
5-30 Fish Houses
5-33 Building Elevation Control
5-34 Pole Buildings
5-35 Docks
5-36 Erosion and Sediment Control
Section 6 Structural Requirements
6-2 Square Footage
6-12 Concrete
6-12.b Driveways
6-15 Foundations & Footings
6-19.a Wood Foundations
6-32 Basement Egress Windows
6-54 Fireplace
6-59 Floor Sheating
6-63 Wall Framing
6-70 Stucco
6-80 Roofing
6-81 Roofing Sheating
6-100 Plumbing
6-104 Water Softeners
6-109 Septic System
6-122 Adoption of 7080
6-135 Gas Appliance
6-190 Stainless Steel Chimneys
6-193 Inspections and Tests
Section 7 Materials
7-14 Masonry
7-20 Roofing
Section 8 Electrical
Section 9 Licenses and Bonds
Section 9-A Insulation
4
ORDINANCE NO. 8
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING ALL MATTERS PERTAINING,
RELATING OR INCIDENTAL TO THE CONSTRUCTION, BUILDING,
ALTERATION, REPAIR, INSTALLATION, PERFORMANCE,
MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF ALL BUILDINGS, WALKS,
STRUCTURES, DRIVEWAYS, SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS, SEWAGE
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, WELL DRILLING AND WATER SUPPLY
SYSTEMS, ELECTRIC WIRING, HEATING PLANTS, GAS BURNERS
AND EQUIPMENT, INCINERATORS, PLUMBING, PLASTERING,
EXCAVATIONS, LOT GRADING, CEMENT AND BRICK LAYING,
ROOFING, WRECKING AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS, ERECTED,
CONSTRUCTED, BUILT, ALTERED, REPAIRED, INSTALLED,
PERFORMED AND MAINTAINED IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, AND
PROVIDING FOR LICENSES, PERMITS, BONDS AND FEES FOR THE
PURPOSE OF PROTECTION OF PROPERTY AGAINST FIRE AND FOR
SECURING HEALTHFUL, SAFE AND SANITARY CONDITIONS AND
ENVIRONMENT FOR THE OCCUPANTS OF BUILDINGS USED FOR
HUMAN HABITATION OR OTHERWISE, AND PROVIDED FOR
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF, AND REPEALING A
BUILDING CODE APPROVED AND ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF
WHITE BEAR TOWNSHIP SEPTEMBER 25, 1944, AND SUBSEQUENT
REVISION ON MARCH 1, 1949
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. GENERAL.
1-1. The following provision shall constitute and be known as the
“Building Code of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota.”
1-2. Permits heretofore issued for construction already undertaken
but not completed shall remain in full force and effect.
1-3. The term “municipality” as used in this Code shall mean the
Town of White Bear and the term “governing body” shall mean the Board of
Supervisors of the Town of White Bear.
1-4. The governing body shall appoint a Building Inspector.
1-5. The Building Inspector may be removed at the pleasure of the
governing body.
1-6. Repealed. By Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
5
1-7. The Building Inspector shall devote as much time as is
necessary for the proper performance of his official duties. He shall receive
applications required by this code, issue permits and supervise or perform
all office work incidental to his position. He shall examine the premises for
which permits have been requested prior to the issuance of such permit and
shall satisfy himself that the said premises can be used for the purpose for
which a permit is requested in accordance with all of the provisions of this
code, the Zoning Ordinance and all other rules, regulations or ordinances.
He shall make necessary inspection to see that the provisions of law are
complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce
all laws relating to the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, raising or
lowering, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and
structures, except as may be otherwise provided for in other ordinances or
regulatory measures. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or
when the interests of the municipality so requires, make investigations in
connection with matters referred to in this code and render reports on the
same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to
require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue
such notices or orders as may be necessary.
1-8. Repealed. By Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-2.
1-9. Repealed. By Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-2
1-10. Repealed. By Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-2.
1-11. Repealed. By Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-2.
PLUMBING
1-12. The governing body may appoint a Plumbing Inspector.
1-13. Repealed. By amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
1-14. The Plumbing Inspector shall not engage in the business of
installation or maintenance of any plumbing or sewage disposal systems
either directly or indirectly in this municipality and he shall have no interest
in any concern engaged in such business in this municipality.
1-15. The Plumbing Inspector shall make a thorough inspection of
the installation in buildings of all plumbing and fixtures and also all sewage
disposal systems now installed or that may hereafter be installed within this
municipality, and when the installation of any such plumbing or disposal
systems or material used is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition,
he shall notify the person, firm or corporation owning, using, operating or
6
installing the same to place such defective plumbing or sewer installations
in a safe condition and he shall immediately place a notice in a conspicuous
place upon such dangerous or unsafe construction stating that the
workmanship, design or material is unsafe and that it shall not be used until
it is put in a safe condition and thereafter it shall be unlawful to use said
installation or materials until it has been placed in a safe condition and has
been inspected and approved by said Inspector.
HEATING
1-16. The governing body may appoint a Heating Inspector.
1-17. Repealed. By amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
1-18. The Heating Inspector shall not engage in the business of the
installation or maintenance of heating equipment either directly or indirectly
in this municipality and he shall have no interest in any concern engaged in
such business in this municipality.
1-19. It shall be the duty of the Heating Inspector to enforce the
provisions of this code. He shall inspect all of the work covered in that part
of this code relative to or incidental with the installation of heating
equipment of any kind.
1-20. Any Inspector appointed by the governing body of the
municipality shall receive as compensation for his services such fees or
salary as the governing body by resolution shall provide.
1-21. Any Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to
enter any building in the discharge of his duties, or for the purpose of
making any inspection which he might deem necessary in the performance
of his particular duties.
1-22. Any person or persons who shall interfere with the Inspectors
in the execution of their duties, as defined by this code, shall upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided herein.
1-23. The Inspectors shall, when necessary, call upon the police
authorities of the municipality for assistance in enforcing any of the
provisions of this code.
1-24. The Inspector shall have authority to recommend the
employment by the governing body of such technical or expert consultants
as might become necessary to insure proper construction and public safety.
7
1-25. In the absence of any appointed Inspector, the governing body
shall appoint a substitute or temporary Inspector who shall assume all of the
duties and responsibilities of the Inspector or Inspectors mentioned in this
code.
1-26. Within the text of this code, references are made to specific
State, Federal, City, Trade and Professional publications or standards
relating to building construction, incorporating such publications or parts
thereof in the body of this code. (Authority for the adoption of regulations by
reference is given in the “Minnesota Statutes 1945” – 471.62). Provisions of
these publications, or parts thereof, adopted by reference shall be as much
a part of this code as though they had been set out in full herein.
1-27. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to stop the construction,
repair, alteration, renewal or demolishing of any building or structure when
any work done thereon is carried on in violation of this code or in a reckless,
careless, unsafe or improper manner.
1-28. It shall be the duty of the Police Authority, when called upon by
an Inspector, to perform such duties as may be necessary to enforce the
provisions of this code.
1-29. When any work shall have been stopped by an Inspector for
any reason whatsoever, it shall not again be resumed until the Inspector
shall have been satisfied that the reason for work stoppage has been
completely removed.
1-30. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to pass upon all questions
relating to the strength, durability, appearance and general workmanship of
buildings or structures.
1-31. The Inspector shall examine all buildings or structures for
which application has been made for a permit to enlarge, remove or alter
such building or structure, to determine whether or not such permit may be
granted.
1-32. The Inspectors are hereby given authority to make such tests
or order such tests to be made as they may deem necessary to determine
the safety of the condition of any structure, building or part thereof, material
or machinery, when it becomes their duty under the provisions of this code
to inspect.
CONDEMNATION
1-33. If, in the opinion of the Inspector, any building or structure
shall, from any cause whatsoever, be in a dangerous condition to persons
8
or property, it shall be his duty to notify the owner thereof of such condition
in writing, and at the same time the Inspector shall advise the owners that
unless repairs are made within thirty (30) days of the notification, the
Inspector has the authority to cause the repairs to be made, and the
expense caused may be recovered by the governing body from the owner.
1-34. The Inspector shall have the authority to cause the repair or
construction of any building or structure which is dangerous or unsafe to
persons or property, and the cost thereof may be recovered by the
municipality from the owner.
1-35. If, in the opinion of the Inspector, any building if unsafe or unfit
for further use, the Inspector shall recommend to the governing body that
such building be condemned.
1-36. Whenever the Inspector recommends the condemnation of
any building or structure, the owner shall be granted a hearing by the
governing body upon not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty (30)
days’ notice and after such hearing, the governing body may, in its
discretion, order either the repair or the demolition of such building or
structure.
1-37. Whenever the Inspector shall recommend the condemnation of
any building or structure, he shall post a notice upon the property affected
stating that the building has been recommended for condemnation by the
Building Inspector and if the governing body condemns any such building
after hearing, the Inspector shall post a notice upon the property affected
that the same has been condemned by the governing body.
1-38. The Inspector shall then have the authority, thirty (30) days
after such condemnation has been imposed, to enter upon said premises
and to fence in, prop up or tear down and remove such unsafe or
dangerous building or structure and do all things which, in his opinion, may
be necessary for the protection of life and adjoining property.
1-39. The amount of the expense caused by condemnation may be
recovered by the municipality from the owner, or owners of the lot or parcel
of land.
1-40. A statement of the expense of any work incidental to the
condemnation or repair of a structure of a building shall be filed by the
Building Inspector in the office of the County Auditor.
1-41. The expense involved due to the condemnation or repair, as
shown in the report of the Inspector, shall become a lien in favor of the
municipality upon the lot or parcel of land.
9
1-42. Any lien which has been established against any property as a
result of condemnation or repair and expenses incidental thereto may be
enforced in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
1-43. After the removal or destruction of any building, the Inspector
shall notify the owner or his agent in writing to clean up all debris and also
to fill any old foundations or pits.
1-44. If the work of cleaning up debris and filling in of old foundations
has not been started within thirty (30) days from the time of the Inspector’s
written notice to the owner or agent, the Inspector shall have the authority to
enter upon the premises and to perform such work.
1-45. Repealed. By amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
1-46. Where excavations of any kind have been made and left
without proper protection, the Building Inspector shall notify the owner or
owners in writing to fill or properly protect such excavation. Failure, on the
part of the owner to fill or protect the excavation within the time limit given in
the Inspector’s notice, shall cause the Inspector to have such work done as
might be necessary and the cost of such work may become a lien in favor of
the municipality upon the lot or parcel of land.
1-47. Repealed. By amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 3-
1a.
1-48. Every permit issued under the provisions of this building code
shall expire by limitations and become null and void if the building or work
authorized by such permit is not commenced within 120 days from the date
of issuance of such permit or if the building or work authorized by such
permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 120 days. Before such
work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so,
and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit
for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the
original plans and specifications for such work; and provided, further, that
such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded 120 days. In order to
renew action on a permit after expiration, the permitee shall pay a new full
permit fee. Any permitee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an
extension of the time within which he may commence work under that
permit when he is unable to commence work within the time required by this
section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend
the time for action by the permitee for a period not exceeding 180 days
upon written request by the permitee showing that circumstances beyond
the control of the permitee have prevented action from being taken. No
permit shall be extended more than once.
10
When a permit is issued which includes work on the exterior of the
structure, such exterior work must be completed within 120 days after
issuance of the permit. This time limit may be extended by the governing
body upon proof of circumstances beyond the control of the permitee which
make it impossible to complete the improvement within the 120 day limit,
provided that application for such extension of time be made in writing prior
to such expiration date.
1-49. Whenever it becomes necessary for any Inspector to reinspect
any work which has been found faulty during the first inspection, a
re-inspection fee shall be paid by the permitee. This re-inspection fee not
provided for in the Minnesota State Building Code shall be established by
Town Board Resolution.
1-50. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or
demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the
Town or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance.
1-51. The various provisions of this Building Code shall be
severable, and if any part or provision shall be held to be invalid, it shall not
be held to invalidate any other part or provision thereof.
1-52. The apparent silence of this Building Code as to any detail
concerning the method of performing any of the work described herein or
any of the materials to be used in connection with that work shall be
regarded as meaning that only the best general practice is to prevail and
that all materials and workmanship are to be of the type and character
which shall provide the best final result in any construction. In any cases
where this code omits specific reference to any work or material which may
in fairness be implied, the permitee shall perform such work and furnish
such material that the work will be complete according to good practice and
in the interest of the public.
1-53. It shall not be the intention of this code or the governing bodies
of the municipality to prevent the use of materials or methods which may
either now or in the future prove to be equal or better than any of those
described herein. The governing body of the municipality may permit a
revision in this code after they have been satisfied that such a change or
revision is one which will give equal or better results.
11
1-54. ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE.
(a). The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the
Commissioner of Administration pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 16B.59 to 16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules
and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time
by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, through the
Building Codes and Standards Division is hereby adopted by
reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless
specifically adopted herein. The Minnesota State Building Code is
hereby incorporated in this Ordinance as if fully set out herein.
(b). The application, administration, and enforcement of the
Code shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code.
The Code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted
by Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, Subdivision 1, when so established
by this Ordinance.
(c). The Code Enforcement Agency of the Town of White
Bear shall be the Building Official.
(d). This Code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified
Building Official designated by the Town of White Bear to administer
the Code (Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 16B.65), Subdivision 1.
(e). The issuance of permits and the collection fees shall be
as authorized in Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, Subd. 1. Permit fees
shall be assessed for work governed by this Code in accordance with
the fee schedule adopted by the Town of White Bear in Ordinance
No. 54 (Fees & Charges). In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by this Code in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes, 16B.70.
1-54A. SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
Existing and New Buildings. Automatic sprinkler systems for new
buildings, buildings increased in total floor area (including the existing
building), or buildings in which the occupancy classification has changed,
must be installed and maintained in operational condition within the
structure. The requirements of this subpart apply to structures that fall
within the occupancy classifications established in part 1306.0030, items A
to E.
12
Exceptions.
1. The floor area of minor additions that do not increase the
occupant load does not have to be figured into the square
footage for occupancy classifications established in part
1306.0030, items A to E.
2. The existing portion of R-2 apartment occupancies, attached
R-3 occupancies, and attached town homes is not required to
be sprinklered under this chapter.
New Buildings. Automatic sprinkler systems for new buildings,
additions to existing buildings, or buildings in which the occupancy
classification has changed must be installed and maintained in operational
condition within the structure. The requirements of this subpart apply to
structures that fall within the occupancy classifications established in part
1306.003, items A to E.
Exception.
The floor area of minor additions that do not increase the occupant
load does not have to be figured into the square footage for
occupancy classifications established in part 1306.0030, items A to
E.
Requirements. For purposes of this chapter, area separation, fire
barriers, or fire walls do not establish separate buildings. Gross square
footage (gsf) means the floor area as defined in the International Building
Code. The floor area requirements established in items A to E are based
on the gross square footage of the entire building and establish thresholds
for these requirements. The following occupancy groups must comply with
sprinkler requirements of this chapter, unless specified otherwise:
A. Group A-1, A-2, A-3, and A-4 occupancies;
B. Group B, F, M and S occupancies with 2,000 or more gross
square feet of floor area or with three or more stories in height;
C. Group E occupancies with 2,000 or more gross square feet of
floor area or with two or more stories in height;
D. Group E day care occupancies with an occupant load of 30 or
more;
E. Attached R-3 occupancies and attached townhouses built to
the International Residential Code with more than 16 dwelling
units or more than three stories in height.
Standard. Automatic sprinkler systems must comply with the
applicable standard referenced in the State Building Code. If a public water
13
supply is not available, the Building Official and Fire Chief shall approve the
use of an alternate on-site source of water if the alternate source provides
protection that is comparable to that provided by a public water supply. If an
adequate alternate water supply sufficient for hose stream requirements is
provided or available, the Building Official and Fire Chief may permit the
water supply requirements for the hose stream demands to be modified.
Substitute Construction. The installation of an automatic sprinkler
system, as required by this chapter, would still allow the substitution of onehour
fire-resistive construction as permitted by the International Building
Code, Table 601, footnote d.
Exemption. The Building Official, with the concurrence of the Fire
Official, may waive the requirements of this chapter if the application of
water has been demonstrated to constitute a serious life, fire, or
environmental hazard, or if the building does not have an adequate water
supply and the building is surrounded by public ways or yards more than 60
feet wide on all sides.
1-55. During the period of any construction, all construction waste
and debris shall be deposited in containers provided by the contractor and
the debris shall be removed from the premises when containers are filled or
upon completion of job.
1-56. During the period of construction, activities cannot commence
before the hours of 7 a.m. or continue after 10 p.m. weekdays. On
weekends, no activities before 7 a.m. or after 6 p.m. on Saturdays.
Sundays no activities before 10 a.m. or after 6 p.m. Exceptions to the time
may be granted by the Town.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.
2-1. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for
the purpose of this code, have the meanings indicated in this section.
2-2. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular.
2-3. Where terms are not defined in this section, they shall have
their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
2-4. ALLEY means any public space or thoroughfare 20 feet in width
which has been dedicated or needed for public use.
14
2-5. ALTERATION as applied to a building or structure, means a
change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit, lighting or
ventilating facilities; or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or
by increasing in height; or the moving from one location or position to
another; the term alter in its various moods and tenses and its participle
forms refers to the making of an alteration.
2-6. APARTMENT means a room or suite of two or more rooms in a
residence building occupied as the home or residence of an individual,
family or household.
2-7. APPROVED as applied to a material, device or method of
construction, means approved by the governing body under the provisions
of this code, or by other authority designated by law to give approval in the
manner in question.
2-8. APPROVED MASONRY means masonry constructed of brick,
stone, concrete, hollow block, solid block or other material approved after
test or a combination of these materials.
2-9. AREA as applied to a form of construction, means an
uncovered sub-surface space adjacent to a building.
2-10. AREA as applied to the dimensions of a building, means the
maximum horizontal projected area of the building at grade.
2-11. A.S.A. means the American Standards Association.
2-12. A.S.T.M. means the American Society for Testing Materials.
2-13. AUTOMATIC, as applied to a fire door or other opening
protective means normally held in an open position and automatically
closed by a releasing device that is actuated by abnormal high temperature
or by a predetermined rate of rise in temperature.
2-14. BACK VENT OR REVENT is that part of a vent pipe line which
connects directly with an individual trap, underneath or back of the fixture,
and extends to the branch, main or vent pipe at any point higher than the
fixture or fixture traps it serves.
2-15. BASEMENT is any floor level below the first story in a building,
except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as
defined herein.
15
2-16. BRANCH of any system of piping is that part of the system
which extends horizontally at a slight grade, with or without lateral or vertical
extensions or vertical arms, from the main to receive fixture outlets not
directly connected to the main.
2-17. BUILDING means a combination of materials to form a
construction that is safe and stable and adapted to permanence or
continuous occupancy for public, institutional, residence, business or
storage purposes; the term “building” shall be construed as though followed
by the words “or part thereof”. For the purposes of this code, each portion
of a building, separated from other portions by a fire-wall, shall be
considered as a separate building.
2-18. BUILDING DRAIN is that part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a building drainage system which received the discharge from soil, waste,
and other drainage pipes inside the walls of any building and conveys the
same to the building sewer.
2-19. BUILDING LINE means the line, beyond which property
owners or others have no legal or vested right to extend a building or any
part thereof without special permission and approval of the proper
authorities.
2-20. BUILDING INSPECTOR means the officer or other designated
authority charged with the responsibility of enforcement of this code under
the authority of the governing body.
2-21. BUILDING SEWER is that part of the horizontal piping of a
building-drainage system extending from the building drain to its connection
with the main sewer and conveying the water, liquid, and water-carried
waste of but one building.
2-22. CIRCUIT VENT AND LOOP VENT is a pipe which vents a
series of fixture traps on the same soil or waste branch and which is
continued through the roof or reconnected into a vent stack above all
fixture-trap branches.
2-23. CURB LEVEL is the level of the established curb in front of a
building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been
established, the governing body may establish such curb level or its
equivalent for the purposes of this code.
2-24. DEAD LOAD means the weight of walls, partitions, floors,
roofs and all other permanent construction of a building.
16
2-25. DISPLAY SIGN means a structure that is arranged, intended,
designed or used as an advertisement, announcement or direction; and
includes a sign, sign screen billboard and advertising devices of any kind.
2-26. DWELLING means a building occupied exclusively for
residence purposes and having not more than two apartments, or as a
boarding or rooming house serving not more than fifteen (15) persons with
meals or sleeping accommodations or both.
2-27. FIRE DOOR means a door and its assembly so constructed
and assembled in place as to give the specified protection against the
passage of fire.
2-27(a). SOIL PROCESSING AND STORAGE is limited to the
recycling of dirt into top soil, which is done through a screening process.
Such processing shall also include the transporting and/or grading of such
soil to be processed.
2-28. FIRE PARTITION means a partition which subdivides a
building to restrict the spread of fire or to provide areas of refuge, but is not
necessarily continuous through all stories nor extended through the roof and
has a fire-resistance rating of at least two hours.
2-29. FIRE RESISTANT RATING means the time in hours that the
material or construction will withstand the standard fire exposure as
determined by a fire test made in conformity with the “Standard Methods of
Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials”, A.S.T.M., E 119-50.
2-30. FIRE RETARDANT CEILING means a ceiling construction
which has been proved by test as satisfactory for use as ceiling protection
for a floor or roof construction which has a fire resistant rating of not less
than one hour.
2-31. Repealed.
2-32. FLOOR AREA means a floor space enclosed by exterior
walls, fire walls, or fire partitions or by a combination of them.
2-33. FOOTING is the projecting course or courses at the bottom of
a foundation wall, column or pier.
2-34. FOUNDATION is the sub-structure on which the building or
structure is supported.
2-35. FRAME CONSTRUCTION see “wood frame construction”.
17
2-36. FRONTAGE means the width of a lot or building site
measured on the line separating it from a public street or way.
2-37. GARAGE, PRIVATE means a building, shed or enclosure or a
part thereof designed or used for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles
containing flammable fuel and having a floor area not exceeding 1,200
square feet, outside dimensions.
2-38. GAS BURNERS AND GAS BURNER EQUIPMENT. The
term “gas burner” shall mean a device for the final conveyance of gas or a
mixture of gas and air to the combustion zone of a steam or hot water
boiler, furnace, or to any device or appliance used in connection with a
space heating system, and shall include conversion burners, gas designed
heating appliance, power gas burners and atmospheric gas burners. The
term “gas burner equipment” shall include gas burners as above defined,
together with all fans, blowers, control devices, accessories connected to
the burners, and piping involved in supplying the burner.
(a). Conversion Burner shall mean a gas burning appliance
designed to supply gaseous fuel to and properly burn same in the
combustion chamber of a boiler, furnace or other device originally
designed to burn another fuel.
(b). Gas Designed Heating Appliance shall mean any space
heating appliance designed for the exclusive use of gaseous fuel,
excepting such auxiliary heaters as gas logs, radiant heaters, etc.
(c). Power Gas Burner is a device in which either the gas or air or
both are supplied at pressure exceeding, for gas, the house line
pressure and for air, atmospheric pressure.
(d). Atmospheric Burner is a device (other than a gas range or a
gas water heater) in which air at atmospheric pressure is injected into
the burner by a jet of gas under pressure and whose input exceed
fifty thousand (50,000) BTU per hour.
2-39. GAS FITTING shall be taken to mean the work of putting
together any fittings, pipes or fixtures or other appliance which are to
contain gas for heat, light or power purposes.
2-39(a). GAZEBO is a free-standing structure less than 144 square
feet, open-sided or screened and roofed.
2-40. GRADE with reference to a building, means when the street
grade has been established, the mean elevation of the street level opposite
those walls that are located on, or parallel with and within 15 feet of, street
18
lines; or, when the street grade has not been established, or all the walls of
the building are more than 15 feet from the street lines, “grade” means the
mean elevation of the ground adjoining the building on all sides.
2-41. GOVERNING BODY shall be taken to mean the organized
group of people elected by the voter of any village or township and charged
with the duty of exercising authority and administering the laws of the
municipality.
2-42. HABITABLE ROOM means a space in a structure for living,
sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartment, closets, halls,
storage or utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable
spaces.
2-43. HEIGHT. For all districts except the Shoreland Management
District the vertical distance of a structure measured from the lowest
elevation at grade adjacent to the structure to the top of the roof shall not
exceed 40 feet, except for water towers approved by the Town Board.
A. Height as applied to a building means the vertical distance from
grade to the highest finished roof surface in the case of flat roofs, or
to a point at the average height of roofs having a pitch of more than
one foot in 4 ½ feet.
B. Height of a building in stories is the vertical distance above a
reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of
the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum
shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater
height of a building:
1. The elevation of the highest adjoining ground surface
within a five (5) foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of
the building when such ground is not more than ten (10) feet
above the lowest grade.
2. An elevation ten (10) feet higher than the lowest grade
when the ground surface described in item 1 above is more
than ten (10) feet above lowest grade.
2-44. HEIGHT. (Height in Shoreland Management District). For
riparian lots in the Shoreland Management District the distance from the
highest grade to the average of the highest gable shall be no more than 25
feet. For walkout basements in no event shall the height from the lowest
point of a walkout basement to the top of the roof exceed 40 feet.
19
A. Height as applied to a building means the vertical distance
from grade to the highest finished roof surface in the case of flat
roofs, or to a point at the average height of roofs having a pitch of
more than one foot in 4 ½ feet.
B. Height of a building in stories is the vertical distance above a
reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of
the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum
shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater
height of a building:
1. The elevation of the highest adjoining ground surface
within a five (5) foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of
the building when such ground is not more than ten (10) feet
above the lowest grade.
2. An elevation ten (10) feet higher than the lowest grade
when the ground surface described in item 1 above is more
than ten (10) feet above lowest grade.
2-45. HEIGHT as applied to a story, means the vertical distance
from top to top of two successive tiers of floor beams or finished wood
surfaces.
2-46. HEREAFTER means after the time that this code becomes
effective.
2-47. HERETOFORE means before the time that this code becomes
effective.
2-48. HOLLOW MASONRY UNIT means a masonry unit whose net
cross sectional area in any plane parallel to the bearing surface is less than
75 percent of its gross cross sectional area measured in the same plane.
2-49. LIVE LOAD means all loads except dead loads.
2-50. LOT means a portion or parcel of land considered as a unit
devoted to a certain use or occupied by a building or a group of buildings
that are united by common interest for use and the customary accessories
and open spaces belonging to the same. (Refer to Section 35 of the Town
Zoning Ordinance.)
2-51. MAIN. The main of any system of horizontal, vertical or
continuous piping is that part of such system which receives the wastes,
20
vent or back vents, from fixture outlets or traps, direct or through branch
pipes.
2-52. Repealed. Repealed to Ordinance No. 33.
2-53. MUNICIPALITY as used in this code shall mean an
incorporated village or township.
2-54. NATURAL WATERWAY as mentioned in this code shall mean
any natural passageway in the surface of the earth so situated and having
such a topographical nature that surface water flows through it from other
areas before reaching a final ponding area. The term shall also mean to
include any and all drainage structure that have been constructed or placed
for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another.
2-55. OCCUPIED as applied to a building shall be construed as
though followed by the words “or intended”, arranged or designed to be
occupied.
2-56. OWNER includes his duly authorized agent or attorney-in-fact,
a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary and a person having a vested interest in the
property in questions.
2-57. PERSON includes a corporation or a co-partnership as well as
an individual.
2-58. PLACE OF ASSEMBLY. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8,
Subdivision 1-54.
2-59. PLACE OF BUSINESS means maintaining a bona fide
address or location where all types of business may be transacted.
2-60. PLATTED PROPERTY means a tract of land which has been
subdivided into lots and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds as a
plat or an addition dedicating streets and roads and designating each
individual lot by a lot number and each block of lots with a block number.
2-60(a). PLAYHOUSE. A structure not exceeding 144 square feet,
and constructed specifically for children to play in.
2-61. PLUMBING. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
2-62. PLUMBING FIXTURES are receptacles intended to receive
and discharge water, liquid, or water carried wastes into a drainage system
with which they are connected.
21
2-63. PLUMBING SYSTEM of a building includes the water supply
distributing pipes; the fixtures and fixture traps; the soil, waste, and vent
pipes; the building drain and building sewer; the storm-water drainage, with
their devices, appurtenances, and connections within the building and
outside the building within the property line.
2-63(a). POLE BUILDINGS/POST FRAME CONSTRUCTION is an
engineered wood frame building system that meets UBC and IBC
standards. Post frame buildings feature large solid sawn posts or laminated
columns instead of wood studs, Steel framing or concrete masonry.
2-64. PREFABRICATED. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8,
Subdivision 1-54.
2-65. REPAIR means the replacement of existing work with the
same kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional
work that would affect the structural safety of the building, or that would
affect or change required exit, lighting or ventilating facilities, or that would
affect a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating
installation, or that would be in violation of a provision of this code.
2-66. ROOF means the roof slab or deck with its supporting
members.
2-67. ROOFING means the covering applied to the roof for weather
resistance, fire resistance, or appearance.
2-68. REQUIRED means required by some provision of this code.
2-69. SELF-CLOSING as applied to a fire door or other opening
protections means, normally closed and equipped with an approved device
which will insure closing after having been opened for use.
2-70. SEWAGE means:
(a). Wash water and water-carried animal, culinary, and, in some
cases, industrial wastes.
(b). Liquid waste containing human excretes, and other matter,
flowing in or from a building-drainage system or sewer. Excreta
include feces, urine, secretions from the skin, expectoration, etc.
(c). Liquid wastes from dwellings and institutions, stables, and
business buildings. It may also contain liquid wastes from industries.
22
(d). A combination of (1) the liquid wastes conducted away from
residences, business buildings and institutions, and (2) from
industrial establishments, with (3) such ground surface, and storm
water as may be admitted to or find its way into the sewers.
(e). The ordinary liquid contents of a sewer containing organic
wastes, which may or may not include street wash.
2-71. SHALL as used in this code is mandatory.
2-72. SOIL PIPE is any pipe which conveys the discharge of water
closets, with or without the discharge from other fixtures, to the building
drain.
2-72(a). SOIL PROCESSING AND STORAGE. Soil processing and
storage is limited to the recycling of dirt into top soil, which is done through
a screening process. Such processing shall also include the transporting
and/or grading of such soil to be processed.
2-73. STACK is a general term for any vertical line of soil, waste, or
vent piping.
2-74. STAIRWAY means one or more flights of stairs and the
necessary lands and platforms connecting them to form a continuous and
uninterrupted passage from one story to another building or structure.
2-75. STORY. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or
unused under-floor space is more than six (6) feet above grade for more
than 50 percent of the total perimeter, or is more than 12 feet above grade
at any point, such usable or unused under-floor space shall be considered
as a story.
2-76. STREET. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
2-77. STREET LINE means a lot line dividing a lot from a street.
(NOTE: Compare with definition of “building line” and “lot line”.)
2-78. STRUCTURE means a combination of materials to form a
construction that is safe and stable; including among other, stadiums,
gospel and circus tents, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation
towers, radio towers, water tanks and towers, trestles, piers, wharves,
sheds, coal bins, fences and display signs; the term “structure” shall be
contoured as though followed by the words “or part thereof”. (NOTE: The
distinction between “structure” and “building” should be noted. “Structure” is
the broader term; “Building” is a restricted form of “structure”.)
23
2-78(a). SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or
recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm)
deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground
swimming pools; hot tubs; portable and non-portable spas; and fixedin-
place wading pools.
2-79. TRAP is a fitting or device so constructed as to prevent the
passage of air or gas through a pipe without materially affecting the flow of
sewage or waste water through it.
2-80. TRAP SEAL is the vertical distance between the crown weir
and the dip of the trap.
2-81. VENT PIPE is any pipe provided to ventilate a building
drainage system and to prevent trap siphonage and back pressure.
2-82. WALL
(a). BEARING WALL means a wall which supports any vertical load
in addition to its own weights.
(b). CAVITY WALL means built of masonry units or of plain
concrete, or of a combination of these materials, so arranged as to
provide an air space within the wall, and in which the inner and outer
parts of the wall are tied together with metal ties.
(c). CURTAIN WALL means a non-bearing wall between columns or
piers and which is not supported by girders or beams.
(d). FACED WALL means a wall in which the masonry facing and
backing are so bonded as to exert common action under load.
(e). FIRE WALL means a wall of non-combustible material having
fire resistance as follows: Storage occupancy four (4) hours,
business occupancy three (3) hours, all other occupancies two (2)
hours. Fire walls shall thus divide a building or separate buildings to
restrict the spread of fire and which starts at the foundation and
extends continuously through all the stories to and above the roof,
except where the roof is fireproof or semi-fireproof and the wall is
carried up tightly against the under side of the roof slab. (NOTE: Fire
walls must include stability under extreme fire conditions as well as
resist the effects of fire. It is therefore necessary that a fire wall be
considered as a special device requiring careful consideration of the
use of materials and the workmanship.)
24
(f). FOUNDATION WALL means a wall below the first floor
extending below the adjacent ground level and serving as support for
a wall, pier, column or other structural part of a building.
(g). HOLLOW WALL OF MASONRY means a wall built of masonry
units so arranged as to provide an air space within the wall, and in
which the inner and outer parts of the wall are bonded together with
masonry units.
(h). NON-BEARING WALL means a wall which supports no vertical
load other than its own weight.
(i). PARTY WALL means a wall used or adopted for joint service
between two (2) buildings.
(j). PANEL WALL means a non-load bearing wall in skeleton
construction, built between columns or piers and wholly supported at
each story.
(k). RETAINING WALL means any wall used to resist the lateral
displacement of any material including liquids.
2-83. WASTE PIPE is any pipe which receives the discharge of any
fixture, except water-closets, and conveys the same to the building drain,
soil, or waste stacks. When such pipe does not connect directly with a
building drain or soil stack, it is termed a special waste.
2-84. WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPES are those which convey water
from the service pipe to the plumbing fixtures.
2-85. WATER SERVICE PIPES are pipes from the watermain to the
building served.
2-86. WRITING includes printing and typewriting.
2-87. WRITTEN NOTICE shall be considered to have been served if
delivered at or sent by registered mail to the last business address known to
the party giving the notice.
2-88. YARD means a court that extends along the entire length of a
lot line.
2-89. ZONING means the reservation of certain specified areas
within the municipality for buildings and structures for certain purposes with
other limitations such as height, lot coverage and other stipulated
requirements.
25
2-90. HOUSE TRAILER OR TRAILER means house trailer, mobile
homes, trailer coaches or any other trailer or semi-trailer designed,
constructed, modified, and/or equipped for use or used for temporary or
permanent human dwelling place, living abode or living quarters.
2-91. TRAILER CAMP means any area used or to be used for
temporary, semi-permanent or permanent harboring of two or more house
trailers as hereinbefore defined and includes trailer coach parks, mobile
home courts or parks, trailer parks, etc.
2-92. DOCK. Any wharf, pier or other structure constructed or
maintained in the lake, whether floating or not, including all “Ls”, “Ts” or
posts which may be a part thereof, whether affixed or adjacent to the
principal structure.
2-93. SITE. Any shoreline lot, lots or parts of lots in common
ownership forming one contiguous parcel of land which has been recorded
in the office of the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles. Private
easements shall not be included in the definition of “site”.
SECTION 3. PERMITS REQUIRED.
3-1.(a). Any person, firm or corporation who shall commence work of
any kind for which a permit is required under the provision of this building
code without having first received the necessary permit therefore shall,
when subsequently securing such permit, be required to pay administrative
fees as established, provided by this building code for such permit.
3-2. Applications for permits shall be made in writing upon printed
blanks or forms furnished by the municipality.
3-3. Application for permit shall be accompanied by two copies of
the plans and specifications clearly illustrating and specifying the work to be
done, and such plans shall be so complete as to fully illustrate the character
of the proposed work.
3-4. Each application for a building permit for new construction shall
show the correct legal description of the property. Where the property is not
platted, the application shall be accompanied by a certificate of survey
signed by a registered surveyor. All property corner survey stakes must be
visible.
3-5. Application for a building permit for new construction shall be
accompanied by two (2) copies of the plot plan showing the correct location
of the proposed building with respect to the lot lines and also the correct
26
location of all other buildings existing or proposed to be constructed on the
lot.
3-6. No permit shall be issued until the following items have been
complied with
3-6.1. The inspector shall examine all plans and specifications.
3-6.2. Determination that the grading plan has been complied with.
3-6.3. The establishment of the first floor elevation shall be
determined by the Town Engineer with the costs borne by the
applicant.
3-7. If an examination of the application, plans and specifications
indicate that the provisions of this code and the zoning plan are complied
with, the Inspector shall issue a permit therefore.
3-8. One set of plans and specifications shall be returned to the
applicant and shall be kept at the place where the work is being done.
3-9. One set of plans and specifications shall remain with the
Inspector.
3-10. One copy of the plot plan shall be returned to the applicant and
shall be kept at the place where the work is being done.
3-11. One copy of the plot plan shall remain with the Inspector.
3-12. One copy of the plot plan shall be filed in the office of the Clerk
of the municipality within thirty (30) days of the issuance of any permit by
the Inspector.
3-13. Permits shall be required for the moving of any building or
electrical transformer. This shall include buildings or electrical transformers
being moved into or out of a municipality as well as buildings or electrical
transformers being moved from one location to another within the
municipality. These permits shall be issued to responsible movers only
after approval of the Town Board.
3-14. Repealed.
3-15. A permit shall be required for any work such as sidewalk
construction, curb or gutter construction, driveways, tree planting,
installation of lawn irrigation systems, drainage, or any sub-surface
investigation conducted by proposed bidders or anyone else conducting a
27
sub-surface investigation, which is proposed to be done within the public
right-of-way or public easements. A letter indemnifying the Township of any
responsibility of damage to any property placed in those easements or rightof-
ways must be signed by the property owner before such permit can be
issued. These permits shall be issued by the Town after application for the
work has been reviewed by the Engineer for the Town.
3-16. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-3.
3-17. No alterations or additions in existing plumbing, including the
installation of water softeners, automatic dish washers, automatic washing
machines, garbage disposals, or any other fixtures wherein it is necessary
to cut into existing water pipes or drains by means of a saw, pipe cutter,
drill, or any other means, in any building shall be made nor any plumbing be
placed in any building, nor shall any sewage disposal system be
constructed without first securing a permit therefore, except minor repair
work. Application for permits shall be filed with the Plumbing Inspector or
Clerk of the Township.
3-18. A permit will be required to begin the installation, alteration or
repair (except such minor repair not involving the removal of the burner from
its application) of any gas burner or gas burning equipment.
3-19. Except for minor repair work, a permit will be required to begin
the installation, alteration, addition to or repair of heating systems, gas
appliances, gas piping, furnaces, boilers, incinerators, air conditioning and
refrigeration work and ventilating systems.
3-20. Repealed by Ordinance No. 33, Subdivision 3-1.
3-21. Repealed by Ordinance No. 34, Sections 5 and 6.
3-22. Repealed by Ordinance No. 34, Section 5.
3-23. No permit shall be required when the value of such work and
material used shall not exceed an amount established by Town Board
resolution.
3-24. Permits shall be required for the installation of any device,
appliance, machine, heating device or apparatus requiring the use of
manufactured gas, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas. These permits will
be issued to licensed installers only.
3-25. A permit shall be required for the excavation, grading or
surfacing for any building, structure, plot or area of ground occupied by a
building or in preparation for the construction of a building. This permit shall
28
include all backfilling and finishing. All grading and landscaping shall be
done so that fire hydrants will have the “Break-Off” level with the ground.
Fire hydrant extensions necessary to satisfy this amendment will be
installed by the Town with the installation costs borne by the property
owner. Applications for permit shall be filed with the Clerk of the Town.
3-26. The business of soil processing and storage, removing sand,
gravel, clay, stone or other natural deposits for the purpose of utilizing these
materials is hereby declared a business necessary to regulate for the
general health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the Town of White
Bear, and no person, firm or corporation shall hereafter engage in such
business without first obtaining a permit from the Town Board to do so.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of
soil processing and storage, removing sand, gravel, clay, stone or other
natural deposits for the purpose of utilizing such materials, shall file an
application in duplicate with the Town Clerk, in writing, and in such
application shall give a complete description of the location of the property
on which he proposes to operate, state the elevation relative to adjacent
streets at which the excavated area is proposed to be leveled after
operations are completed, and, if known, the use to be made of such
property following the removal of such materials. The applicant shall also
state in his application whether he requests a permit for the removal of
material only, or whether the installation of equipment for processing such
materials is intended, such as washing machinery, screens, tipples,
bunkers, crushing plant, etc. A separate permit shall be obtained for each
location where any of the aforesaid materials are to be removed.
Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee. In
addition, the applicant shall pay for all engineering and legal expenses
incurred by the Town to process and consider the application. The
applicant shall tender with his fee a cash deposit to guarantee payment of
said expenses, and the Clerk shall refund any portion of the deposit in
excess of said expenses or bill the applicant for any expenses in excess of
the deposit.
Upon receipt of an application under this Subdivision together with
the permit fee and expense deposit, the Clerk shall forward the duplicate
application to the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall investigate the
property upon which the proposed excavation is to be made and shall
prepare a technical report for the Planning Commission and the Town
Board. The Engineer’s report shall, among other things, indicate the affect
upon adjoining properties and any other data, information or advice, directly
or indirectly related to these factors. If in the course of the investigation and
study, the Town Engineer deems it necessary to obtain such services of a
recognized engineering laboratory, he shall obtain such services after first
29
notifying the applicant, and the applicant shall be responsible for the
expense of such laboratory services.
The application, together with the Engineer’s report, shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission following completion of the
Engineer’s investigation, for examination and report of its opinion whether
such excavation should be permitted at the place specified, and whether it
will interfere with future street extensions or the development of the district
for buildings or other purposes.
The Planning Commission shall submit its report together with the
application and the Engineer’s report to the Town Board, who shall grant or
deny the permit, and if granted, the Board shall specify the nature and
extent of the excavation or removal and prescribe conditions for carrying on
such work. All the conditions prescribed by the Town Board shall include
provisions for treatment of the premises after excavating is completed,
which shall be prepared in proper legal form by the Town Attorney and shall
be made part of the permit.
All persons, firms or corporations to whom a permit is granted under
the terms of this Ordinance, shall furnish bond in the amount and duration
as prescribed by the Town Board and is to be approved as to form and
execution and as to surety by the Town Board, conditioned for the full and
faithful performance of all the terms and requirements of this Ordinance and
the permit.
All operations in this section (3-26), for which a permit has been
issued, shall only be allowed to operate between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7
p.m. on weekdays, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Saturdays and not on Sundays. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall approve any area used for such soil
processing and storage so as to prevent the blowing or washing of soil onto
neighboring properties.
3-27. All persons, firms or corporations to whom a permit is given,
shall observe the following requirements:
3-27.1. Shall conform to the plan set forth in the application.
3-27.2. Shall furnish to the Town Board at such time as the Board
may desire, cross-sections of the excavation to indicate the condition
in relating to the depth specified.
3-27.3. Shall, upon failure to furnish said cross-sections, pay the
cost to the Town of making such surveys and cross-sections as may
be required to acquaint the Board as to existing conditions, and the
acceptance of the permit shall be considered an agreement to pay
30
such cost and to permit the Town to enter upon the premises for the
purpose of making such surveys and cross-sections.
3-28. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply equally to
persons, firms or corporations now engaged in the business of removing the
materials herein described, who continue such business after the effective
date of this Ordinance, and a period of sixty (60) days after such effective
date is hereby granted such persons in which to make application and
obtain the necessary permit to continue such business.
3-29. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
3-30. OCCUPANCY PERMIT. No building or structure hereafter
erected, structurally altered or moved shall be occupied or used in whole or
in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of White
Bear stating that the building or structure complies with all pertinent
provisions of the Town Zoning Ordinance and the State Building Code.
3-31. Before issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall verify that the property in question is in
compliance with Section 5-36 – Erosion Control Practice, or that the entire
yard be either seeded or sodded.
3-32. STREET MAINTENANCE DEPOSIT.
3-32.1. Where work is done on private property contiguous to
any street, any damage caused within the street right-of-way by
reason of said work shall be promptly repaired by the person
obtaining the building permit, and all foreign debris deposited on the
street right-of-way by reason of said work shall be promptly removed.
3-32.2. To insure compliance with the above, every person
desiring a residential building permit shall pay a fee per residential
unit, as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges), prior to
receiving a building permit; and every person desiring a
commercial/industrial building permit shall pay a fee for each 2,000
square feet of building, including expansion or addition to existing
buildings, as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges) before
a building permit is issued.
3-32.3. If the person obtaining the building permit complies
with the requirements in paragraph A above, the amount set forth in
paragraph B shall be refunded to them. Any costs incurred by the
Town in restoring streets in the Town to their original condition before
construction shall be subtracted from the above fee.
31
3-32.4. If the above fees do not cover all the costs incurred by
the Town in restoring the streets, the Town will bill the additional
amount to the person who received the building permit and the
addition amount shall be payable by that person within 30 days from
such billing date.
SECTION 4. PERMIT FEES. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth
in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges). The determination of value or
valuation under any of the sections of this Ordinance shall be made by the
building official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and
building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for
which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing,
electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing
systems, and any other permanent equipment.
4-1. PLAN REVIEW FEES. When submittal documents are
required, a plan review fee shall be paid. Said plan review fee shall not be
more than sixty-five percent (65%) of the building permit fee as shown in
Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
4-1.1. The plan review fees specified in this section are
separate fees from the permit fees, and are in addition to the permit
fees.
4-1.2. When submittal documents are incomplete or changed
so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee
shall be charged at the rate shown in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees &
Charges).
4-1.3. When submittal documents for similar plans are
approved, plan review fees shall not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the normal building permit fee established and charged for
the same structure.
SECTION 5. BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
5-1. Each applicant for a building permit must satisfy the Inspector
that the property to be occupied by said building shall have access to a
public street or way, or to a private way protected by a permanent easement
which shall be of width and construction suitable to traffic requirements of
the neighborhood in which the property is located. This shall not be
construed to include alleys or service ways. Where a private easement is to
be used, it shall require special permission by the governing body (see
definition of public street).
32
5-1.1. In residential areas the dwelling unit will be the first building
erected on the lot. No other building may be erected previous to the
construction of the dwelling unit.
5-1.2. No garage or accessory structure shall be constructed on any
residential lot which is greater in height than the principal structure.
5-2. After a building permit has been applied for and previous to the
issuance of said permit, the Inspector shall thoroughly investigate the
existing drainage features of the property to be used. This investigation
shall include an actual inspection of the property, if necessary.
5-3. No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building in
which such construction or necessary grading incidental to such
construction shall obstruct any natural drainage waterway.
5-4. No permit shall be issued in any case where the relative
elevations of the proposed building grade and the established road grade
shall conflict in such a manner as to cause damage through drainage
conditions.
5-5. No permit shall be issued for the construction of a building upon
ground which cannot be properly drained.
5-6. Where application is made for a building permit and subsequent
investigation shows that the property to be occupied by said building is
adjacent to a portion of a public road or street containing a drainage culvert,
catch basin, sewer, special ditch or any other artificial drainage structure
used for the purpose of drainage said property and/or neighboring property,
the applicant shall specifically agree in writing to protect these waterways in
such a way that they shall not be affected by the proposed building
construction or grading work incidental thereto.
5-7. No permit shall be issued for the construction of more than one
(1) private garage for each dwelling. Each applicant for a building permit to
construct any dwelling shall be required to provide off-street parking space
as provided by Ordinance No. 35.
5-8. Location of building corners relative to property lines shall
conform with the rules and regulations covering setbacks and side yards as
set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. Setbacks for buildings shall be measured
from the property line to the outside edge of the building foundation.
Eave projections may extend a maximum of one foot beyond the
building foundation towards the property line when the foundation is
constructed up to the minimum setback requirements.
33
5-9. No building shall hereafter be placed upon a single lot so that
there shall be a dwelling housed in the rear of another house with the same
frontage except by special permission by the governing body.
The Building Inspector, at all times, when issuing building permits,
shall cause the building to be placed in a manner that will conform to the
general building line in said area. When there is a question as to the
building line, the governing body shall be informed, and they shall instruct
the Building Inspector as to the location of said building.
5-10. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 5-
29.C.
5-11. Repealed.
5-12. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 5-
29.D.
5-13. Should the owner or agent of any property upon which a trailer
is located receive rent or payment for such use, the property shall at once,
be considered as a trailer camp and such property shall have to comply with
the Zoning Ordinance and the provisions of this code relative to trailer
camps.
5-14. The removal of wheels from any trailers, or the remodeling of a
trailer through the construction of a foundation or the enclosure of the space
between the base of the trailer and the ground, or through the construction
of additions to provide extra floor space will not be considered as
conforming with this code in any respect and will, therefore, be prohibited.
5-15. The placing of old railroad coaches, street cars, buses, etc., on
any property in the municipality, improved or unimproved will not be
permitted.
Repealed in part by Ordinance No. 34, Subdivision 4-2.
5-16. Repealed by Ordinance No. 35, Subdivision 6-5.1.
5-17. Repealed by Ordinance No. 35, Subdivision 6-5.2.
5-18. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 6-
12a.
5-19. FENCES. Fences, when constructed to enclose or screen any
lot or tract of land or part thereof, shall be erected in such a manner as to be
34
in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and to resist the forces
of wind. Posts, footings and structural framework of all fences shall be so
constructed and maintained as not to create any hazards to life or limb.
Posts and framework shall be placed within the property line of the owner;
and the actual fencing materials such as wire, lumber, pickets, etc., shall be
placed on the side of the fence which faces the street or the adjacent
property. The property marker must be visible before constructing the
fence. Fences constructed in the Township shall require a building permit.
5-19.A. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct or
erect, or cause to be constructed or erected, in the Town of White
Bear, any fence exceeding six (6) feet in height above the sidewalk
or surface of any lot or parcel of ground except by obtaining a permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer after approval of the Town Board.
5-19.B. In “R-1” Suburban Residential and “R-2” Urban Residential
districts as defined in Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning Ordinance), no
fence shall be erected in excess of four (4) feet high from the front
building line to the front lot line, nor on the front of the property. The
fence shall not block roadway intersection sight lines.
5-19.B.1. For corner lots, a fence may exceed 4’ in height but
no greater than 6’ in height within a front yard which
qualifies as an equivalent side yard provided that a fence
exceeding 4’ in height does not extend beyond the front of the
house. A fence exceeding 4’ in height is allowed to
encroach into the front setback area on the rear of the
property. Any fence exceeding 4’ in height must be set back
no less than 12’ from the back of a curb or the pavement if no
curb exists.
5-19.C. Except for lands used for agricultural purposes, no barbed
wire fence or portion thereof is to be erected within the Town of
White Bear unless it complies with the following conditions:
5-19.C.1. No fence using wire with barbs or spikes may be
erected in “R-1” Suburban Residential or “R-2” Urban
Residential districts (except lands used for agricultural
purposes.
5-19.C.2. Barbed wire, not exceeding three (3) strands, may
be permitted on the top of the fence, (except in “R-1” and “R-
2” districts) provided that the arms or the front of the fence
projects backwards or towards private property and not over
public property. The minimum height to the bottom strand of
the wire shall be not less than six (6) feet.
35
5-19.C.3. Application for a permit for a barbed wire fence or
portion of the fence shall be filed with the Code Enforcement
Officer who shall forward the application to the Town Board,
together with his recommendations, for review and approval,
and approval of the Town Board shall be required before a
permit is granted and construction is permitted.
5-19.D. The Town shall have authority to extend fences on public
lakeshore property to the water’s edge and shall be responsible for
all maintenance of said fences.
5-19.E. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct or
erect erosion control or so called silt fence except for erosion or
sediment control purposes. Such silt fence shall not be used to
enclose or screen any tract of land except as permitted in Section 5-
36 herein. Silt fencing used for erosion and sediment control shall be
removed when the vegetation has established itself or in a timely
manner as directed by the Town.
5-19.F. When property on Portland Avenue, Otter Lake Road,
County Road J or I-35E, is a double fronting lot, meaning that it has a
residential street on the front of its lot and Portland Avenue, Otter
Lake Road, County Road J or I-35E on the back of its lot, a fence not
to exceed six (6) feet in height may be erected by the property owner
on the back and sides of the property’s lot. The fence shall not block
roadway intersection sight lines, as reviewed and determined by the
Town Board.
5-20. Repealed by Ordinance No. 35, Subdivision 6-5.
5-21. Repealed by Ordinance No. 35, Subdivision 6-5.3.
5-22. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 6-
12B.
5-23. Repealed by Ordinance No. 35, Subdivision 7-5.
5-24. It is not the purpose of this portion of the Building Code to
discourage the design of future subdivisions to take advantage of new ideas
nor is it the purpose of this code to prevent the placing of building corners in
their relationship with the property lines in any other manner than that which
is specifically stated herein. The Town Board shall permit the development
of any area in such a way as to comply with any agreements made between
the Town Board and the developer at the time that a new plat is approved
and recorded.
36
5-25. Within 6 months after the application by a property owner, the
Town Board may vary any provision of this Code in harmony with its general
purpose and intent, where there are practical difficulties or peculiar
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this
Ordinance so that the public health, safety and general welfare may be
secured and substantial justice done. If not done within such 6 month
period the application shall be null and void.
5-26. When new buildings are constructed on property which can be
served by either a sanitary sewer, public water supply or both, the applicant
for such building permit shall be required to agree to connect his building to
these utilities. In these cases, no permit for a well or private disposal
system shall be issued.
5-27. The Building Inspector shall review all building permit
applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed
new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and
mobile homes) must: (a) be designed (or modified) and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure, (b) use
construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood
damage, and (c) use construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage.
5-28. The Building Inspector shall require new or replacement water
supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the system into flood waters and require on-site waste disposal systems to
be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them
during flooding.
5-29. GARAGES – ATTACHED OR DETACHED – AND
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. Every single family dwelling shall be permitted
to have one (1) garage, attached or detached, and one (1) accessory
building auxiliary to the single family dwelling. The combined area of any
garage attached or detached and accessory building shall not exceed 10%
of the total square footage of the lot not to exceed a total combined area of
2,000 square feet. No permit shall be granted where the remaining lot, yard
and density are less than the minimum percent of the green area provided
in Ordinance No. 35. In no event shall an individual building exceed one
thousand (1,000) square feet in area unless approved by the Town Board in
accordance with Sections 5-29.A. and B. Play houses and gazebo’s are not
included within the term “accessory building”. All accessory buildings shall
be so located on property as to conform to the minimum set back
37
requirements of Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning Ordinance) and shall be located
behind the single family dwelling.
A. No building permit shall be obtained for an individual garage,
attached or detached, or an individual accessory building in excess
of one thousand (1,000) square feet in area, except on property
having a minimum area of 22,000 square feet.
B. A permit for an individual garage exceeding 1,000 square feet in
area, but no larger than 2,500 attached or detached, or an individual
accessory building shall be obtained from the Town Board after
review and recommendation by the Town Planning Commission.
Such permit may be applied for where the property is in agricultural
use or abuts agricultural zoning, or is adjacent to designated Open
Space or Conservation Wetlands zoning districts. No permit shall be
granted where the remaining lot, yard and density are less than the
minimum percent of Green Area provided in Ordinance No. 35
(Zoning Ordinance).
C. Garages shall be so located on the property as to conform with
the side yard specifications of the Zoning Ordinance, in the particular
classification for which the property is zoned.
D. No detached private garage shall be located no closer to any
dwelling on the adjoining property than twenty (20) feet unless the
owner of such dwelling agrees in writing to allow said garage to be
erected closer.
E. Garages or other small buildings or frame construction used as
accessory buildings may be constructed on a concrete slab without
footing. Slabs upon which such buildings are to be built shall
conform with the requirements of paragraph 5-29H.
F. A garage not exceeding the area provided in paragraph 5-29 may
be attached to or form a part of a residence building or business
building if separated from other occupancies by walls, partitions and
ceilings of materials to restrict passage of gases, smoke and odor
from the garage to other parts of the building.
G. Any accessory building such as a garage, utility, etc., connected,
attached or situated in such a way on the property as to make future
attachment possible, shall require footing of the same depth and
bearing as the building to which they are or may be attached.
H. Garage, terrace, porch and dwelling floors, where of concrete
construction, without footing, shall have a minimum thickness of four
38
(4) inches. These slabs shall be laid on a bed of gravel, cinders or
other approved material not less than four (4) inches thick. The bed
may be omitted if slab is properly reinforced.
I. Warm air ducts shall not be installed for the purpose of heating
attached private garages from any forced air system serving
habitable areas.
J. Concrete slabs used in driveways shall conform with the
provisions of paragraph 6-9.
K. An expansion joint shall be provided between driveway slab and
concrete apron at garage door and in each driveway at intervals of
not more than thirty (30) feet.
5-29. L. In all residential zoning districts, one driveway access shall
be permitted per property. A permit for an additional driveway
access to a pubic right-of-way may be obtained from the Town after
review. The Town shall consider, as part of its review, the following:
1. Denial of an additional driveway permit which would cause
undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the
individual property.
2. Granting the additional driveway only after it is demonstrated
that such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of
the Ordinance.
3. Undue hardship means the property in question cannot be put
to a reasonable use if used under conditions allowed by the
official controls, the plight of the property owner is due to
circumstances unique to the property and not created by the
property owner, and the additional driveway would not alter
the essential character of the locality.
4. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute an undue
hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under the
terms of the Ordinance.
5. That the property owner provide an engineering/traffic study
acceptable to the Town to demonstrate support that there is
no issue of pubic health, safety or welfare with the granting of
an additional driveway.
5-30. Fish houses shall be considered by definition to be accessory
structures. The architectural style and facing materials of fish houses shall
39
be compatible with the principal structure upon the property of which they
are stored. All fish houses shall be stored so as to meet setback
requirements to property lines as set forth in Ordinance No. 35, Section 7-9
for accessory structures.
5-31. The construction of “tree houses” or elevated play houses is
prohibited on public property.
5-32. On all lots abutting on a freeway right-of-way there shall be
constructed a noise barrier pursuant to specifications set forth by the Town
Board and/or the Town Engineer and/or the Town Code Enforcement
Officer in accordance with standards set out by Town Board resolutions.
Building permits shall not be issued until provision is made for the
construction of an approved barrier, and a Zoning Certificate (Certificate of
Occupancy) shall not be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer until
construction of an approved barrier is completed.
5-33. BUILDING ELEVATION CONTROL. The first floor (entrance
grade) elevation of any structure shall not be less than 1 and ½ feet above
the centerline elevation of the approved street grade along the frontage of
the building site. The finish ground line at the structure shall not exceed 8
feet above the centerline elevation of the approved street grade adjacent to
the building site, said building grade to be at the required front yard setback
to the structure. The finished basement floor shall be set a minimum of
three (3) feet above established water table or critical storm event,
whichever is higher.
5-34. POLE BUILDINGS/POST FRAME CONSTRUCTION. The
construction of pole barns/buildings is prohibited in the Town.
5-34.1. Post frame construction shall be allowed subject to the
following requirements:
A. No use of wrinkle or corrugated metal on roof or sides of
building.
B. Standing seem roofs and vertical steel ribbed siding is
permitted.
C. Building exterior color and material shall be approved by the
Town Board.
D. Shall be allowed on agriculturally used property or on property
which abuts agricultural zoned property in a surrounding
community.
40
E. Building must have finished soffit and fascia with minimum 2’
overhangs.
F. Building must have overhead doors (no sliding doors).
G. Building must have a concrete floor.
H. All subsurface building components shall be reinforced
concrete or other permanent material – not wood.
5-35. DOCKS.
A. No dock, lift or the boat it serves may be located any closer than
ten (10) feet from the site side property line.
B. No dock shall be so located as to: (1) obstruct reasonable use or
access to any other dock, or (2) present a potential safety hazard.
No dock shall be located or designed so that it unreasonably or
unnecessarily requires or tends to encourage using it to encroach
upon any other authorized dock use area.
C. NON-CONFORMING USES. From and after the effective date of
this Ordinance amendment, docks and other structures in the lake
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance
amendment and any of the same which are not in conformance shall
be regarded as non-conforming. All non-conforming uses shall be
terminated no later than 1 year after the effective date of this
Ordinance amendment.
5-36. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
SECTION A. PURPOSE. In response to the Metropolitan Water
Management Act and the Town Water Management Plan and the
need for erosions and sediment control for land development, the
purpose of this ordinance is to control or eliminate erosion and
sedimentation within the Town of White Bear. It is designed to
preserve land value throughout the Town of White Bear; to prevent
the pollution of streams, lakes, wetlands, and other watercourses by
sediment and related construction materials, to establish design
standards and specifications for practices and planning activities
which prevent soil erosion and sedimentation; to preserve and
enhance the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community; and to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Town of
White Bear.
41
SECTION B. SCOPE. Except as exempted by Section 6, any
person, firm, corporation or business proposing land disturbance
activity within the Town of White Bear shall apply to the Town for the
approval of the erosion and sediment control plan. No land shall be
developed until the plan is approved by the Town and conforms to
the standards set forth herein.
1. Erosion and Sediment Practice Specifications or
Practice. “Erosion and Sediment Practice Specifications” or
“Practice” means the management procedures, techniques,
and methods to control soil erosion and sedimentation as
officially adopted by the district.
2. Developer. “Developer” means a person, partnership or
corporation engaged in a land disturbance activity.
3. District. “District” means the Ramsey Soil and Water
Conservation District organized and operated under
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 40.
4. Erosion. “Erosion” means any process that wears away
the surface of the land by the action of water, wind, ice, or
gravity. “Erosion” can be accelerated by the activities of man
and nature.
5. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. “Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan” means a document containing the
requirements of Section C that when implemented will
decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land.
6. Land Disturbance Activity. “Land Disturbance Activity”
means land change that may result in soil erosion from water
or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or
lands of Ramsey County, including clearing, grading,
excavating, transporting and filling of land. “Land Disturbance
Activity” does not mean:
(a). Minor land disturbance activities such as home
gardens and individuals home landscaping, repairs and
maintenance work;
(b). Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included
in an overall plan for a land disturbance activity relating
to construction of a building to be served by a septic
tank system;
42
(c). Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural,
horticultural, or silvicultural crops;
(d). Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric
poles and other kinds of posts or poles; and
(e). Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property
and emergency repairs, except if the land disturbing
activity would have required an approved erosion and
sediment control plan except for the emergency, then
the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized
in accordance with the requirement of the local planapproving
authority or the district when applicable.
7. Community Stormwater Management Design Manual
means a manual which contains the Erosion and Sediment
Control Practice specifications to control soil erosion and
sedimentation. The Community Stormwater Management
Design Manual must be adopted by the Ramsey Soil and
Water Conservation District. The Community Stormwater
Management Design Manual may include but is not limited to:
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service Field Office Technical guide and other recognized
technical procedures adopted by the Ramsey Soil and Water
Conservation District and all requirements of Ordinance No.
87 relating to stormwater management.
8. Sediment. “Sediment” means solid mineral or organic
material, that, in suspension, is being transported, or has been
moved from its original site by air, water, gravity, or ice, and
has been deposited at another location.
9. Sedimentation. “Sedimentation” means the process or
action of depositing sediment, that is determined to have been
caused by erosion.
SECTION C. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A
person engaged in a land disturbance activity must submit an erosion
and sediment control plan that will prevent soil erosion or sediment
from damaging adjacent land, bodies of water, watercourses or
wetlands to the Town for its approval.
1. The erosion and sediment control plan must address the following
criteria:
(a) Stabilization of denuded areas and soil stockpiles;
43
(b) Establishment of permanent vegetation;
(c) Protection of adjacent properties;
(d) Timing and stabilization of sediment trapping
measures;
(e) Use of sediment basins;
(f) Cut and fill slopes;
(g) Stormwater management criteria for controlling off-site
erosion;
(h) Stabilization of waterways and outlet;
(i) Storm sewer inlet protection;
(j) Working in or crossing waterbodies;
(k) Underground utility construction;
(l) Construction access routes;
(m) Disposition of temporary measures; and
(n) Maintenance of practices.
2. PLAN. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include:
(a) Location map with major streets and landmarks;
(b) Project description;
(c) Property boundary and lot lines;
(d) Utility lines;
(e) Existing contours;
(f) Existing drainage flow patterns;
(g) Existing vegetation;
(h) Soils;
(i) Critical erosion areas;
(j) Final contours;
(k) Final drainage flow patterns;
(l) Final vegetation and permanent stabilization;
(m) Location and description of erosion and sediment
control practices;
(n) Location and description of stormwater management
controls; and
(o) Description of the maintenance of erosion and
sediment control practices.
SECTION D. COMMUNITY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
DESIGN MANUAL. The manual shall be the reference for Erosion
and Sediment Control Practice specifications used in the Town of
White Bear.
1. Approval. All erosion and sediment control practice
specifications must be approved and adopted by the District.
44
SECTION E. REVIEW. The Town appoints the Code Enforcement
Officer to review the erosion and sediment control plan. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall review the erosion and sediment control
plan within 7 days of receiving the plans from the developer. The
Town shall notify the developer of its decision after receipt of
comments from the appointed reviewer and no more than 30 days
after receiving the plans from the developer.
1. Permit Required. If the appointed reviewer determines that the
erosion and sediment control plan meets the requirements of this
ordinance, the Town shall issue a permit that authorizes the land
disturbance activity contingent upon the implementation and
completion of the erosion and sediment control plan.
2. Denial. If the appointed reviewer determines that the erosion and
sediment control plan does not meet the requirements of this
ordinance, the Town shall not issue a permit for the land disturbance
activity. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be re-submitted
for approval before the land disturbance activity begins. All land use
and building permit shall be suspended until the developer has an
approved erosion and sediment control plan.
SECTION F. MODIFICATION OF PLAN. An approved erosion and
sediment control plan may be modified upon submission of an
application for modification to the Town and subsequent approval by
the Town. In reviewing such application, the Town may require
additional reports and data.
SECTION G. BOND REQUIREMENT. Upon approval of an erosion
and sediment control plan, the Town may require the developer to
post a performance bond, cash or certified check to insure
completion of the erosion and sediment control plan.
5-37. REGULATIONS FOR RECONSTRUCTION OF DAMAGED
NON- CONFORMING STRUCTURES. Whenever a lawful non-conforming
structure is damaged by fire, flood, explosion or other casualty, such
structure may be repaired if damage to the building is 50% or less of its fair
market value. If the damage is greater than 50% of the structures fair
market value, Town Board approval shall be required to reconstruct or
repair the non-conforming structure. Repair or reconstruction of the nonconforming
structure as it was existing prior to the casualty may be
approved by the Town Board if requested within six (6) months of the
casualty. Any non-conforming structure with damage exceeding 50% of its
fair market value not approved for reconstruction/repair by the Town Board
shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements established in
Table 7-1 of Ordinance No. 35.
45
SECTION 6. STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
6-1. The workmanship in the fabrication, preparation and installation
of materials shall conform to generally accepted good practice. Specific
provisions of this part of this code shall not be deemed to suspend any
requirements of good practice, but shall be regarded as supplementing or
emphasizing them, and shall be controlling. The governing body of the
municipality shall, as may be necessary, promulgate rules in accordance
with the provisions of this code, embodying the requirements of such
generally accepted good practice.
6-2. Every dwelling house hereafter erected shall have at least three
habitable rooms and shall have an area of not less than 900 square feet,
and dwellings having two full stories shall also contain a first floor area of
not less than 672 square feet, except townhouses shall have a total square
footage of not less than 1,000 square feet for one or two bedroom units and
an additional 200 square feet per bedroom in excess of two bedrooms. No
room except bath, shall be less than 7 feet wide. No habitable room, except
kitchen, shall have a floor area of less than 90 square feet. House trailers,
basements or any other structure not conforming with the foregoing
requirements shall not be used for a permanent dwelling place and shall not
be used for a temporary dwelling place unless allowed by a special permit
as elsewhere provided for in this Ordinance.
6-2.a. Every rental unit designed exclusively for senior citizens aged
62 or older, hereafter erected, shall have at least three habitable
rooms and shall have an area of not less than 725 square feet. No
room except bath, shall be less than 7 feet wide. No habitable room,
except the kitchen, shall have a flood area of less than 90 square
feet.
6-3. Any owner or builder shall have the right of appeal to the
governing body of the municipality relative to any decision made by any
Inspector. All such appeals to the governing body shall be made in writing
and addressed to the Clerk of the municipality.
6-4. Until provision for permanent support has been made,
excavations shall be properly guarded and protected to prevent the same
from becoming dangerous to life or limb, and, where necessary, shall be
sheet-piled or braced to prevent the adjoining earth from caving in, by the
person causing the excavation to be made.
6-5. The person causing any excavation to be made shall prevent
the movement of earth in the adjoining property and the trees and natural
46
objects thereon or therein and maintain or restore all public sidewalks,
curbs, pavements and the property of public utilities located within the street
line, which may be affected by the excavation. This shall include any
damage which might be caused to the surface of the public street as a
result of the loading or unloading of machinery to be used in connection with
the excavation for or the construction of a building, the movement of such
machinery on the said surface of the street or the improper use of the edges
of the driving surface of the street and the boulevards adjacent thereto in
the delivery of building materials.
6-6. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 6-
15.a.
6-7. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 5-
29.e.
6-8. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 5-
29.G.
6-9. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 5-
29.H.
6-10. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 5-
29.I.
6-11. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 5-
29.J.
CONCRETE
6-12. Concrete shall be poured in a continuous manner wherever
possible. Before new concrete is deposited on or against concrete which
has set, the form shall be retightened, the surface of the set concrete shall
be thoroughly cleaned and wetted but not saturated. The surface of the
hardened concrete shall be sloshed with a coating of neat cement grout
against which the new concrete shall be placed before the grout has
obtained its set.
6-12.a. Previous to the placing of any surfacing material of a
permanent or semi-permanent nature on that portion of any driveway
lying between the edge of the travel road or street and the property
line of the property being served by said driveway, the owner or
builder shall contact the Building Inspector for a permit, at which time
he shall be advised as to the grade and elevation which can be used
in the construction of the proposed driveway.
47
6-12.b. DRIVEWAYS. When constructed from the public street over
a portion of the lot, driveways in residential areas shall be located to
conform with the side lot requirements of Subdivision 7-1 of
Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning Ordinance). The driveway access
minimum boulevard slope shall not exceed ¼ inch per foot from the
top of curb elevation to the property line and must maintain a
minimum grade of not less than 0.50% or a maximum grade of not
more than 15% from the property line to the building (garage) floor.
When a driveway is to be constructed which will connect to a street
having concrete curb and gutter, an approved curb opening shall be
constructed. The existing concrete curb and gutter shall be removed
in full sections to the nearest joints and a curb opening be
constructed in accordance with the attached standard plate. If a
concrete apron is also to be constructed, it shall be constructed in
accordance with either of the two standard plates for concrete
driveway aprons.
6-13. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-14. Adequate equipment shall be provided for heating the concrete
materials and protecting the concrete during the freezing or near freezing
weather. No frozen materials or materials containing ice shall be used.
6-15. All concrete materials and all reinforcement, forms, filers and
ground with which the concrete is to come in contact, shall be free from
frost.
6-15.a. Foundation walls or other permanent supports shall be
carried not less than three (3) feet, six (6) inches below the grade of
the adjoining ground, except when erected upon hardpan or solid
rock, and they shall rest on solid ground or on leveled rock, or on
piles or other suitable foundation, when solid earth or rock is not
found.
6-16. Whenever the temperature of the surrounding air is below 40
degrees Fahrenheit, all concrete when placed in the forms shall have a
temperature of between 60 degrees and 90 degrees Fahrenheit and shall
be maintained at a temperature of not less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit for
at least seventy-two (72) hours for normal concrete or twenty-four (24)
hours for high, early strength concrete, or for as much more time as is
necessary to insure proper rate of curing of the concrete.
6-17. The housing, covering, or other protection used in connection
with pouring of concrete shall remain in place and intact for at least twentyfour
(24) hours after artificial heating is discontinued.
48
6-18. The use of any chemical for the prevention of the freezing of
concrete or the use of any other material for this purpose shall be in
accordance with the most accepted general practice for the use of such
material.
6-18.a. Conditions on plain and reinforced concrete not specifically
covered by other sections of this code shall be resolved by reference
to the American Concrete Institute Bulletin (ACI 318-51) “Building
Code Requirements for Reinforced Concrete”.
6-19. The footing under a concrete foundation shall be not less than
eight (8) inches thick and twenty (20) inches wide. Concrete footings shall
be poured into wooden or steel forms constructed for the purpose. All
footings shall be continuous.
6-19.a. The footing under a wood foundation shall not be less than
eight (8) by sixteen (16) inches wide.
6-20. Masonry exterior basement walls shall be not less than twelve
(12) inches in thickness.
6-21. All masonry shall be protected against freezing for at least
forty-eight (48) hours after being placed. No frozen materials shall be built
upon.
6-22. Masonry walls that meet or intersect shall be adequately
bonded or anchored.
6-23. Door and window openings in masonry walls shall be spanned
by well buttressed arches or by lintels having bearings proportioned to their
loads but not less than four (4) inches.
6-24. During erection, a masonry wall shall be adequately braced
and arches temporarily supported.
6-25. Repealed.
6-26. Except where a cement slab is used, every building hereafter
erected shall have either a basement or an excavation space under the
entire first floor at least three (3) feet in depth or such building shall be
elevated above the ground so that there shall be a clear air space of at least
two (2) feet between the top of the ground and the bottom of the floor joists.
Such space shall in all cases be enclosed but provided with ample
ventilation and properly drained.
49
6-26.A. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-27. In all cases, where basements are constructed in ground
which contains water, suitable provisions shall be made to properly carry off
the moisture from such soil.
6-28. At least two (2) foundation wall vents, having a total effective
area of one (1) square foot for each fifteen (15) lineal feet of exterior wall,
shall be constructed in each basement less space. Vents shall be covered
with 1/8 inch mesh non-corrodible screening. This venting shall not be
required when basement less space is open to a ventilated basement.
6-29. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-30. Wood posts in basements shall bear upon a concrete base
which shall extend not less than four (4) inches above the finished floor and
shall rest on a footing. The top of such posts shall be securely fastened to a
girder.
6-31. Repealed.
6-32. Basements in dwelling units and every sleeping room below
the fourth story shall have at last one operable window or door approved for
emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside to
provide a full clear opening without the use of separate tools.
All escape or rescue windows shall have a minimum net clear
openable area of 5.7 square feet. When windows are provided as a means
of escape or rescue they shall have a finished sill height not more than 44
inches above the floor.
6-33. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-34. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8, Subsection 5-
29.E.
6-35. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-36. All chimneys, irrespective of which materials the walls are built,
shall have a flue of not less than eight (8) inches by eight (8) inches. Where
wood is to be used for heating purposes, the flue shall be not less than eight
(8) inches by ten (10) inches. All flues to be set with acid resistant mortar.
6-37. Solid brick or concrete chimneys shall not be less than four (4)
inches thick exclusive of flue lining. A standard size brick laid horizontally
shall be deemed to fulfill this requirement for brick chimneys.
50
6-38. Hollow tile chimneys shall have a minimum thickness of eight
(8) inches.
6-39. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-40. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-41. Chimneys shall be properly cast with brick, terra cotta, stone,
cast iron, concrete or other approved non-combustible weather proofed
material.
6-42. Chimneys shall be wholly supported on masonry or self
supporting fire proof construction.
6-43. Foundations of an exterior chimney shall start below the frost
line.
6-44. No chimney shall be corbelled from a wall more than six (6)
inches; nor shall a chimney be corbelled from a wall which is less than
twelve (12) inches in thickness unless it projects equally on each side of the
wall; provided that in the second story of two (2) story dwellings the
corbelling of chimneys on the exterior of the enclosing walls may equal the
wall thickness. In every case, the corbelling shall not exceed one (1) inch
projection for each coarse of brick protected.
6-45. No change in the size or shape of chimney where the chimney
passes through the roof shall be made within a distance of six (6) inches
above or below the roof joist or rafters.
A. All that part of any chimney above the roof line shall be
constructed with pressed brick material. This shall be required regardless
of the type of chimney used inside the building or the particular purpose of
the chimney, except chimneys described in 6-46.
6-46. Fabricated chimneys, designed for particular types and
methods of heating and meeting or exceeding the functional requirements
specifically mentioned in this code, may be approved by the governing body
of the municipality. All such chimneys and material shall be approved by
the National Board of Fire Underwriters. These chimneys, when used, shall
not require brick tops as specified in 6-45.A.
6-46.A. Stainless steel No. 302, Number 26, U.S. Standard Gauge
to eight inches diameter. Number 24, U.S. Standard Gauge over
eight inches diameter is acceptable.
51
6-47. No smoke pipe shall be placed within twelve (12) inches of any
woodwork or wooden lath or plaster partition or ceiling unless the surface
above the plaster be protected by metal lath and plaster of any approved
fire resistant material.
6-48. Repealed.
6-49. No smoke pipe shall pass through any floor or roof having
wooden framework or covering.
6-50. The use of smoke pipe rather than a chimney shall be
prohibited.
6-51. No wooden beams, joists or rafters shall be placed within two
(2) inches of the outside face of a chimney whether it be for smoke, air or
any other purpose.
6-52. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-53. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-54. Wooden forms or centers used in the construction of that part
of the supporting construction which is below the hearth of the fireplace
shall be removed when the supporting construction of the hearth is
completed.
6-55. No heater shall be placed in a fireplace which does not
conform to the requirements of this section or is not provided with a flue,
except electric or gas heaters of a type specifically approved for such
installation.
6-56. Ends of all wood joists and girders embedded in masonry walls
shall be fire cut.
6-57. No floor hereafter erected in a residence building shall be
designed for less than forty pounds per square foot of area live load
uniformly distributed. Public rooms and corridors in a resident building shall
be designed for not less than 80 pounds per square foot live load.
A. Every building and structure shall be designed and erected of
sufficient strength in all its parts to sustain safely all live loads
depending thereon, whether permanent or temporary, in addition to
the death load.
B. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
52
6-58. All floor joists shall be provided with well nailed cross bridging
and the distance between each row of cross bridging shall not exceed eight
(8) feet.
6-59. STRUCTURAL FLOOR SHEATING. Structural floor sheating
shall be designed in accordance with the uniform building codes and the
special provisions in this subsection. A sheating used as sub flooring shall
be designed to support all loads specified in this code and shall be capable
of supporting concentrated loads of not less than 300 pounds without
failure. The concentrated load shall be applied by a loaded disk of 7 square
inches.
6-60. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-61. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-62. Bearing and exterior wall studs shall be capped with double
top plates installed to provide overlapping at corners and at intersections
with other partitions. End joints in double top plates shall be off set at least
48 inches.
6-63. WALL FRAMING. Wood stud walls and bearing partitions
shall not support more than two floors and a roof unless an analysis
satisfactory to the building official shows that shrinkage of the wood framing
will not have adverse effects upon the structure nor any plumbing, electrical,
mechanical systems nor other equipment installed therein due to excessive
shrinkage or differential movements caused by shrinkage. The analysis
also shows that the roof drainage system and the foregoing systems or
equipment will not be adversely affected or, as an alternative, such systems
shall be designed to accommodate the differential shrinkage or movements.
6-64. At least one doorway serving as an exit shall have a width of
thirty –two (32) inches. Revolving, sliding, and overhead doors shall not be
used as required exits.
6-65. No stairway serving as an exit shall have a width less than
thirty-six (36) inches.
6-66. At least two (2) exits shall be provided for each floor of any
building which is to be used as a multiple dwelling. These exits shall be
placed as far apart as possible.
6-67. Repealed.
6-68. Repealed.
53
6-69. Repealed.
6-70. Stucco shall be held above ground surfaces and flashing
carried over openings, to prevent moisture from penetrating behind the
stucco.
6-71. Stucco shall consist of Portland Cement mortar or other
approved mortar, and approved metal lath, concrete masonry, brick work or
other approved backing.
6-72. Nothing in this code relative to stucco or plaster shall preclude
the use of other materials and constructions meeting the same or equivalent
fire resistance rating.
6-73. The total glass area of required windows in any habitable room
shall not be less than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the room.
6-74. One-half (1/2) of this area of windows opening upon an open
porch may be used in computing the required glass in the room in which
they occur.
6-75. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-76. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-77. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-78. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-79. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-80. Composition shingles or ready roofing on dwellings and
commercial buildings shall be laid in such a way that there will not be less
than two (2) thickness’ at any point.
A. Where old roofs are removed, the debris shall be removed from
the premises promptly. When new roofing is being placed, the
wrappings, binding, etc., shall be carefully kept in one place and this
waste shall be permanently disposed of after each day’s work.
Failure to comply with this requirement shall be considered a
violation of this building code.
6-81. STRUCTURAL ROOF SHEATING. Structural roof sheating
shall be designed to support all loads specified in this code and shall be
capable of supporting concentrated loads of not less than 300 pounds
54
without failure. The concentrated load shall be applied by a loaded disk of 7
square inches.
6-82. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-83. Repealed.
6-84. Repealed.
6-84.a. Repealed.
6-84.b. Sheating shall be required on all exterior walls and shall be a
minimum of one-half (1/2) inch thick.
6-85. All concrete steps and attached porches shall be constructed
on approved footings.
6-86. The use of precast steps shall be prohibited unless they are
guaranteed by the manufacturer for a period of five (5) years against
deterioration or disintegration.
6-87. The following materials shall be considered as approved
materials to be used for the outside covering of any building: wood siding,
shakes or shingles, stucco, brick, stone, concrete block or exterior plywood.
The use of any other material shall require special permission of the
governing body.
6-88. It shall be required that the area surrounding any newly
constructed or newly placed building be cleaned up and that all debris shall
be completely removed from the premises.
6-89. No buildings shall be constructed upon frozen ground.
6-90. No building shall be constructed upon filled ground until the fill
has compacted sufficiently to support the contemplated load. The Building
Inspector may call upon the applicant for any permit to furnish a report from
a recognized engineering firm or laboratory in deciding whether or not any
fill is compacted sufficiently.
6-91. The construction of all public buildings such as schools,
theaters, libraries, churches, etc. shall conform with the provisions of the
Uniform Building Code as revised and also with State laws as they may
apply.
6-92. The construction of all business or industrial buildings shall
conform with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code as revised and
also the State laws as they may apply.
55
A. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
6-93. Repealed.
A. Repealed by Ordinance No. 33, Subdivision 5-16.
B. Repealed by Ordinance No. 33, Sections 4 and 10.
6-94. Repealed by Ordinance No. 33, Section 10.
6-95. Repealed by Ordinance No. 33, Sections 4 and 10.
PLUMBING AND WATER SUPPLY
6-96. Repealed by Ordinance No. 33, Section 10.
6-97. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-98. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-99. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-100. The construction or placing of outside toilets shall be
permitted only through special action by the Plumbing Inspector and such
special permission when given shall be for a limited length of time.
6-101. Every fixture trap shall be protected against siphonage and
back pressure, and air circulation assured by means of a soil or waste stack
vent, a continuous waste or soil vent, or a loop or circuit vent. No crown
vent shall be installed. The placing of a waste above the top fixture on a
soil or waste stack shall be prohibited unless the placing of such waste
below said fixture is not feasible in the opinion of the Plumbing Inspector.
6-102. The soil or vent pipe leading to an efector or other appliance
for raising sewage or other waste matter to the outlet sewer shall, where a
water closet or closets are installed, be provided with a vent pipe not less
than two (2) inches in diameter, and where fixtures other than water closets
are installed, the waste vent pipe shall be the same diameter as the waste
of the fixture it serves and in no case less than one and one-half (1 ½)
inches.
A. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
56
B. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-104. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-104.A. Water Conditioning Contractors and Installers. Any
person who installs or services water conditioning equipment must be first
certified by the State of Minnesota Health Department.
SEPTIC
6-105. All septic tanks shall be designed to provide adequate
volume for settling, for sludge and scum storage. The design shall also
provide for access for cleaning.
6-106. All septic tanks shall be placed not less than ten (10) feet
from the property line of adjoining private property. These tanks shall be
not less than fifty (50) feet from any source of domestic water supply. The
tank shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from the foundation of any
building.
6-107. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-108. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-109. The sewer line between the building and the disposal tank
shall have water tight joints. This sewer pipe shall have a gradient of not
less than one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot of pipe except by special permission
of the Inspector.
6-110. Inlet and outlet connections of the tank and of each
compartment thereof shall be submerged and baffled so as to obtain
effective retention of scum and sludge. Scum storage volume (space
between the liquid surface and the top of the inlet and outlet devices) shall
be not less than fourteen (14) percent of the total required liquid capacity.
The tank shall be constructed in such a manner as to assure its
being water tight to prevent the entrance of rain water, drainage or ground
water. It shall be constructed of sound and durable material not to
excessive corrosion or decay. Access to each compartment of the tank for
inspection and sludge removal shall be provided. Each inspection opening
shall be provided with a removable cover. The inlet and outlet devices shall
be made accessible by a removable cover. Each tank shall be provided
with a four (4) inch standpipe, the top of which shall be level with the ground
or slightly above the ground and securely plugged.
57
6-111. The inlet baffle or submerged pipe shall extend approximately
six (6) inches below the liquid surface. It shall also extend above the liquid
surface at least to the crown of the inlet sewer.
The outlet baffle or submerged pipe and the baffles or submerged
pipes between compartments shall extend below the liquid depth. These
baffles shall also extend above the liquid level to provide for scum storage;
they shall be not less than six (6) inches above the liquid level nor less than
six (6) inches below the inlet baffle. Each baffle shall have a clearance
between baffle and inside edge of tank of not less than seven (7) inches.
6-112. These shall be at least two (2) inches between the under side
of the tank top and the top of inlet and outlet pipes or baffles and partitions
to provide the required ventilation of the tank and disposal field or seepage
pits through the main building stack.
6-113. Metal septic tanks must comply with the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency Individual Sewage Treatment System Chapter 7080.
6-114. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-115. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-116. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-117. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-118. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-119. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-120. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-121. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-122. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 6-122A.
6-122.A. ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA POLLUTION CONTROL
AGENCY CHAPTER 7080 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM
CHAPTER 7080. That certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the Town Clerk of the Town of White Bear, being marked and
described as Minnesota Pollution Control Agency 6, Chapter 7080
Individual Sewage Treatment System Standards 7080 adopted in 1987 by
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency is hereby incorporated by reference
and each and all of the standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
6, Chapter 7080 Individual Sewage Treatment System Standards Chapter
58
7080 on file in the office of the Town Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance.
WELL DRILLING.
6-123. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-124. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-125. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-126. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-127. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-128. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-129. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-130. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-131. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-132. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-133. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-134. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-134A. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
GAS APPLIANCES
6-135. The installation and maintenance of appliances or devices
operated by means of natural, manufactured or liquid petroleum gas shall
require a permit as described elsewhere in this code. This work shall be
subject to inspection by the Heating Inspector or his representative.
6-136. Every installation of gas appliances shall be in strict
accordance with the portions of this code dealing with gas. Every appliance
shall be installed for use in accordance with the recommendations of its
manufacturer.
59
6-137. Immediately after the installation of any appliance or device
to be operated by gas, the installer shall notify the Heating Inspector of the
municipality who shall inspect the installation within forty-eight (48) hours of
the time that such notice is given.
6-138. When the Inspector is satisfied that the installation of gas
appliances or devices is correct and proper and in accordance with the code
of the municipality, he shall issue a certificate of inspection authorizing the
gas to be turned on for such appliances.
6-139. All gas piping shall be inspected before concealment and the
person, firm or corporation installing such piping shall notify the Inspector at
least forty-eight (48) hours before they expect to cover said pipe.
6-140. No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the work is
done in strict conformity with the provisions of this code, the statutes of the
State of Minnesota and the rules and regulations of the State Fire Marshall.
HEATING (Other Than Gas)
6-141. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-142. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-143. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-144. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-145. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
GAS BURNERS AND GAS BURNER EQUIPMENT
400,000 BTU PER HOUR OR LESS
6-146. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or agent
to install any gas burner as defined within this Ordinance until such gas
burner has been approved by the Heating Inspector of the municipality. The
minimum requirements for approval by the Heating Inspector shall be
approval or listing by the American Standards Association, sponsored by
the American Gas Association in compliance with the requirements of this
code.
60
6-147. Nothing in this code shall be construed to limit the right of the
gas utility and its authorized employees to render necessary service in the
event of an emergency.
6-148. No permit shall be issued and no used gas burner shall be
installed until the licensed installer shall have first submitted with his
application for permit, a copy of the purchase order stating that a used
burner is to be installed and bearing an acknowledgment by the purchaser
that such is the case together with a statement by the licensed installer that
said burner has been reconditioned and will comply in every way with the
requirements of this code for new equipment as to operation, safety
standards and adjustments. No used gas burner shall be installed unless it
is of a type, make and model currently approved for installation in the
municipality.
6-149. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-150. Gas burners or gas burner appliances as herein before
defined shall not be installed for operation in a room where the normal
facilities for ventilation do not permit proper combustion of the gas, unless
special provision is made for supplying sufficient air for complete
combustion.
6-151. The installation of conversion burners shall be made in
conformance with the American Standards Association requirements, as
sponsored by the American Gas Association and with requirements herein
set forth.
6-152. Before a gas burner is installed in any existing boiler or
furnace all flues, fire-pots, combustion and chambers and connecting joints
through which flue gases are conducted shall be thoroughly cleaned,
examined for leaks and draft conditions and made gas tight as shown by a
smoke bomb test or equivalent.
6-153. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-154. Each burning appliance shall be equipped with a draft hood
or its equivalent designed to:
1. Insure the ready escape of the products of combustion in the
event of no draft, back draft or stoppage beyond the
appliance.
2. Prevent a back draft from entering the appliance.
3. Neutralize the effect of stack action of the flue upon the
operation of the appliance. The draft hood shall be placed in
and made a part of the flue pipe from the appliance or shall be
61
in the appliance itself. Such device shall have a free area
equal to or greater than the cross-section area of the flue pipe
connected thereto subject to the approval of the Heating
Inspector.
6-155. The draft hood shall be located at a point not lower than the
top of the highest flue passage in the appliance.
6-156. Appliances of the revertible flue type shall have the draft
hood located at least one foot higher than the top of the highest flue
passage. Proper provision shall be made subject to the approval of the
Heating Inspector, to prevent the accumulation of gas in any part thereof.
6-157. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-158. The draft hood should ordinarily be located adjacent to the
appliance. In cases were it appears desirable to place the draft hood at a
distance from the appliance, the size of the restricted section may be
modified according to the length and rise of the flue pipe.
6-159. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-160. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-161. Material used for flue pipe shall be such as to resist the
corrosive action of flue gases.
6-162. Flue pipe of existing systems shall be relocated where
necessary and new flue pipe installations shall be so made as to avoid
sharp turns or other construction features which would create excessive
resistance to the flow of flue gases. Flue pipes shall slope upward to
chimney.
6-163. Flue pipe shall be tightly connected to the chimney liner, so
as to prevent infiltration of cold air.
6-164. No baffles shall be applied which will interfere with the proper
combustion of the gas.
6-165. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-166. All space heating equipment shall be of the vented type and
properly vented to an effective flue.
62
6-167. Radiant heaters or other unvented heaters of less than
25,000 BTU input may be installed in fireplaces providing the chimney has a
positive draft with the damper closed.
6-168. Gas burners of all types shall consist of assembled and
tested units and shall be accompanied by complete and comprehensive
installation and operation instructions. The burner or burners shall be
located according to the manufacturers’ instructions and shall be so secured
that they will not twist, slide or drop out of position.
6-169. The burners shall be so installed as to be readily accessible
for cleaning and inspection.
6-170. The burner or burners shall be so installed that no part of the
flames impinge on the heating surface so as to cause incomplete
combustion.
6-171. Air shutters shall be adjusted to produce a proper flame at
the prevailing gas pressure.
6-172. On all pre-mix power burners an approved type of check
valve shall be installed in the gas supply line at the appliance to prevent
back flow of air into the gas line.
6-173. When secondary air is necessary, secondary air opening or
openings shall be provided, of sufficient area to supply an adequate amount
of air flow complete combustion under the specified draft conditions and at
the maximum rate of firing.
6-174. Where an automatic secondary air control is provided, the
construction shall be such that, in case the control fairs in any way, either
the gas will be shut off or the secondary air door will remain open.
6-175. The air intake of power burners shall be so located as to
prevent the possibility of accidental closure. The gas and air supply shall be
equipped with controls coordinated to prevent opening of the gas supply
until the air supply is adequate for proper combustion and to shut off the gas
supply in the event of failure of the air supply.
6-176. Each gas burner shall be equipped with a safety device
arranged to prevent the flow of gas through the main burner unless the pilot
flame is burning, to consist of a thermostat pilot or other similar type of
safety device. The operation of this device shall not depend upon the
closing of an electric circuit to shut off the main gas supply. Gas burners
installed under 6-167 are exempt from this provision.
63
6-177. Pilot burners shall be rigidly supported in such a manner that
their position relative to the main burner or burners will be fixed.
6-178. Pilot burner or burners shall be so placed that they can be
safely lighted and they shall be readily accessible or removable.
6-179. Pilot lines shall be connected to vertical main gas supply lines
or to the side or top of horizontal lines ahead of all controls including
pressure regulators and appliance shut-off and shall be provided with a
separate cock. Pilot lines for liquid petroleum gas burners shall be
connected to a 100% shut-off conforming to the provisions of 6-176, so
arranged as to cut off both main gas and pilot gas supply in the event of
pilot flame failure.
6-180. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-181. An annually operated approved shut-off valve or cock shall
be installed at each appliance to shut off the entire gas supply to the
appliance, except the pilot, in case of emergency. For liquid petroleum gas
installations, a manual main shut-off valve shall be provided ahead of all
controls. Such valve or cock shall be so located that it is readily accessible,
at about five feet above the floor, and shall clearly indicate the “on” and “off”
positions, or direction of rotation to open or close. A suitable manual valve
shall be provided for shutting off the main burner gas independently of the
pilot gas. Where a cock is provided, the opening handle shall be securely
attached to the plug in such a manner that it may not be readily removed.
6-182. Electric control valves shall be installed according to the
instructions furnished by the manufacturer. All heating equipment shall be
automatically controlled by thermostat except heaters installed in fireplaces
as provided in 6-167.
6-183. All electrical connections shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of all Building and Electrical Codes relating to the installation
of electric wiring in the municipality.
6-184. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-185. The boiler or furnace shall be equipped with safety devices
arranged to limit high stem pressures or water temperatures, as well as high
air temperature in warm air furnaces, and all such devices shall be subject
to the approval of the Heating Inspector.
6-186. Each gas fired steam boiler shall be equipped with a lowwater
cut-off, approved by the Heating Inspector.
64
6-187. Safety devices operated electrically shall not depend upon
the closing of a circuit to shut off the main gas supply. This requirement
shall not be construed as prohibiting the use of electrical regulating devices,
provided the required safety devices are also installed. Controls shall be so
connected that maximum inherent safety provided by such controls will be
attained.
6-188. Safety shut-off valves if used shall be tested to assure gas
tightness of the seal when in the closed position; the valve assembly shall
be gas tight in all positions. Packing glands shall be designed so that the
valve will not be made inoperative by excessive tightening of the packing
nut.
Either the valve shall incorporate means for requiring a manual
operation for re-opening of the valve after it has closed or the electrical
circuit shall be so arranged as to require a manual operation to re-open the
valve after it has been closed. In no case shall valves be able to be opened
manually until safety pilots are lighted and circuit completed or low-water
cut-off circuit has been completed.
6-189. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-190. Except as exempted in this section, and except on approved
incinerators, masonry chimneys serving gas fired boilers, furnaces, or
heating devices, whether of the gas designed type or fired by gas
conversion burners shall be lines continuously from the thimble to the top
with an approved incombustible, acid and corrosion resisting liner of the
same equivalent internal cross-sectional area as the flue pipe or pipes
extending from the appliance or other appliances to the chimney liner. A
condensation pocket shall be provided at the base of said liner with
provisions for a drip, so arranged that excessive condensation of the flue
products may be disposed of without damage to chimney, foundation, floor
or footings. Such liners shall be constructed of material having a thickness
before coating of not less than No. 22 U.S. Standard Gauge. Where such
liners are constructed of uncoated materials and inherent characteristics of
which show a high degree of resistance to acids and corrosion, a lighter
gauge may be used, subject to the approval of the Heating Inspector. In the
event the chimney flue serving the conversion fired or gas designed
appliance and serves one or more heating appliances other than gas fired,
the above provided liner may be omitted. On larger installations where
burners are in more or less continuous operation, and stack temperatures
are sufficiently high to minimize the possibility of condensation within the
chimney, the chimney liner may be omitted, subject to the approval of the
Heating Inspector.
65
6-191. In the event conditions at the time of installation are such that
the chimney or vertical flue has insufficient natural draft to properly carry
away the products of combustion or is subject to down drafts, provisions
shall be made by the installer to rectify existing conditions, or provide
mechanical means of maintaining constant updraft during appliance
operation.
6-192. Pilot flames shall effectively ignite the gas at the main burner
or burners and shall be adequately protected from drafts. A device which,
under normal chimney draft conditions is at least equal in performance to
the draft hood herein before provided for shall be interpreted as fulfilling the
second part of this requirement as far as chimney drafts are concerned.
INSPECTIONS AND TESTS
6-193. Pilot flames shall effectively ignite the gas at the main burner
or burners and shall be adequately protected from drafts. A device which,
under normal chimney draft conditions is at least equal in performance to
the draft hood herein before provided for shall be interpreted as fulfilling the
second part of this requirement as far as chimney drafts are concerned.
6-194. Gas fired furnaces or oil fired furnaces shall employ either a
thermostatic pilot, so constructed and adjusted that no gas can flow through
the main burner unless the pilot flame is burning, or some other type of
safety device serving this same end shall be employed.
6-195. Luminous flame pilots shall not show carbon deposits when
adjusted according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
6-196. Where escapement pilots are used, their flames shall be
freely ignited by the constant burning pilot.
A. The flames from each burner shall freely ignite the gas from
adjacent burners when operating at the normal gas pressure or when
the main control valve is regulated to deliver about one-third (1/3) the
full gas rate, except where additional pilots are provided. If the
additional pilot is a runner type pilot, this pilot must be proven by a
safety mechanism before the main burner valve can open.
6-197. Burner flames shall not flash back upon immediate ignition,
nor upon turning the gas cock until the gas rate to the burner is about onethird
(1/3) the full supply.
6-198. Burner flames shall not flash back when the gas is turned on
or off by any automatic control mechanism.
66
6-199. Main burner flames shall ignite freely from each constant
burning pilot when the main control valve is regulated to deliver about onethird
(1/3) the full gas rate and when pilot flame is reduced to minimum pilot
at which it will actuate the safety thermostat device. The holding port of
multiple port pilots must satisfactorily ignite the main burner if the ignition
port, or ports, are stopped.
6-200. Burners shall be of such design that ignition from pilot or
pilots will carry to all ports or burner heads protected by the pilot at inputs
from one-third (1/3) to maximum rating. When ignition is made in a normal
manner, the flames shall not flash outside the appliance. Burners shall not
expel gas through air opening in mixer faces when operating at the normal
burner pressure.
Note: In making the test under 6-193 and 6-196, care shall be
exercised to prevent the accumulation of non-combusted gas in the
appliance or flues which might result in explosion or fire.
6-201. The flue gas temperature as taken on the appliance side of
the draft hood shall not exceed 480 degrees F. above that of the air
temperature surrounding the appliance. The concentration of CO2 shall not
exceed 9%, the concentration of CO shall not exceed .04%, the
concentration of oxygen shall not be less than 5% nor more than 10%.
6-202. The rate of flow of the gas shall be adjusted to within plus or
minus two (2) percent of the required hourly BTU input rating at the manifold
pressure specified by the manufacturer. When the prevailing pressure is
less than the manifold pressure specified, the gas rate shall be adjusted at
the prevailing pressure. The appliance shall be allowed to operate until the
stack temperature becomes stabilized, after which a sample of the flue
products shall be taken at a point in the flue after the outlet of the appliance
but ahead of the draft hood, and analyzed for carbon dioxide, carbon
monoxide and oxygen.
6-203. The rate of flow of gas shall be adjusted to within plus 5% or
minus 15% of 1.7 times the calculated hourly BTU net loss of the building in
which it is installed. The appliance shall be allowed to operate until the
stack temperature becomes stabilized, after which a sample of the flue
products shall be taken at a point in the flue after the outlet of the appliance
but ahead of the draft hood, and analyzed for carbon dioxide, carbon
monoxide and oxygen.
6-204. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
6-205. The owner and/or occupant shall be thoroughly instructed by
the installer as to the proper and safe operation of the appliance before it is
67
placed in service, such instructions to include actual demonstration to the
customer or his authorized agent of the processes of lighting and turning off
the gas burner. A printed set of instructions, enclosed in an envelope
labeled “Instructions to Customer”, shall be securely attached to the gas
valve.
6-206. A metallic plate, suitably etched or stamped, setting forth
detailed instructions for the safe lighting and shutting off of the appliance,
shall be permanently attached to the appliance in a prominent position near
the lighting apertures. The size and type used shall be not smaller than ten
(10) point and the wording contained therein shall be subject to the approval
of the Heating Inspector. This plate shall also state make and model
numbers of the burner and show the rate hourly gas BTU input.
EXCEEDING 400,000 BTU PER HOUR
6-207. The construction arrangement, manner of installation,
alteration and repair of all gas burners in steam and hot water boilers,
furnaces and air heaters having input capacity exceeding 400,000 BTU per
hour, and for power, industrial and process uses shall conform to the
following provisions of this code. The requirements for installation of gas
burning equipment in power boilers as adopted by the American Standards
Association, sponsored by American Gas Association shall be considered
herein as minimum requirements.
6-208. All burners shall be accompanied by complete and
comprehensive installation and operating instructions.
6-209. Where burners are equipped with secondary air shutters or
louvers, they must be so designed or counter-balanced so as to drop to a
wide open position in the event of failure or breakage of connecting linkage.
They shall also be of sufficient area to supply adequate air for complete
combustion under specified draft conditions and at the maximum rate of
firing.
6-210. The air intake on power burners must be protected with
means to prevent accidental closure by debris being pulled over inlet by
suction of blower.
6-211. The burner or burners shall be located according to the
manufacturers’ instructions and shall be so secured that they will not slide,
twist or drop out of position.
6-212. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
68
6-213. The burner or burners shall be so installed that no part of
flame shall impinge on heating surface so as to cause incomplete
combustion.
6-214. On all pre-mix power burners an approved type of check
valve shall be installed in the gas supply line to prevent back flow of air into
the gas line.
6-215. Burners shall be sized according to the BTU rating shown in
the regularly published literature of the burner manufacturer, and under no
condition shall it be permissible to alter the burner so as to exceed the rated
maximum BTU input. Before the permit for installation of a burner is issued,
the burner manufacturer shall furnish the Heating Inspector with a certified
copy of the literature showing capacity of the burner, spud size and draft
loss across the burner for the maximum ratings at the various pressures.
6-216. Each burner shall be equipped with a plain gas pilot or pilots
in addition to the safety pilot to insure smooth lighting of the burner so that
there will be no rollback or heavy detonations during lighting off period
except that where the burner unit is of such size that safety pilot only will
light burner smoothly, the plain pilot may be omitted. The pilot flame shall
effectively ignite the gas at the burner and shall be so designed as to be
adequately protected from drafts. Pilot flames shall not become
extinguished during the operation of the main burners nor by starting or
stopping them in a normal manner. Luminous flame pilots shall not show
carbon deposit during the period of tests when adjusted according to the
manufacturer’s instruction.
6-217. Where the vertical or upshot type of burner consisting of a
multiplicity of heads is used, a minimum of one plain gas pilot for each eight
heads must be used. In arriving at the number of pilots, the safety pilot will
be counted, as one plain gas pilot above eight heads; below eight heads
there must be at least one plain gas pilot and a safety pilot unless the
Heating Inspector approves a lesser number.
6-218. All burners shall be equipped with a flame conductivity or
flame rectification type of safety pilot or other approved type of safety
device. The thermostat type of pilot will not be permitted.
6-219. Safety pilots shall be so designed that upon insertion of pilot
after removal for repairs, or cleaning, pilots will be in the same position
relative to the main burner as when originally installed.
The pilot flame shall be in such a position that in the event of a drop
in gas pressure, the contact between pilot flame and flame rod or
thermocouple shall be broken before the point where the pilot flame will fail
69
to reliably ignite the main burner. In the event that this cannot be
accomplished then the flame rod or thermocouple shall supervise the main
burner flame.
The flame conductivity of flame rectification type of pilot shall consist
of a flame road and pilot burner, flame head (if of the flame head type),
relay, start-stop push button switch, solenoid gas valve for shutting off
safety pilot gas as well as gas to the flame pilots, necessary high tension
cable, and a positive shut-off gas valve carrying the approval of the Heating
Inspector. The safety pilot shall be so arranged as to prevent its being lit
unless the main safety valve is in the off position.
6-220. All pilot burners shall be supported in such a manner that
their position relative to the main burner or burners will remain fixed.
6-221. Pilot lines shall be connected to vertical supply lines when
possible. When horizontal lines are used, connection must be made on top
or side. Connection must be ahead of all controls including regulator and
appliance shut-off and shall be provided with a separate shut-off cock.
Where gas pressure is greater than that for which pilots are designed, a
pressure regulator (pilot regulator) must be installed on the downstream
side of pilot line shut-off cock.
6-222. A shut-off cock must be installed on branch line to safety pilot
and to each branch line of plain pilot system.
6-223. A manually operated approved shut-off cock shall be installed
adjacent to the gas burner on the downstream of all other control valves
either manual or automatic. Such cock shall be so located that it is readily
accessible and shall clearly indicate the “on” and “off” position, or direction
of rotation to open or close. This valve or cock must have handle securely
attached in such a manner that it may not be readily removed. When gas
pressures are greater than 1 psi the cock must be of the lubricated plug
type. Gate or glove type valve will not be acceptable.
Provide bleeder line or other approved method in insuring against
gas leakage to boiler during shut down periods.
6-224. A manually operated approved type lubricated shut-off cock
shall be installed at each boiler or furnace ahead of all control valves and
regulators except pilot line. This cock shall be so located that it is readily
accessible and shall clearly indicate the on or off position or direction of
rotation to open and close. Cock shall be provided with a suitable operating
handle permanently attached. Gate or globe valve will not be acceptable.
70
6-225. Electric control valves shall be installed according to the
instructions furnished by the manufacturer.
6-226. All electrical connections shall be made in conformity with the
provisions of all codes relating to the installation of electric wiring within the
municipality.
6-227. A gas pressure regulator approved by the Heating Inspector
shall be installed on all gas burner installations.
6-228. Each boiler or furnace shall be equipped with safety devices
to limit high steam pressures or water temperatures, low-water level and
high air temperatures. Where boiler or furnace is equipped with so-called
power burner, where air for combustion is furnished by means other than a
natural draft stack or where boiler burners are so sized and designed to
require forced or induced draft or both, the gas and air supply shall be
equipped with suitable controls to prevent functioning of the gas supply until
air supply is adequate for proper combustion, or in the event of failure of air
supply, to shut off the gas supply.
6-229. Where forced draft equipment is used, a manual cutout
control switch may be installed, subject to approval, to permit lighting off the
burner under natural draft, normal operation under force draft to remain
under safety control.
6-230. Safety devices operated electrically shall not depend upon
the closing of a circuit to shut off the main gas supply. This requirement
shall not be construed as prohibiting the use of electrical regulating devices,
provided the required safety devices are also installed. Controls shall be so
connected that maximum inherent safety provided by such controls will be
obtained.
6-231. Safety shut-off valves shall be tested to assure gas tightness
of the seat when in the closed position; the valve assembly shall be gas
tight in all positions. Packing glands shall be designed so that the valve will
not be made inoperative by excessive tightening of the packing nut.
Either the valve shall incorporate means for requiring a manual
operation for re-opening of the valve after it has been closed or the
electrical circuit shall be so arranged as to require a manual operation to reopen
the valve after it has been closed. In no case shall valves be able to
be opened manually until safety pilots are lighted and circuit completed or
low-water cut-off circuit has been completed.
6-232. Where a switch is installed in the low-water cut-off circuit to
keep circuit to safety shut-off valve closed when blowing down water
71
column, switch must be of the push button type so that when operator
releases button the control circuit to safety shut-off valve will be normal.
6-233. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
6-234. For burners or a combination of burners not exceeding a total
input of 500,000 BTU’s per hour, a combination control of the on-off type
with quick opening control valves may be used.
6-235. For a burner or a combination of burners not exceeding
2,500,000 BTU’s per hour input, an on-off type of control may be used
provided the automatic gas valve is of the slow opening type. Valve must
be so designed that an adjustable opening time of from ten (10) to thirty (30)
seconds may be obtained and with a closing time not to exceed five (5)
seconds.
6-236. For a burner or a combination of burners with a total input
exceeding 2,500,000 BTU’s per hour, a combustion control of the
modulating type must be used.
Where the uptake or outlet damper is securely locked in a fixed
position for maximum load condition, the control may be of the type that
operates the inlet air louver of the burner in conjunction with the gas valve
by means of mechanical linkage. The damper in conjunction with the gas
control valve or valves, either by mechanical linkage or by change in
furnace pressure. The operating medium may be steam, electricity, air or
hydraulic. If the gas control goes to open position upon failure of operating
medium, then a means for shutting off the gas supply upon the failure of the
operating medium must be provided.
6-237. Where quick opening or slow opening gas control valve is
connected to an inlet shutter on gas burner, the air inlet shutter or louver
only must be so designed or counter-balanced as to drop to full open
position in the event of breakage or failure of connecting mechanism. When
the control is of the modulating type that operates the air inlet shutter or
louver only, shutter or louver must be so designed and counter-balanced as
to drop to full open position upon the failure or breakage of connecting
linkage. The uptake or outlet damper must have an indicator or pointer
visible to the operator to show the position of the damper in relation to open
and closed position. Remote indicators are permitted where necessary.
6-238. When uptake damper is set in a fixed position such as will be
used with “on” and “off” control or the modulating type that operates only the
air louvers on the burner, a draft regulator must be used. This regulator
shall be of the type that will reverse and open to the boiler room in the event
of down or back drafts. Where control that operates the damper is used, or
72
induced or force draft fan or both is used, it shall be optional as to the use of
a draft regulator. Draft hood or diverter is not permissible.
6-239. All gas burner installations in steam boilers with an input
exceeding 2,500 feet of gas per hour shall be equipped with indicating
gauges for furnace, window and uptake draft to show combustion conditions
and with flue gas analysis equipment of portable or fixed type. On
installations exceeding 20,000 cubic feet gas input per hour, equipment
shall be installed for continuous indicating or recording of carbon dioxide,
oxygen or air flow-steam flow.
6-240. All piping connections for gas burners under this section of
the code shall be properly sized for the design maximum load with a total
pressure drop permissible under the particular conditions of the application.
6-241. On all installations with an input capacity in excess of
1,000,000 BTU’s per hour, the contractor shall submit to the Heating
Inspector with his request for a permit, a detailed drawing made by the
burner manufacturer showing method of installing burner, recommended
furnace construction including floor insulation, control assembly along with
piping details, pipe sizes, valve sizes, type and make of control if the uptake
damper operating type. If this is to be furnished by someone other than the
burner manufacturer, he must show this as it will be applied to this burner.
This drawing must be one that is made up for the specific job and cannot be
what is known as a typical installation or a marked up drawing of some
similar installation with changes to suit the job in questions. This drawing
must have a drawing number as well as a title listing the name of the job to
which it applies. It is desirable that this drawing may be made by the home
office of the burner manufacturer but, in lieu of this, drawing may be made
by the local representative in which case it must be certified by an officer of
the manufacturer that it is approved by them.
6-242. At completion of installation, the installer shall adjust all
equipment and controls and, in the presence of the Inspector, demonstrate
the proper functioning of all equipment and controls throughout the normal
range of operation from minimum to maximum input. A combustion analysis
shall be made to demonstrate proper combustion results throughout the
operating range. Burners shall be able to demonstrate main burner flame
retention without pilot stabilization but pilot shall be used in all cases.
INCINERATORS – DOMESTIC OR PORTABLE TYPE
6-243. Repealed by Ordinance No. 13, Sections 3 and 4.
SECTION 7. MATERIALS.
73
7-1. All building materials shall be of the quality to meet the intent of
this code, and shall be new or approved equal by the governing body of the
municipality. In case there is reason to doubt the quality of a material to be
used in a building or structure, the governing body may require tests to be
made to establish its suitability, or to determine whether it conforms to the
intent of this code.
7-2. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use
of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
code providing any such alternate has been approved.
7-3. The governing body may approve any such alternate provided
that the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material and method or
work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire-resistance,
durability and safety. The governing body shall require that sufficient
evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be
made regarding its use.
7-4. All tests of material shall be conducted under the supervision of
the particular Inspector responsible for the installation of that type of
material, except that duly authenticated tests by a competent person or
laboratory may be accepted by him in lieu of tests under his own
supervision.
7-5. Materials or methods of construction which have been tested
and approved shall be used and installed in accordance with the terms of
approval.
7-6. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-7. The governing body may require tests to be repeated, if at any
time there is reason to believe that a material no longer conforms to the
requirements on which its approval was based.
7-8. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-9. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-10. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-11. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-12. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
74
7-13. MORTAR PROPORTIONS OF CEMENT MATERIALS
Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-14. Masonry shall be laid in the following types of mortar:
7-14.1. Type M or S mortar used in foundation walls of hollow
masonry units.
7-14.2. Type M, S or N mortar shall be used in cavity wall masonry
except that Type A mortar shall be used in cavity walls having a
mortar thickness of ten (10) inches.
7-14.3. Type M, S, or N mortar shall be used in footings, foundation
walls of solid masonry units, isolated piers, cavity walls exceeding
ten (10) inch mortar thickness and load bearing or exterior walls of
hollow masonry units.
7-15. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-16. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-17. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-18. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-19. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
ROOFING
7-20. Approved built up roofing, vertical or edge grain wood
shingles, asbestos, slate, or their equivalent, will be accepted.
7-21. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 1-54.
7-22. Nails for attaching roof covering shall be non-ferrous or hot
dipped galvanized nails.
7-23. It shall be required that all materials shall be used in
accordance with generally approved methods. Wherever specially
manufactured materials is used, it shall be in accordance with the directions
furnished by the manufacturer.
7-24. Any material or method of construction failing to conform to the
requirements of this code or rules adopted thereunder shall not be used.
SECTION 8. ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
75
8-1. ELECTRICAL. The Minnesota Electrical Act, Minnesota
Statutes, Sections 326.01 through 326.246, together with all amendments
thereto, and the Rules of the State Board of Electricity, State of Minnesota,
Chapters One, Two, Three and Four, together with all amendments thereto
are hereby adopted by reference as the Electrical Code of the Town of
White Bear regulating electricians and electrical installations in the Town of
White Bear. The Sections of Minnesota Statutes and the Rules of the State
Board of Electricity, State of Minnesota, herein referred to are hereby
incorporated into and made a part of this Ordinance as completely as if said
provisions were set out in full.
8-2. INSPECTION FEES AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
Inspection fees, inspection procedure and code enforcement’s shall be the
same as those outlined in the following rules and regulations of the
Minnesota State Board of Electricity:
Chapter One: ELECTRICAL 1-10 Inspections;
Chapter Two: ELECTRICAL 11-20 Enforcement, Procedures;
Chapter Three: ELECTRICAL 21-26 Appeals;
Chapter Four: ELECTRICAL 26-35 Licenses.
8-3. ELECTRICAL PERMITS. No installation or connection of any
electric light fixtures, motors, heating devices or any apparatus requiring the
use of electric current, nor any alterations or addition in the wiring of any
existing building shall be made, nor shall any building be wired for the
placing of any electric lights, motors, heating devices or any apparatus
requiring the use of an electric current, nor shall any installation or
connection of any electric fixtures, motors, heating devices or any
alterations in the wiring be made in any building after inspection, without
first securing a permit therefore.
Electrical permits shall not be issued unless the applicant is properly
licensed by the Minnesota State Board of Electricity for the work to be
performed, or unless the wiring is to be installed in a single family dwelling
by the owner if the owner resides in or plans to reside in such dwelling.
8-4. LICENSING REQUIREMENTS. No person shall wire for or
install any electrical apparatus or equipment for light, heat, power or other
purposes unless he is licensed by the Minnesota State Board of Electricity
as a Class A Master Electrician or as a Class A Journeyman Electrician or
unless he is under the direct-on-the-job supervision of one so licensed,
except the owner of a single family dwelling residing in or planning to reside
in such dwelling may install the wiring in such dwelling without a license.
76
No person shall order, direct or instruct a person who is not properly
licensed by the Minnesota State Board of Electricity to perform electrical
work that requires a license, unless such person so ordering, directing or
instructing is property licensed by the Minnesota State Board of Electricity to
perform the work himself.
8-5. INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATES. Repealed by Ordinance
No. 8, Subdivision 8-2.
8-6. TECHNICAL PROVISIONS – TEMPORARY INSTALLATIONS.
Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-1.
8-7. WIRING METHODS. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8,
Subdivision 8-1.
8-8. SERVICE. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-1.
8-9. SERVICE DISCONNECTS AND METERS. Repealed by
Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-1.
8-10. FUSES. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-1.
8-11. MOTORS. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-1.
8-12. ELEVATOR HOISTWAYS. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8,
Subdivision 8-1.
8-13. GASOLINE PUMPS. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8,
Subdivision 8-1.
8-14. RANGES. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-1.
8-15. SUB-FEEDERS. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision
8-1.
8-16. CIRCUITS. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-1.
8-17. EXIT LIGHTS. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-
1.
8-18. LOW VOLTAGE SYSTEMS. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8,
Subdivision 8-1.
8-19. FLUORESCENT FIXTURES. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8,
Subdivision 8-1.
77
8-20. CONNECTION TO INSTALLATIONS. Repealed by
Ordinance No. 8, Subdivision 8-1.
8-21. BOARD OF REVIEW. Repealed by Ordinance No. 8,
Subdivision 8-4.
SECTION 9. LICENSES AND BONDS.
9-1. Before any person, firm or corporation shall engage in the
business of doing or performing contracting work in the Town of White Bear,
they must show proof of being licensed by the State of Minnesota or be
licensed by the Town of White Bear. There shall be a surcharge of $5.00
on each building permit for the purposes of license verification from the
State of Minnesota.
Any person, firm or corporation not required to be licensed by the State of
Minnesota shall be required to obtain a license from the Town of White Bear
before engaging in their type of business.
All Sewer and Water Contractors, Excavators and all Demolition/Wrecking
Contractors, shall be required to provide a Certificate of Insurance naming
White Bear Township, its Officers and Employees as an additional insured.
9-2. Licenses shall be obtained from the Clerk of the Town.
Applications for licenses shall be filed with the Clerk on the forms furnished
by the Town. The fee for each license shall be as established from time to
time by Town Board Resolution.
9-3. All licenses shall expire on January 1st following the date of
issuance unless sooner revoked or forfeited. If a license granted hereunder
is not renewed previous to its expiration then all rights granted by such
license shall cease and any work performed after the expiration of the
license shall be in violation of this code.
9-4. Persons, firms, or corporations renewing their licenses after the
expiration date shall be charged the full annual license fee. No pro-rated
license fee shall be allowed of renewals.
9-5. A license granted to a contractor shall include the right to
perform all of the work for which he is licensed. Sub-contractors on any
work shall be required to comply with the sections of this code pertaining to
license, bond, qualifications, etc. for his particular type of work.
9-6. Each applicant for a license shall satisfy the governing body that
he is competent by reason of education, special training, experience and
that he is equipped to perform the work for which a license is requested in
78
accordance with all state laws, Town Ordinances and this Building Code.
Each applicant for a heating license shall further satisfy the governing body
that he already had a valid license or competency card from another
municipality in the St. Paul-Minneapolis Metropolitan Area.
9-7. The governing body shall have the power to suspend or revoke
the license of any person, partnership, firm or corporation, licensed under
the regulations of this code, whose work is found to be improper or
defective or so unsafe as to jeopardize life or property providing the person
holding such license is given twenty (20) days notice and granted the
opportunity to be heard before such action is taken. If and when such
notice is sent to the legal address of the licensee and he fails or refuses to
appear at the said hearing, his license will be automatically suspended or
revoked five (5) days after the date of the hearing.
9-8. When a license is suspended, the period of suspension shall be
not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one (1) year, such period being
determined by the governing body.
9-9. When any person, partnership, firm or corporation holding a
license as provided herein has been convicted for the second time by a
court of competent jurisdiction for violation of any of the provisions of this
code, the governing body shall revoke the license of the person,
partnership, firm or corporation so convicted. Such person, partnership,
firm or corporation may not make application for a new license for a period
of one (1) year.
9-10. No license granted under the terms stated herein shall become
effective until the licensee shall have filed with and approved by the Clerk of
the Town a policy of public liability insurance naming the Town of White
Bear as an additional insured which shall remain and be in force and effect
during the entire term of said license and which shall contain a provision
that it shall not be canceled without ten (10) days written notice to the Town
Clerk. Public liability insurance shall not be less than an amount
established by Town Board Resolution.
9-11. Repealed.
9-12. Each applicant for a permit to move a building or electrical
transformer over any street or public right-of-way must satisfy the Building
Inspector that he is provided with sufficient and adequate insurance to
protect the municipality and the public from any and all damages which may
result, either directly or indirectly, from the moving of said building or
electrical transformer.
9-13. Repealed.
79
9-13.A. A certificate of competency must be submitted by gas
installers to qualify for gas line installation.
9-14. All licenses heretofore issued and now in force and effect shall
continue for one year from the date of issuance. These licenses, may, upon
expiration, be renewed in accordance with the provisions of 9-4 of this code.
9-15. Persons installing sewer and water services outside buildings
on private property do not have to be licensed plumbers. They shall be
classified as pipe layers and be licensed as outside sewer installers. A
surety bond shall be furnished, conditioned that the Town and the person
contracting to have the work done by the license holder will be saved
harmless from any loss or damage by reason of inadequate or improper
work performed by the holder of said license under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 9A. INSULATION.
9A-1. SLAB ON GRADE FLOORS FOR RESIDENTIAL. For slab
on grade floors the thermal resistance of the insulation around the perimeter
of the floor must not be less than R-10. The insulation must extend
downward from the top of the slab to the design frost line or downward to
the bottom of the slab than horizontally beneath the slab for an equivalent
distance and must be an approved type.
9A-2. FOUNDATION WALLS FOR RESIDENTIAL. If floors are not
insulated as required in Section 1, basement or crawl space walls must be
insulated. The thermal resistance ® of the insulation on the entire wall must
not be less than R-5 or the thermal resistance ® of the insulation on the wall
must be not less than R-10 down to the design frost line.
9A-3. VAPOR BARRIERS FOR RESIDENTIAL. A vapor barrier
must be installed between the interior surface and the winter design
condition dew point location within each building envelope surface. The
vapor barrier must be continuous with all joints overlapped and made over
framing members or blocking. Rips and punctures in the vapor barrier must
be patched with vapor barrier materials and sealed a minimum of 4 mil
polyethylene must be used.
9A-4. CEILINGS FOR RESIDENTIAL.
A. R-38 throughout the entire ceiling.
80
B. If a portion of the ceiling is less than R-38, the insulation in the
remainder of the ceiling must be increased to yield an overall
average thermal resistance of not less than R-38.
9A-5. GLASS AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL. Maximum glass area
may not exceed 12 percent of the area of exterior walls not including
foundation walls. All windows shall be double glazed or have storm
windows.
Maximum glass area may not exceed 10 percent of the area of
exterior walls when a sliding glass door is installed.
SECTION 10. PENALTY.
10-1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall commence work of
any kind for which a permit is required under the provisions of this building
code without having first received the necessary permit therefore shall,
when subsequently securing such permit, be required to pay double the fee
provided by this building code for such permit.
10-2. Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 8.
10-3. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
Ordinance shall be punished as provided in Ordinance No. 26. Each three
(3) days that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense
subject to the punishments provided herein.
SECTION 11. DATE EFFECTIVE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be
in force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Supervisors of the Town of White Bear this 6th
day of August, 1956.
APPROVED:
______________________________
EDWARD WELSCH, Chairman
ATTEST:
____________________________
HERMAN R. HANSON, Clerk
Board of Supervisors:
EDWARD WELSCH, Chair
ALBERT JENSEN, Supervisor
81
PAUL J. CROMER, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press August 16, 1956
Historical Notes
2017
Sections 2, 5-29, and 5-34 passed March 6, 2017, and effective March 15, 2017 by
Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2016
Section 5-36 Sections B and D passed September 7, 2016, and effective
September 21, 2016 by Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2015
Section 5-29.B. passed July 20, 2015, and effective July 29, 2015, by Kermes
(Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 3-32 passed January 21, 2015, and effective January 28, 2015, by Kermes
(Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2011
Section 5-19.B.1. passed August 15, 2011, and effective August 24, 2011, by
Mample (Chair), Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2010
Section 5-37 passed June 7, 2010, and effective June 23, 2010, by Sand (Chair),
Mample, Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2008
Section 5-29 and 5-29.B. passed October 6, 2008, and effective October 22, 2008,
by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2006
Section 5-1.2 passed April 17, 2006, and effective April 26, 2006, by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2004
Section 9-1 passed December 20, 2004, and effective December 29, 2004, by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 5-19.B passed November 1, 2004, and effective June 8, 2005, by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 5-19.F passed August 2, 2004, and effective August 11, 2004, by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 1-54 passed April 19, 2004, and effective May 5, 2004, by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
2003
Section 9-12 passed October 20, 2003, and effective November 5, 2003, by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 3-13 passed October 20, 2003, and effective November 5, 2003 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 9-11 passed April 21, 2003, and effective April 30, 2003 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 4 passed April 7, 2003, and effective April 16, 2003 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
2002
Section 5-29.L. passed March 4, 2002, and effective March 27, 2002 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
2000
Section 5-29.L. passed May 15, 2000, and effective May 31, 2000 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
82
Section 5-19.e. passed September 5, 2000, and effective September 13, 2000 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1998
Section 5-29 passed March 16, 1998, and effective March 25, 1998 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 2-78(a) and 5-19 passed May 18, 1998, and effective June 17, 1998 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 5-8 and 5-30 passed August 28, 1998, and effective September 16, 1998
by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 1-54A., 2-39(a), and 2-60(a) passed November 16, 1998, and effective
December 2, 1998 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer.
1997
Section 3-33 passed December 1, 1997, and effective December 17, 1997 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1995
Section 1-54 passed March 6, 1995, and effective March 22, 1995 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 2-72(a) and 3-26 passed September 18, 1995, and effective September
20, 1995 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1994
Section 6-2.a. passed May 16, 1994, and effective June 1, 1994 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1993
Section 5-19.D. passed January 4, 1993, and effective January 13, 1993 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 3-32 passed February 8, 1993, and effective February 24, 1993 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 2-43 and 2-44 passed July 19, 1993, and effective August 11, 1993 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1992
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 passed May 18, 1992, and effective
May 27, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 3-25 passed August 17, 1992, and effective August 26, 1992 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 3-15 passed September 8, 1992, and effective September 23, 1992 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1991
Section 5-36 passed August 5, 1991, and effective August 14, 1991 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1990
Section 5-18 passed July 9, 1990, and effective August 15, 1990 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 2-92, 2-93, 5-35.A. passed November 19, 1990, and effective November
28, 1990 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1989
Section 3-15 passed February 21, 1989, and effective March 1, 1989 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 1-54 passed February 27, 1989, and effective March 15, 1989 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 5-25 passed July 17, 1989, and effective July 26, 1989 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 3-6 passed July 17, 1989, and effective July 26, 1989 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 3-6 passed August 1, 1989, and effective August 9, 1989 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1988
83
Section 5-29 passed May 2, 1988, and effective May 11, 1988 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1987
Section 5-34 passed November 16, 1987, and effective December 2, 1987 by
Weisenburger (Chair); Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1984
Section 3-30 passed January 31, 1984, and effective February 8, 1984 by
Jungkunz (Chair), Weisenburger and Hamilton; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer).
1983
Section 6-2 passed September 6, 1983, and effective September 21, 1983 by
Jungkunz (Chair), Weisenburger and Hamilton; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer).
1981
Sections 1-13, 1-17, 3-29, 4-1, 4-2, 4-3, 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 4-10, 4-11, 4-18, 4-19, 4-20, 4-21, 4-
22, 4-23, 4-26, 4-27, 4-30, 4-31(a) and (b), 6-13, 6-35, 6-40, 6-60, 6-104, 6-134A, 6-204,
and 10-2 repealed; sections 1-49, 1-55, 3-23, 3-26, 4-33, 6-34, 9-10, 9-11, 9-13, 9-15, 10-3
passed August 3, 1981, and effective August 11, 1981 by Sand (Chair), Jungkunz; Webber
(Clerk-Treasurer).
1980
Section 1-54 passed July 7, 1980, and effective July 17, 1980 by Perron (Chair),
Sand and Jungkunz; LaFosse (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 5-19 passed August 4, 1980, and effective August ___, 1980 by Perron
(Chair), Sand and Jungkunz; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 5-19 passed October 6, 1980, and effective October 9, 1980 by Perron
(Chair), Sand and Jungkunz; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer).
1979
Section 5-32 passed January 8, 1979, and effective January 11, 1979 by Perron
(Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 6-122a, 5-18 and 5-22 passed March 26, 1979, and effective April 6, 1979
by Perron (Chair), Sand and Jungkunz; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1978
Sections 5-29, 5-30, and 5-31 passed February 12, 1978, and effective February
23, 1978 by Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 1-48 passed May 22, 1978, and effective May 25, 1978 by Perron (Chair),
Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 4-10 and 4-11 passed September 18, 1978, and effective September 28,
1978 by Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1977
Sections 5-27 and 5-28 passed February 7, 1977, and effective February 17, 1977
by Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 5-18 and 9-2 passed April 11, 1977, and effective April 21, 1977 by
Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 1-50 passed September 12, 1977, and effective September 22, 1977 by
Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1976
Sections 8-1, 8-2, 8-3, and 8-4 passed April 5, 1976, and effective April 15, 1976
by Perron (Chair), Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1972
Sections 3-19, 4-11, amended, 4-12, 4-13, 4-14, 4-15, 4-16, and 4-17 repealed,
passed March 27, 1972, and effective April 6, 1972 by Rooney (Chair), Perron and King;
Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 8-1 and 8-2 passed April 3, 1972, and effective April 6, 1972 by Rooney
(Chair), Perron and King; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 1-54 passed July 10, 1972, and effective July 20, 1972 by Rooney (Chair),
Perron and King; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1971
84
Section 11(k) passed June 21, 1971, and effective July 1, 1971 by Rooney (Chair),
Perron and King; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 4-10 and 9-15 passed November 8, 1971, and effective November 11,
1971 by Rooney (Chair), Perron and King; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1970
Section 4-4 passed March 23, 1970, and effective April 1, 1970 by Rooney (Chair),
Malloy and Perron; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 4-32 passed August 24, 1970, and effective September 2, 1970 by Rooney
(Chair), Malloy and Perron; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1969
Sections 3-26 and 3-29 passed September 29, 1969, and effective October 8, 1969
by Rooney (Chair), Malloy and Perron; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 3-19, 4-11, 4-15, 4-17, 4-21, 9-2, and 9-6 passed October 6, 1969, and
effective October 15, 1969 by Rooney (Chair), Malloy and Perron; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1968
Section 8-4.1-7 passed February 5, 1968, and effective February 21, 1968 by
Rooney (Chair), Kuehnl and Malloy; Hovey (Clerk-Treasurer).
1967
Section 1-48 passed October 2, 1967, and effective October 11, 1967 by Rooney
(Chair), Kuehnl and Malloy; Hovey (Clerk-Treasurer).
1966
Sections 2-90, 2-91, and 6-2 passed April 25, 1966, and effective May 5, 1966 by
Rooney (Chair), Kuehnl and Malloy; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 4-31a-e passed July 7, 1966, and effective July 14, 1966 by Rooney
(Chair), Kuehnl and Malloy; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer).
1965
Sections 4-1, 4-2, 4-3, 4-4, and 10-2 passed December 20, 1965, and effective
December 23, 1965 by Kumm (Chair), Rooney and Kuehnl; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer).
1963
Sections 4-7, 6-98, 6-99, and 6-123 to 6-134 repealed; Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and
8 passed February 18, 1963, and effective February 21, 1963 by Kumm (Chair), Hovey and
Rooney; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 9-10 and 9-13 passed July 8, 1963, and effective July 11, 1963 by Kumm
(Chair), Hovey and Rooney; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer).
1961
Section 5-19 passed July 10, 1961, and effective July 13, 1961 by Kumm (Chair),
Hovey and Rooney; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 3-26, 3-27, and 3-28 passed October 30, 1961, and effective November
2, 1961 by Kumm (Chair), Hovey and Rooney; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 8-1, 8-2, 8-3, 8-4, 8-5, and 8-6 passed November 6, 1961, and effective
November 16, 1961 by Kumm (Chair), Hovey and Rooney; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer).
1959
Sections 1-48, 3-5, 3-17, 4-10, 5-9, 6-100, and 6-125 passed February 23, 1959,
and effective April 2, 1959 by Blair (Chair), Hovey and Linneer; Wright (Clerk-Treasurer).
1956
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, originally passed
August 6, 1956, and effective August 16, 1956 by Welsch (Chair), Hansen (Clerk-
Treasurer).













ORDINANCE NO. 12
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 12 OF THE TOWN OF
WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA, ADOPTED FEBRUARY
4, 1960, AS AMENDED, BEING AN ORDINANCE REGULATING RATES
AND WATER SERVICE AND PROVIDING FOR THE COLLECTION OF
WATER CHARGES IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
The Ordinance relating to and regulating rates and water service and providing
for the collection of water charges passed and approved February 4, 1960, as
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows, and all other Ordinances or
parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. In all other
respects all other Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 2. SERVICE CONNECTION – PERMIT REQUIRED. No water
service shall be provided and no person shall turn on or off any hydrant or the
water connection or gate valve to any service main or the water supply at any
curb stop unless authorized to do so by the Town.
SECTION 3. APPLICATION FOR SERVICE. Application for service hereunder
shall be made upon forms provided for that purpose by the Town. All accounts
shall be carried in the name of the owner who personally, or by his authorized
agent, shall apply for such service. Said owner shall at all times be liable for
water service consumed upon the premises, whether he is occupying the same
or not, and any delinquent charges shall be collected in accordance with Section
8 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. SEPARATE CONNECTIONS. No more than one dwelling or
building shall be supplied from one service connection, except by special
permission of the Town Board. Whenever two or more parties are supplied from
one pipe connecting with the distribution main, each building or part of building
must have a separate curb stop.
SECTION 5. PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES. No water pipe of the Town Water
System shall be connected with any pump, well or tank that is connected with
any other source of water supply and when such are found, the Town Clerk shall
notify the owner to disconnect the same, and if not done immediately, the water
supply shall be turned off forthwith.
SECTION 6. SIZE OF CONNECTIONS. Connections with mains for ordinary
domestic supply shall be not less than one inch.
SECTION 7. WATER RATES.
7-1. The rates for water taken from the Town Water Supply System shall
be figured on a quarterly basis payable quarterly for the preceding quarter and
shall be set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges). All amounts due as
described herein shall be payable at the office of the Town Clerk or other
designated person by the date established on the quarterly bill.
7-2. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by
the date established in Section 7-1.
SECTION 8. SERVICE CHARGES. Charges shall be collected and paid at the
time of making application for tapping and making connections with the Town
water mains as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & charges).
8-1. UTILITY CONNECTION CHARGES. A utility connection charge shall
be collected in those instances when a property has not been previously
assessed for water services.
8-1.1. Before connecting to the Town water system a utility connection
charge based on the number of “units” shall be paid. If, after the initial
connection charges are paid, additional building permits or new water
connections are made, additional charges shall be paid. The utility
connection charge per unit shall be established by Town Board resolution.
8-1.1.(a). The number of units shall be computed as follows:
The following types of residential housing each comprise one unit
per dwelling unit:
8-1.1.(a).(1). Single-family houses;
8-1.1.(a).(2). Townhouses;
8-1.1.(a).(3). Each duplex unit, apartment unit and/or
condominium unit; and
8-1.1.(a).(4). A single mobile home.
8-1.2.(b). Commercial, industrial and other structures shall be
assigned one water unit for each sewer availability charge (SAC)
unit assigned to it by the Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services.
8-1.2. The utility connection charge shall be paid to the Town before a
building permit or water connection permit is issued.
2
8-1.3. Any person financially unable to pay a utility connection charge
pursuant to this section may make application to the Town Board to
provide for installment payments for such utility connection charge. Such
application shall include the following information:
8-1.3(a). The name and address of the applicant.
8-1.3(b). The owner and legal description of the subject
property.
8-1.3.(c). The reason and proof of financial hardship of the
applicant.
8-1.3(d). A copy of the most recent income tax returns.
8-1.3(e). A sworn financial statement showing all assets,
liabilities, sources of income and expenses.
8-1.4. If the Town Board finds sufficient financial hardship to the applicant,
the Town Board may provide for payments of such charge in annual
installments for a period not to exceed five years, and collectable with
property taxes due on the subject property.
8-2. WATER AVAILABILITY CHARGE. In addition to the utility
connection charge, the user shall also pay the water availability charge as
determined by Town Board resolution in accordance with Ordinance No. 54
(Fees & Charges), prior to the Town issuing a building permit or permit for water
connections is issued.
8-3. SERVICE STUB INSTALLATION. In addition to other fees and
charges set forth in this Ordinance, the property owner shall also be responsible
for all costs incurred for installation of a service stub from the Town’s system in
the street to the property line, the cost of which is dependent upon the individual
property.
SECTION 9. COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES. Each charge levied
by and pursuant to this Ordinance is hereby made a lien upon the corresponding
lot, land, parcel or premises served by a connection to the water system of the
Town. All such charges which are on September 1st of each year more than 30
days past due and having been properly billed to the occupant of the premises
served, shall be deemed a delinquent account and may be certified to the Town
Clerk who shall prepare an Assessment Roll each year provided for assessment
of the delinquent account against the respective property serviced. In preparing
the Assessment Roll, the Town shall collect an administrative charged for each
account as provided in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges). This Assessment
3
Roll shall be delivered to the Town Board for adoption on or before September
15th of each year and upon approval thereof, the amount due shall be certified by
the Town Clerk to the Auditor of Ramsey County before the 15th day of October
each year, and the Town in so certifying such charges to the County Auditor,
shall specify the name of the owner of the premises, the description of the
premises serviced, and the amount thereof. The amount so certified shall be
extended by the auditor on the tax rolls against such premises in the same
manner as other taxes. Such action may be optional or subsequent to using legal
action to collect delinquent accounts.
SECTION 10. DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR ORDINANCE
VIOLATION. The Town Board may have the water service shut off at any curb
stop upon occurrence of any of the following:
10-1. The owner or occupant of the premises served or any person
working on any pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the Town
Water Supply System has intentionally violated any of the provisions of this
Ordinance.
10-2. Unpaid charges for water, sewer, meter, meter parts or any other
financial obligation imposed on the owner or occupant of the premises served.
10-3. Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection
with an application for service.
10-4. VACANT PROPERTY. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of
its residents, and in order to protect the public water supply and/or private
property, the Town Board hereby delegates to the Town Clerk the authority to
authorize the Town water supply system to be immediately shut off at the curb
stop, with such action to be ratified by the Town Board, upon determining that
any of the following conditions exist:
10-4.1. The property is vacant as defined in Ordinance No. 16
(Nuisance);
10-4.2. The property is unsecured;
10-4.3. The property is determined to be uninhabitable or unsuitable
for occupancy;
10-4.4. Other utilities to the property providing heat and/or light have
been shut off;
10-4.5. The property has plumbing that is failing or unsafe;
4
10-4.6. Running water to the property creates an unsanitary or
unsafe condition to anyone who may enter the property; or
10-5. Uncontrolled running water which is creating unsanitary or unsafe
conditions that cannot be shut off at the curb stop and would require excavation
at the curb stop location. This situation shall be considered a nuisance condition
and shall be processed and abated in accordance with Ordinance No. 16,
(Nuisance) Section 11 – Emergency Abatement Procedure.
10-6. The water service shall not be turned on to the property until it has
been approved by the Building Official or any agent designated by the Building
Official, and all necessary permits have been issued and fees have been paid.
The inspection fee shall be as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
SECTION 11. INTERRUPTIONS TO WATER SUPPLY. The Town shall not be
liable for any lack of water supply to its customers, in the event of repair of
watermains or connection of new watermains or in the event of fire prevention, or
any other cause, and such water supply may be interrupted for as long as is
necessary to complete the necessary work.
SECTION 12. RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER. The Town or any of its officers
or agents shall not be liable or responsible for freezing, faulty plumbing, leaking
service connections or lines or damages caused thereby, directly or indirectly or
the repairing, thawing or replacement thereof. The property owner is responsible
for water lines from the house up to and including the corporation cock in the
street.
12-1. All repairs to a property owners water line performed within the
street right-of-way shall be done by or at the direct supervision of Town forces
and the cost of which the property owner shall be responsible for.
SECTION 13. ACCESS TO BUILDINGS. All water service through the Town
Water Supply System shall be furnished through a water meter of the kind
designated by the Town Board. All meters will be equipped with an outside
reading device. The meter and outside reading device shall be installed in a
location on the premises suitable for easy access for examination and reading,
and safe from frost and other damage. All meters shall be under the control and
supervision of the Town and shall be sealed by employees of the Town or
persons delegated by them to perform that task.
13-1. If a water meter has not been installed at any property that has
received reasonable notice, the property served by Township water shall be
billed the residential non-metered water fee and the non-compliant fee as set
forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges) until such time as water meter
installation is complete.
5
13-2 The Town Board finds that the reading of water meters is necessary
to accurately determine water usage and charges. The officers of the Town and
every person delegated by them for that purpose shall have free access at
reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises
connected with the Town Water Supply System. However, if access to the water
meter is denied, the property served by the water meter shall be billed the fixed
fee rate plus the non-compliant fee as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees &
Charges) until such time as the Town or its designee is permitted access to the
building or premises.
13-3. At the written request of any owner a person designated by the
Town may test or cause to be tested the meter supplying the premises. A meter
testing fee in the amount set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges) will be
paid before the meter is tested. If the meter is found to be faulty, the meter
testing fee may be returned. If the meter is found to be measuring water
accurately, then the meter testing fee will be retained by the Township to pay for
the testing. The result of such test will be reported to the owner.
13-4. If the testing of a meter as stated in Section 13-3, indicates that the
register has caused overcharging to the owner, the owner may be refunded
based on the corresponding quarter of the previous year, or if for any other
reason the charge for such corresponding period cannot be justly applied, the
charge will be equitably adjusted by a person designated by the Town.
13-5. The owner is prohibited from obstructing the meter so as to prohibit
the reading or repairing of the meter.
13-6. It shall be unlawful for anyone to intentionally misread or tamper with
any meter so as to avoid charges for water.
13-7. All water meters shall be obtained from the Township at the cost set
forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
SECTION 14. TAPPING OF MAINS PROHIBITED. No person except
contractors employed or authorized by the Town or any of its officers or agents,
shall tap any distributing main or pipe of the Town Water Supply System, or
insert stop-clocks or ferrules therein.
SECTION 15. EXCAVATING PERMITS REQUIRED. No person shall excavate
in a public street to service a water main, make connections therewith, or for any
purpose which will expose a water main, unless given a permit to do so by the
Town or authorized to do so on behalf of the Town or any of its officers or agents.
SECTION 16. CORPORATIONS AND SERVICE LINES. The corporation
inserted in the distributing pipe must be of the size specified in the permit order.
Every service pipe must be laid sufficiently waving to allow not less than one foot
6
of extra length, and in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The
service pipe must be placed not less than seven feet below the surface and in all
cases so arranged as to prevent rupture from freezing.
SECTION 17. CURB STOPS AND SHUT-OFF VALVES. Service pipes must
extend from the main to the inside of the building, or if not taken into a building
then to the hydrant or other fixtures which it is intended to supply. A curb stop
assessable from the surface through a stand pipe without digging in all cases
must be placed outside in a box located at a point not to exceed 2 feet from the
property line or such other suitable place as the Town or any of its officers or
agents or any of its officers or agents shall determine, and a shut-off or other
shut-off value with waste, of the size and strength required, shall be placed close
to the inside wall of the building, well protected from freezing. All curb stops, and
shut-off values must conform to the specifications of the Town.
17-1. No unauthorized person shall operate a water curb stop connected
to the Town’s water system.
SECTION 18. STREET OPENINGS. Street openings shall be made in a
manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public, provisions must
be made for passage of surface water along the gutters and one-half of the
traveled portion of the street must be at all times in good and safe condition for
passage of vehicles. All open excavations must be plainly marked at all times
with barricades and protected when work is not actually in progress. Pipes or
mains exposed to front or freezing temperatures shall be protected in such a
manner that will prevent freezing of water therein. In addition to the penalties
prescribed herein, any person responsible for exposing a Town main which shall
be damaged by freezing, whether freezing temperature be foreseen or not, shall
be liable to the Town for all damages caused by such freezing.
SECTION 19. REFILLING OPENINGS. On refilling street openings made for
tapping or other work on water mains or service pipes all of the earth must be
replaced in the trench and thoroughly puddled or tamped, and the surface of the
street shall be restored to as good order as it was before excavation, to the
satisfaction of the Town or any of its officers or agents or any of its officers or
agents. All dirt and debris from such work must be removed immediately from
the public street. Any person or persons who shall neglect to comply with the
requirements of this section within 24 hours after notice from the Town shall be
liable to the Town for the full cost of restoring such excavated portions of said
street to proper condition.
SECTION 20. PRESSURE REQUIREMENTS. All appliances, boilers and
fixtures shall be constructed of sufficient strength to withstand a working pressure
of 100 pounds per square inch. Curb stops and other appurtenances must have
sufficient strength to resist a similar pressure under similar circumstances.
7
SECTION 21. REPAIR OF LEAKS. In case of failure upon the part of any
consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring upon said consumer’s service
pipe within 24 hours after verbal or written notice has been given upon the
premises, water will be shut off from the same and will not be turned on until the
repair has been completed. When the waste of water is great, or when damage
is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the repair is not
preceded with immediately upon the giving of such notice.
SECTION 22. OLD CORPORATIONS PLUGGED. When new buildings are
erected on the sites of old ones, and it is desired to increase or change the old
water service, no connections with the mains shall be given until all the old
corporations shall have been removed and the main plugged. If any contractor,
workman or employee upon such building shall cause or allow any service pipe
to be hammered together at the ends to stop the flow of water or save expense in
removing such pipe from the main, the owner or contractor of the building shall
be punished in accordance with Section 26 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 23. EXCAVATIONS FOR TAPPING WATER MAINS. Excavations
made for the purpose of making a tap from the Town water mains shall be at
least 2 ½ feet wide by 4 feet long inside the curbing, said 4 feet to be measured
from a point 6 inches beyond the side of the main opposite to that which is to be
tapped and from said point toward the building with which said water connection
is to be made. Such excavations shall extend to the depth of at least 12 inches
lower than the bottom of the water main. Ample clear space shall be allowed
around the main in all cases to insert the tapping machine. In case the
excavation is not properly made, sufficient clear space is not provided, or the
excavation improperly curbed, the tap shall not be made until the excavation
clear space and curbing are proper and safe. A safe ladder shall be furnished by
the person doing the work for the use of the inspector for the purpose of
inspecting the connection to the Town’s main.
SECTION 24. SPRINKLING.
24-1. RESTRICTED HOURS. The use of the Town Water Supply System
for lawn sprinkling and irrigation, shall be limited to the following hours and days
for the entire year:
24-1.1. Even numbered houses may use their Water System for the
above stated uses only on even numbered days from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
24-1.2. Odd numbered houses may use their Water System for the above
stated uses only on add numbered days from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
8
24-1.3. The Town Board may, by resolution, revise the hours of
sprinkling.
24-1.4. The Town Clerk may temporarily revise the hours for sprinkling
when water system storage levels fall below the standards provided in the
Town Community Water Supply Plan for an unreasonable period of time.
The temporary revision of hours for sprinkling shall remain in effect until
the next meeting of the Town Board. At its next meeting, the Town Board,
by resolution, may adopt the revised hours or otherwise change the hours
for sprinkling. If no action is taken by the Town Board, the hours for
sprinkling shall return to the times provided in Sections 24-1.1 and 24-1.2,
or Section 24-1.3.
24-2. SPRINKLING VIOLATIONS.
24-2.1. Any person found to have violated the restricted sprinkling hours
set out in Section 24-1 shall receive one written warning.
24-2.2. Any person found to have violated the restricted sprinkling hours
set out in Section 24-1 two times within the same calendar year, shall
receive a written sprinkling violation and will be charged a $40.00
Administrative Fee for the second and any following violations. The $40.00
fee will be added to their quarterly utility bill. This fee shall be in addition to
any other penalties imposed by this Ordinance.
24-3. APPEAL PROCEDURE.
24-3.1. If any resident wishes to appeal their $40.00 Administrative Fee
for violation of the sprinkling restrictions, the resident may provide the
Town Clerk with a written request stating the circumstances surrounding
the violation(s), and request that the Town Board reconsider the
Administrative Fee. The matter will then be placed on a future meeting
agenda of the Town Board for consideration.
24-3.2. At the meeting the objecting person may:
24-3.2.(a). Appear and give their written or oral testimony; and/or
24-3.2.(b). Give written or oral testimony of witnesses.
24-3.3. Town Board may give its decision orally at the meeting or at a
later date. The Town Board shall:
24-3.3.(a). Find for the objecting person and waive the $40.00
Administrative Fee; or
9
24-3.3.(b). Find against the objecting person and impose the
$40.00 Administrative Fee; or
24-3.3.(c). Find against the objecting person and suspend
collection of the $40.00 Administrative Fee on the condition that no
further sprinkling violations occur within a calendar year. However,
in the event another sprinkling violation is received, the suspended
fee, plus the additional fee, shall both be added to the person’s
quarterly utility bill.
SECTION 25. PERMIT APPLICATIONS. No permit herein required shall be
granted unless application therefore be made in writing and signed by the owner
or his agent duly authorized to do the work. The application must state clearly the
kind of service for which the connection is intended; the size and kind of pipe to
be used, the street and number, which side of street if on a corner, on which
street to be tapped, with a diagram of the property to be supplied, showing the
streets, the boundary, the block on which it is situated, with the distance from the
nearest corner, the full name and address of the owner, the purpose for which
the water is to be used, the time when the ferrule is to be inserted, and the
application shall show all other particulars necessary to the full understanding of
the subject. No permit shall authorize anything not stated in the application. For
any misrepresentation in such application, the permit may be suspended, and if
the misrepresentation appears to be willful, the permit may be revoked.
25-1. INSPECTIONS. The Plumbing Inspector shall examine all
applications before construction is begun, and after the construction,
enlargement, alteration or repair is complete, the Plumbing Inspector shall be
notified. It shall be unlawful to cover any affected lines until an inspection has
been made and such connection and the work incidental thereto has been
approved by the Town as a proper and suitable connection. It shall be the duty of
the contractor and/or plumber to notify the Plumbing Inspector by telephone or in
writing not less than eight (8) working hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
4:30 p.m. before work is to be inspected or tested.
25-2. DAMAGE TO CURB STOP. Before any grading or excavation is
started, the curb stop and stand pipe or riser shall be located and checked for
damage by the Public Works Department at that time the connection permit is
issued. The contractor assumes all responsibility for damage to the curb stop
and stand pipe or riser unless the Public Works Department certifies the damage
existed before excavation or grading is started. After backfilling and grading is
completed, the contractor shall immediately notify the Public Works Department
so that inspection can be made to insure that the curb stop and stand pipe or
riser is not in a damaged or bent condition.
SECTION 26. HYDRANT WATER SALES. Any person wishing to open any fire
hydrant must first receive Township approval, and then pay the hydrant meter
10
deposit amount, permit fee, and rental fee, as set forth in Ordinance No. 54
(Fees & Charges). All water used in connection with the hydrant use will be billed
at the commercial rate set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
SECTION 27. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided by Ordinance No. 26
(Maximum Fines).
SECTION 28. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in force and effect
from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey
County, Minnesota, this 2nd day of February, 2009.
APPROVED:
_____________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
_____________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press February 11, 2009.
Historical Notes
2013
Section 7-1 and 7-2 passed August 5, 2013, and effective August 14, 2013 by Mample
(Chair); Kermes and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2011
Section 12, passed October 17, 2011, and effective October 26, 2011 by Mample (Chair);
Kermes and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 13, 17, and 26, passed May 16, 2011, and effective June 1, 2011 by Mample
(Chair); Kermes and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2009
Sections, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 20, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, passed February 2, 2009, and effective February 11, 2009 by Weisenburger, (Chair);
Sand, Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1997
Section 23, passed December 1, 1997, and effective December 17, 1997 by
Weisenburger, (Chair); Sand, Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1995
Section 23, passed June 23 1995, and effective June 28, 1995 by Weisenburger, (Chair);
Sand, Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
11
12
1992
Sections 23C and 25, passed June 1, 1992, and effective June 10, 1992 by
Weisenburger, (Chair); Sand, Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 8, passed July 20, 1992, and effective August 5, 1992 by Weisenburger, (Chair);
Sand, Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 11, passed August 17, 1992, and effective August 26, 1992 by Weisenburger,
(Chair); Sand, Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1991
Section 7B, passed April 15, 1991, and effective May 1, 1991 by Weisenburger, (Chair);
Sand, Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1988
Section 23, passed March 21, 1988, and effective April 27, 1988 by Weisenburger,
(Chair); Jungkunz, Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1980
Section 8, passed July 28, 1980, and effective August 7, 1980 by Perron, (Chair), Sand,
Jungkunz; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 8, passed October 6, 1980, and effective October 9, 1980 by Perron (Chair),
Sand, Jungkunz; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer).
1976
Sections 12A, 24A and 24B, passed March 1, 1976, and effective March 11, 1976 by
Perron, (Chair), Sand, Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1975
Section 8, passed February 3, 1975, and effective February 13, 1975 by Perron, (Chair),
Sand, Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1972
Section 6, passed May 22, 1972, and effective June 1, 1972 by Rooney, (Chair), Perron,
King; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1961
Sections 7, 11 and 23, passed May 8, 1961, and effective May 11, 1961 by Kumm,
(Chair), _________; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer).
1960
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, and 26, originally passed February 4, 1960, and effective February 25, 1960 by Blair (Chair);
Kumm and Hovey; Wright (Clerk-Treasurer).






ORDINANCE NO. 15
Table of Contents
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING
ORDINANCES
SECTION 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-1. Short Title
2-2. Purpose
2-3. Interpretation
2-4. Scope
2-5. Platting Authority
2-6. Requirement
2-7. Planned Unit Development (PUD)
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS.
SECTION 4. SKETCH PLAN
4-1. General
4-2. Required Sketch Plan Data
SECTION 5. PRELIMINARY PLAT –MINOR SUBDIVISION
5-1. General
5-2. Future Subdivision
SECTION 6. PRELIMINARY PLAT – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
6-1. Procedure
6-2. Data Required for Preliminary Plat
6-3. Design Features of Preliminary Plat
SECTION 7. FINAL PLAT
7-1. General
7-2. Data Requirements for Final Plat
SECTION 8. DESIGN STANDARDS
8-1. General Design
8-2. The Design of Streets
8-3. Easement Requirements
8-4. Blocks
8-5. Lots
SECTION 9. CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
9-1. General
9-2. Procedures for Construction of Public Improvements
SECTION 10. PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, OPEN SPACE AND STORM
WATER HOLDING AREAS
10-1. General
SECTION 11. VARIANCES
SECTION 12. BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION 13. PENALTIES
SECTION 14. SEVERABILITY
SECTION 15. EFFECTIVE DATE
2
ORDINANCE NO. 15
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 15 OF THE TOWN
OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA, ADOPTED
AUGUST 31, 1978, AS AMENDED, BEING AN ORDINANCE
ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE
SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING WITHIN THE TOWN OF WHITE
BEAR, ESTABLISHING THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
AS THE PLATTING AUTHORITY, PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR
THE VIOLATION THEREOF, AND REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES
AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREIN
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
Ordinance No. 15, being an Ordinance regulating the subdivision of land in the
Town of White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, approved August 31, 1978, as
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows, and all other Ordinances or
parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. In all other
respects all other Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
2-1. SHORT TITLE. This Ordinance shall be known as the
“SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY
COUNTY, MINNESOTA” (Ordinance No. 15), and will be referred to herein as
“this Ordinance”.
2-2. PURPOSE. This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to powers granted
by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.358, and other applicable sections to provide
for orderly, economic and safe development of land and urban services and
facilities and to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. In
order that new subdivisions will contribute toward an attractive, orderly, stable
and wholesome community environment, adequate municipal services and safe
streets, all subdivisions hereafter platted with the Town shall fully comply with the
regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
2-3. INTERPRETATION. The interpretation and application of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be the minimum requirements adopted for the
protection of public health, safety, good order and general welfare of the Town.
2-4. SCOPE. Except in the case of resubdivision, this Ordinance shall
not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of
the Registrar of Deeds prior to July 30, 1964. It is not the intention of this
Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with
3
existing provisions of other laws or Ordinances except those specifically repealed
by, or in conflict with this Ordinance, or with private restrictions placed upon
property by deed, covenant or other private agreement, or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the Town is a part. Where this
Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by
such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract of deed, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
2-5. PLATTING AUTHORITY. The Town Board of Supervisors shall
serve as the platting authority in accordance with Minnesota Law 1965, Chapter
670, as amended, (Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.358). No plat, replat,
subdivision of land, or registered land survey, shall be filed or accepted for filing
by the Registrar of Titles or County Recorder of Ramsey County, unless it is
accompanied by a certified copy of a resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of
a majority of the member of the Board approving plat, replat, subdivision of land,
or registered land survey.
2-6. REQUIREMENT. All subdivisions which create five (5) or more lots
or parcels which are 2 ½ acres or less in size shall be platted.
2-7. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). Planned Unit
Developments shall be in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 35,
Section 7-10.
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS.
3-1. For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words and terms are
hereby defined as follows:
3-1.1. BLOCK is an area of land within a subdivision entirely bounded by
streets or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above, with a stream or lake.
3-1.2. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN is a compilation of policy statements,
goals, maps and standards governing the physical, social and economic
development, both public and private, of the community and its environs.
3-1.3. CUL-DE-SAC is a residential access street with only one (1) outlet
and a circular turn-around at its end.
3-1.4. DESIGN STANDARDS are the specification to land-owners or
subdividers for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final,
indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum or maximum
dimensions of such items as right-of-way, blocks, easements, lots, etc.
4
3-1.5. EASEMENTS are a grant by the property owner for the use of a
portion of land for the express purpose of construction and maintenance of
slopes, grade transitions or utilities.
3-1.6. FREEWAY is a fully controlled access highway.
3-1.7. GRADES, SLOPE OR GRADIENT is the rate of vertical drop or
rise from any fixed horizontal line.
3-1.8. IMPROVEMENTS mean the construction or installation of public or
private utilities including, but not limited to, water and sanitary sewer
systems, storm sewers, roads and other thoroughfares, sidewalks, curbs
and gutters, paving barricades, trees and other plantings, lighting, fuel or
energy and the transmission thereof, transportation systems or facilities
connected therewith, and communications systems which are necessary,
desirable or convenient in the maintenance of the health, safety and the
general welfare.
3-1.9. LOT is a parcel of land delineated upon and thereafter described by
reference to a plat, registered land survey or auditor’s subdivisions, or
other similar recorded dedicatory document.
3-1.10. OPEN SPACES are areas set aside for the preservation of
natural open space to counteract the effects of urban monotony.
3-1.11. OWNER is any person, firm or corporation or any other legal
entity or a combination of any of them, having sufficient legal proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided, to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this Ordinance.
3-1.12. PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS are public lands and open space
in the community dedicated as usable for active recreation purposes.
3-1.13. PEDESTRIAN WAY is a public or private right-of-way within or
across a block or blocks, to provide access for pedestrians or utilities.
3-1.14. PERSON is any individual, firm, association, syndicate or
partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
3-1.15. PLANNING COMMISSION is the Planning Commission of the
Town of White Bear.
3-1.16. PLAT, FINAL is a drawing or map of a subdivision which consists
of all the requirements of final preliminary plat as approved by the Town
Board and is in such form as meets the state and county requirements for
purposes of recording.
5
3-1.17. PLAT, FINAL PRELIMINARY is a resubmittal of the preliminary
plat, which includes conditions, revisions and requirements noted in the
Town Board approval of the preliminary plat. The final preliminary plat,
when approved, will be on file in the Town Offices and will be the official
document indicating layout of subdivision and ultimate development and
land use of the subdivision.
3-1.18. PLAT, PRELIMINARY is the tentative drawing or map indicating
the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted hereunder in
compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and these regulations including
required supporting data.
3-1.19. PROTECTIVE COVENANTS are contracts made between private
parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view to
protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of a given
area.
3-1.20. REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS are defined as those
improvements in any proposed subdivision, including streets, water and
sewer systems and storm water drainage systems, and others which are
required in connection with the approval of any plat or other subdivision.
3-1.21. RIGHT-OF-WAY is the publicly owned area between adjacent
private property lines within the limits of a street or pedestrian right-of-way.
3-1.22. STREET is a publicly owned right-of-way affording primary access
to pedestrians and vehicles whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue or however otherwise designated.
Ownership of right-of-way by the public shall include the right to use said
right-of-way for construction of streets, watermains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, drainage ways and any other public service deemed necessary by
the Board.
3-1.23. STREETS, PRIMARY are the streets serving commercial,
industrial and/or manufacturing areas and/or connection points of major
traffic interest within the Town. Such streets may include minor arterials,
collectors, and some local roadways as defined in the Town of White Bear
Comprehensive Plan.
3-1.24. STREETS, RESIDENTIAL ACCESS are local streets providing
access to residents only, and not serving business, commercial, or
manufacturing areas, and not connection points of major traffic interest.
3-1.25. STREET WIDTH is the shortest distance between the lines
delineating the right-of-way of a street.
6
3-1.26. SUBDIVIDER is any person commencing proceedings under this
Ordinance or to the effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for
another.
3-1.27. SUBDIVISION means the separation of an area, parcel or tract of
land under single ownership into two or more parcels, tracts, lots, or longterm
leasehold interests, except those separations:
3-1.27(a). Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests
will be twenty (20) acres or larger in size and 500 feet in width for
residential uses and five (5) acres or larger in size for commercial
and industrial uses.
3-1.27(b). Creating cemetery lots; and
3-1.27(c). Resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot
line by the relocation of a common boundary.
3-1.28. SUBDIVISION, MAJOR means any subdivision containing three
(3) or more lots whether fronting on existing or requiring creation of any
new street or road; whether utilizing existing or requiring the extension of
municipal facilities or public improvements, and not adversely affecting the
remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any
provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, or
these regulations.
3-1.29. SUBDIVISION, MINOR means the division of one (1) parcel of
land into two (2) parcels of land neither of which parcels can be further
subdivided, and fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street
or road, or the extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any
public improvement, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the
parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or
portion of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, or these
regulations. A minor subdivision is sometimes referred to as a “lot split”
3-1.29(a). ADMINISTRATIVE LOT SPLITS. The Town Clerk
may approve a minor subdivision of any previously subdivided
properties which have been joined together for tax purposes,
subject to the resulting lots meeting current minimum lot size, width
and other applicable requirements established by Town Ordinance.
Such minor subdivision shall not require any rearrangement of
property lines and shall not have any adverse impact on the subject
property or surrounding properties. If the minor subdivision is not
so authorized, the applicant may apply for a minor subdivision
pursuant to the requirements of Section 5.
7
3-1.30. THOROUGHFARES connect primary streets and residential
access streets with freeways and other points of traffic interest.
Thoroughfares are shown in the Town of White Bear Comprehensive
Plan.
3-1.31. TOWN is the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota.
3-1.32. TOWN BOARD is the Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear.
SECTION 4. SKETCH PLAN
4-1. GENERAL. Subdividers may prepare for review with the Town
Board and the Town Planning Commission, a subdivision sketch plan.
Such sketch plan will be considered as submitted for normal discussion
between the subdivider and the Town Board or the Town Planning
Commission. No fee shall be required of the subdivider for the submission
of such sketch plan. Submission of a subdivision sketch plan shall
constitute formal filing of a plat with the Town Board. On the basis of the
sketch plan, the Town Board or the Town Planning Commission will
informally advise the subdivider as promptly as possible of the extent to
which the proposed subdivisions conform to the design standards of this
Ordinance and to the other Ordinances of the Town, and will discuss
possible modifications necessary to secure approval of the plan.
4-2. REQUIRED SKETCH PLAN DATA.
4-2.1. The subdivider shall furnish the Town Board or Town Planning
Commission with the following data:
4-2.1(a). A sketch of the site showing its general shape, size,
adjacent roadways, adjacent land uses, and other significant
features in the immediate area.
4-2.1(b). Type of development proposed, including existing and
proposed zoning.
4-2.1(c). Preliminary road or street layout and lot arrangement,
including lot dimensions.
SECTION 5. PRELIMINARY PLAN – MINOR SUBDIVISION.
5-1. GENERAL. If a subdivision meets the criteria established in the
definition of a minor subdivision, the applicant may proceed in the following
manner:
8
5-1.1. The subdivider shall file with the Town Clerk, an application for a
minor subdivision together with:
5-1.1(a). A sketch plan of the site showing its general shape,
size, adjacent roadways, adjacent land uses, and other significant
features in the immediate area.
5-1.1(b). Type of development proposed, including existing and
proposed zoning.
5-1.1(c). Lot arrangement, including lot dimensions.
5-1.2. The Town Clerk shall refer copies of the sketch plan to the Planning
Commission and Town Board.
5-1.3. The Planning Commission shall study and review the plan to
determine whether such plan conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and
other Town plans and Ordinances as they may deem applicable, and
submits its report to the Town Board.
5-1.4. The Town Board shall act on the minor subdivision within sixty (60)
days of the date on which it was filed with the Town Clerk. The Town
Board may require such revisions in the minor subdivision as it deems
necessary for the health, safety, good order, general welfare and
convenience of the Town. If the minor subdivision is not approved, the
reasons for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings and
transmitted to the applicant.
5-2. REPEALED by Amendment to Ordinance No. 15
5-3. All expenses incurred by the Town associated with reviewing and
processing a request for a minor subdivision (lot split) approval, shall be the
responsibility of the applicant. Costs may include, but are not limited to the
following: Town staff review time (reports, meetings, site review, legal
compliance, etc.); consulting engineer review; Town Attorney review (legal
research, agreements, waivers, etc.); publication costs (notice of hearing). The
applicant shall also be responsible for all costs associated with Special Town
Meetings (other than regularly scheduled meetings) if scheduled at the request of
the applicant.
SECTION 6. PRELIMINARY PLAT – MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
6-1. PROCEDURE. Prior to platting and subdividing any tract of land
into three (3) or more lots, the following procedures shall be followed:
9
6-1.1. The subdivider shall have a preliminary plat prepared on the basis
of the Town plans, design standards, and data set forth by this Ordinance.
6-1.2. The subdivider shall then file an application for a major subdivision
with the Town Clerk, together with:
6-1.2(a). Fourteen (14) copies of the preliminary plat.
6-1.2(b). A cash fee as established from time to time by Town
Ordinance. This fee shall be credited toward any costs or
expenses incurred by the Town in connection with approval or
disapproval of said preliminary plat or final plat. The subdivider
shall be responsible for all costs of approval or disapproval, and the
balance of such expenses over and above the cash fee shall be
paid to the Town at the time the plat is approved or disapproved.
6-1.3. The subdivider shall submit eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat
to the Ramsey County Surveyor and if applicable, one copy each, to the
Minnesota Department of Transportation and Ramsey County Highway
Department.
6-1.4. The Town Clerk shall then refer one (1) copy of the preliminary plat
to each member of the Planning Commission, one (1) copy to the Town
Engineer, one (1) copy to the Town Planner, one (1) copy to the Town
Attorney, one (1) copy to either the Rice Creek Watershed District or
Vadnais Lake Water Management Organization (VLAWMO), and if any
part of the land is designated “wetland” by the Town, one (1) copy to the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
6-1.4(a). When a proposed preliminary plat borders an existing
or proposed County road, highway or County State Aid Highway,
the Town shall submit the proposed plat to the County Engineer for
review and comment within five days of receipt by the Town. The
County Engineer shall provide to the Town written comments
stating whether the proposed plat meets County guidelines and
describing any modifications necessary to bring the plat into
conformity with the County guidelines within 30 days of receipt by
the County.
6-1.4(b). When a proposed preliminary plat borders an existing
or establishing trunk highway or proposed highway which has been
designated by a centerline order filed in the office of the County
Recorder, the Town shall submit the proposed plat to the
Commissioner of Transportation for review and comment within five
days of receipt by the Town. The Commissioner of Transportation
10
shall submit written comments and recommendations to the Town
within 30 days after receipt by the Commissioner of such plat.
6-1.5. The Planner and Engineer shall submit written reports to the Town
Board and the Town Planning Commission, which shall deal with utility
services, drainage, streets and other pertinent planning and engineering
matters, prior to the public hearing date.
6-1.6. The Planning Commission shall study and review the preliminary
plat to determine whether such plan conforms to the data requirements,
design features and design standards set forth in this Ordinance, and shall
submit its report to the Town Board, on or before the hearing on the
preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall also review subdivision
proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that: all such
proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; all
public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage; and adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
6-1.7. A public hearing on the preliminary plat shall be held not earlier
than fourteen (14) days nor later than sixty (60) days after submission of
the preliminary plat. Notice of said hearing shall be published once in the
official newspaper of the Town, at least ten (10) days before the day of
hearing. The subdivision application shall be preliminarily approved or
disapproved within one hundred twenty (120) days following delivery of an
application completed in compliance with the Town Ordinance by the
applicant to the Town.
6-1.8. The Town Board shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days
of the date on which it was filed with the Town Clerk. If the report of the
Planning Commission has not been received in time to meet this
requirement, the Board may act without such report. The Board may
require such revisions in the preliminary plat as it deems necessary for the
health, safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the Town.
Approval of a preliminary plat by the Board is tentative only, involving
merely the general acceptability of the layout. Subsequent approval will
be required of the engineering proposals pertaining to water supply, storm
drainage, sewerage and sewage disposal, gas and electric service,
grading, gradients, and roadway widths and surfacing of streets. If the
preliminary plat is not approved by the Board, the reasons for such action
shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Board and transmitted to the
applicant.
6-1.9. FINAL PRELIMINARY PLAT. All revisions, conditions and/or
requirements noted in the approval of the preliminary plat shall be
11
incorporated into a revised preliminary plat and resubmitted to the Town
Board for final preliminary plat approval.
6-1.9(a). Within six (6) months following approval of the
preliminary plat, unless an extension of time is requested in writing
by the subdivider and granted by the Town Board, the subdivider
shall file seven (7) copies of the final preliminary plat with the Town
Clerk. Said plat shall incorporate all changes required by the Board
and in all other respects, it shall conform to the preliminary plat as
approved. If said plat is not filed within six (6) months following
approval of the preliminary plat, the approval of the preliminary plat
shall be considered void.
6-1.9(b). The Town shall certify final preliminary plat approval
within sixty (60) days, provided the applicant has complied with all
conditions and requirements of applicable regulations and all
conditions and requirements upon which the preliminary approval is
expressly conditioned and through the execution of appropriate
agreements which may be required to assure the construction of
any required public improvements (see Section 9-2).
6-1.9(c). Prior to the Town Board approval of a final preliminary
plat, the following procedures shall be followed:
1. FILING OF ABSTRACT. At the time of filing the final
preliminary plat with the Town Clerk, the subdivider shall also file
with said Clerk, an abstract, certificate of title, or registered property
abstract, certified to date, evidencing ownership of the premises
involved in the plat.
2. REFERENCE. The subdivider shall refer seven (7) copies of
the final preliminary plat to the Town Clerk, one (1) copy either to
the Rice Creek Watershed District or Vadnais Lake Water
Management Organization, four (4) copies to the Ramsey County
Surveyor, one (1) copy to the local telephone utility company.
3. The Town Clerk shall then refer two (2) copies of said plat to
the Town Engineer and one (1) copy to the Town Planner.
4. The Clerk shall refer the abstract or certificate of title or
registered property report to the Town Attorney for his examination
and report.
5. The subdivider shall also submit copies of the final
preliminary plat to other agencies of public bodies for their review,
as directed by the Town Board.
12
6. The Engineer and Attorney shall submit their reports to the
Town Board within fifteen (15) days after the filing of the final
preliminary plat. The Engineer shall state whether said plat and the
improvements conform to the engineering and design standards
and specifications of the Town. The Attorney shall state his opinion
as to the title of the premises involved.
7. FEES. The subdivider shall pay the fees of the Engineer,
Planner and Attorney for their services and reports rendered in
connection with the final preliminary plat, and shall pay other
expenses incurred by the Town, as a direct result of the review of
the plat, excepting the expenses of regular meetings and
administration handling. Cost incurred as a result of special
meetings shall be paid by the subdivider. All said costs shall be
paid in full at the time of approval of said plat.
8. The final preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance
with all applicable State Laws and County Ordinances.
6-2. DATA REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT. It shall be a
condition to the acceptance of a preliminary plat for filing with the Town Clerk that
the following data be a part of said plat:
6-2.1. IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION.
6-2.1(a). Proposed name of subdivision which name shall not
duplicate nor be alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat
already recorded in the County wherein said land is situated.
6-2.1(b). Full legal description of the land involved in said plat.
6-2.1(c). Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider,
surveyor and designer of the plans.
6-2.1(d). If the subdivider is not the fee owner of the land, the
subdivider shall submit the written consent of the fee owner, to the
Clerk at the time of filing said preliminary plat.
6-2.1(e). Graphic scale.
6-2.1(f). North point.
6-2.1(g). Date of preparation.
13
6-2.1(h). Certification by Registered Land Surveyor to the
accuracy of the survey.
6-2.2. EXISTING CONDITIONS.
6-2.2(a). A boundary line survey according to legal description
including measured distances and angles, which shall be tied to the
nearest quarter section or section line.
6-2.(b). Total acreage of proposed subdivision.
6-2.3. EXISTING CONDITIONS THAT SHALL BE SHOWN IN AND
WITHIN 100 FEET OF THE PROPOSED SUBDIVISION.
6-2.3(a). Location and names of existing or platted streets and
other public ways, parks and other public open spaces, permanent
buildings and structures, easements, and section and municipal
boundary lines.
6-2.3(b). Any wetland in accordance with the Township Zoning
Map.
6-2.3(c). Zoning classification for the preliminary plat.
6-2.3(d). Boundaries and land owner names of adjoining
unsubdivided or subdivided land.
6-2.3(e). All permanent buildings and structures.
6-2.3(f). Location, width and type of surfacing of existing
roadways, location of railroads, sanitary sewers, watermains, storm
sewers, gas, telephone and electric lines, cable TV lines, culverts
and other drainage structures, manholes, hydrants and any other
underground facilities. Invert elevations shall be provided for all
sewer and storm drainage structures.
6-2.3(g). Topographic data, including contours at vertical
intervals of two (2) feet, water courses, lakes, marshes, wood
areas, rock outcrops, drainage tile and other significant features
shall be shown. 1920 National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD),
shall be used for all topographic mapping where available.
6-2.3(h). A permanent, accessible bench mark shall be set
within the area to be platted, and the location and the NGVD
elevation of this bench mark shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
14
6-2.3(i). Soils data, ground water elevations and such other
related data as requested by the Engineer.
6-2.3(j). The maximum high-water level as defined in the
Department of Natural Resources Regulations and State-Wide
Standards and Criteria for Management of Shoreland Areas of
Minnesota, or as available from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
shall be shown for all permanent bodies of water within or abutting
the area to be subdivided.
6-2.4. ADDITIONAL SUPPORTING DATA TO BE FURNISHED.
6-2.4(a). Statement of proposed use of lots, i.e., whether
residential, commercial, industrial or combination thereof. If
residential, state type and number of dwelling units. Furnish
sufficient details for all types of usage in order to reveal the effect of
the subdivision development on traffic, fire protection and density of
population.
6-2.4(b). Source of water supply.
6-2.4(c). Facilities for sewage disposal.
6-2.4(d). If zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed
zoning for the area.
6-2.4(e). In areas affected by inadequate surface drainage or
subjected to periodic flooding, furnish proposals designated to
make the area safe for occupancy, and to provide for adequate
street and lot drainage.
6-2.4(f). Proposals for street lighting, curb, gutter, sidewalks
and boulevard improvements.
6-2.4(g). Before any residential plan may be approved and
before any permit may be issued for a residence therein, the
subdivider shall first present competent proof that the ground water
level at all times in said subdivision is not less than three (3) feet
below the level of the lowest portion of the proposed structure, or
that a satisfactory system of ground water control will be
constructed as an integral part of the proposed subdivision.
6-2.4(h). Such other information as shall be requested by the
Planning Commission, Engineer or Planner.
15
6-2.4(i). Sketch plan of water supply, sewage disposal,
drainage and flood control shall be shown as supplemental data
and not shown on the face of the final plat.
6-2.4(j). If, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, there exists
any soil limitations, the subdivider shall have soil borings taken at
places designated by the Town Engineer. Also, if individual
sewage disposal systems are proposed, percolation tests shall be
performed as required by the Town Engineer or the Building
Inspector.
6-2.4(k). Any supplementary engineering data required by the
Town Engineer.
6-2.4(l). Any additional data or standards that may be required
by Ramsey County.
6-2.4(m). When lots are located on a curve or when side lot
lines are at angles of other than 90 degrees, the width of the lot at
the building set-back line shall be indicated.
6-2.4(n). All requirements of Ordinance No. 87 relating to
stormwater management.
6-3. DESIGN FEATURES OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
6-3.1. Design features of the preliminary plat shall indicate the general
use and layout of the proposed subdivision. Refer to Section 8 of this
Ordinance for standards for the design features.
6-3.2. Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths and
proposed names of streets. The name of any street heretofore used in the
community or its environs shall not be used, unless the proposed street is
an extension of an already named street, in which event said names shall
be used.
6-3.3. Location and widths of pedestrian ways and utility easements.
6-3.4. An overall grading plat showing existing vertical contours at two (2)
foot intervals in dashed lines and proposed contours in heavier solid lines.
Minimum basement floor elevations of all proposed buildings shall be
shown.
6-3.5. Layouts of lots and blocks with numbers of each; square footage of
lots and lot dimensions scaled to the nearest foot.
16
6-3.6. Areas, other than streets, pedestrian ways and utility easements
intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of
such area.
6-3.7. Minimum front and side yard building setback lines as required by
the Zoning Ordinance of the Town.
6-3.8. Proposed method of disposing of surface water drainage within and
beyond the limits of the plat.
6-3.9. Whenever a portion of a tract of land is proposed for subdividing
and said tract is large enough or is intended for future enlargement, a
tentative plan for the future subdivision of the entire tract shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission.
SECTION 7. FINAL PLAT.
7-1. GENERAL. The Final Plat may constitute only that portion of the
final preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at the
time, provided that such portion shall conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance, and provided further that the remaining portion or portions of the final
preliminary plat not submitted as a Final Plat shall be subject to the right of the
Town to modify in accordance with new or revised platting and subdivision
regulations.
7-1.1. The subdivider shall prepare a final plat for recording purposes and
record it with the County Recorder within thirty (30) days after the date of
approval of the Final Plat; otherwise, the approval shall be considered
void.
7-1.2. The subdivider shall, immediately upon recording, furnish the Town
Clerk with two (2) prints of the final plat showing evidence of the recording
and a reproducible copy of the same.
7-2. DATA REQUIREMENTS FOR FINAL PLAT.
7-2.1. An identification system for all lots and blocks.
7-2.2. Municipal, Township, County or section lines accurately tied to the
boundaries of the subdivision by distances and angles or as required by
Ramsey County.
7-2.3. Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles and
curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, easements, areas
reserved for public use, and other important features shall be shown.
Complete curve data shall be shown including radii, central angles, points
17
and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all areas. Dimensions of
lot lines shall be shown in feet and hundredths of feet. No ditto marks
shall be permitted in indicating dimension.
7-2.4. Certification by registered land surveyor to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers
shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and NGVD details
are correct.
7-2.5. Notarized certification by owner and by any mortgage holder of
record of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public usage ways.
7-2.6. Certification showing that all taxes currently due on the property to
be subdivided have been paid in full.
7-2.7. An approval statement, i.e. “Approved by the Town Board of
Supervisors of the Town of White Bear, this ____ day of _____________,
19___”.
7-2.8. The grading plan shall be approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer. All grading and landscaping shall be done so that fire hydrants
will have the “Break-Off” level with the ground. Fire hydrant extensions
necessary to satisfy this amendment will be installed by the Town with the
installation costs borne by the developer prior to receiving the Certificate
of Occupancy.
SECTION 8. DESIGN STANDARDS.
8-1. GENERAL DESIGN. The design of all streets shall be considered in
their relation to: public safety; existing and planned streets; efficient circulation of
traffic; topographical condition; run-off of storm water; and proposed uses of the
land to be served by such streets. The arrangements of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provisions for the appropriate continuation of existing
streets in adjoining unsubdivided land susceptible to being divided, then the new
streets shall be carried to the boundaries of such unsubdivided land. All new
streets also conform to the Town Comprehensive Plan.
8-2. THE DESIGN OF STREETS. Street design shall conform to the
following:
8-2.1. WIDTH. All streets shall have right-of-way of not less than sixty
(60) feet in width, and primary streets shall be constructed on right-of-way
of such additional width as may be necessary to accommodate the final
completed ultimate street as required by the ultimate use for which the
street is designed. Primary street shall be those streets designated as
18
collector, minor arterial or intermediate arterial on the Thoroughfare Plan
Map of the Town Comprehensive Plan. Any temporary or permanent
street having a width of less than sixty (60) feet shall be considered as a
permissible variance from this ordinance, providing the Town Engineer
shall design such street in the best possible manner for the contemplated
use. The applicant may be required to enter into special agreements
pertaining to such substandard streets.
8-2.2. VERTICAL CURVES. Different converging street gradients shall
be connected with vertical curves. Minimum length, in feet, of said vertical
curves shall be twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in the
percentage of grade of the two (2) adjacent slopes.
8-2.3. DEFLECTIONS. Where horizontal street lines deflect from each
other at any point more than 10 degrees, said street centerlines shall be
connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 200 feet for local
streets and of such greater radii in the case of other streets as the Town
Board may determine.
8-2.4. REVERSE CURVES. Tangents of at least fifty (50) feet in length
shall be introduced between reverse curves on primary streets.
8-2.5. STREET GRADES. All centerline gradients shall be at least 0.5
percent, and shall not exceed the following:
Primary Streets 4 percent
Residential Access Streets 6 percent
except that the Town Engineer may vary this requirement in cases where
such grades are not possible.
8-2.6. RESIDENTIAL ACCESS STREETS. Residential access streets
shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
8-2.7. STREET JOGS. Street jogs with centerline off-sets of less than
125 feet shall be avoided.
8-2.8. INTERSECTIONS. The angle formed by the intersection of streets
shall not be less than sixty (60) degrees, with ninety (90) degree
intersections preferred. Intersections of more than four corners are
prohibited. Access to a street shall be not less than sixty (60) feet from an
intersection.
8-2.9. SAFE INTERSECTIONS. It must be evidenced that all street
intersections and confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow.
19
8-2.10. ALLEYS. Alleys are not permitted in residential areas.
8-2.11. CUL-DE-SACS. Maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be
500 feet measured along the centerline from the intersection of origin to
end of right-of-way. Each cul-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end
with a turn-round having an outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet,
and a street property line diameter at least 120 feet.
8-2.12. HALF STREET. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and adjoining
unsubdivided areas.
8-2.13. SERVICE STREETS. In those instances where a subdivision
abuts or contains an existing or planned primary street or a railroad rightof-
way, the Town Board may require a service street approximately
parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way in order to provide
separation of through and local traffic, such service streets shall be
located at a suitable distance from the primary street or railroad right-ofway
in order to provide for park use of the intervening land in residential
districts or to provide for commercial or industrial use of the intervening
land in commercial or industrial districts. The requirements of approach
grades and future grade separations shall be considered in establishing
the separation distance between said service streets and the primary
street or railroad right-of-way.
8-2.14. RESERVE STRIPS. Reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited except under conditions approved by the Town Board.
8-2.15. PRIVATE STREETS. Except for approved Planned Unit
Developments, private streets shall not be approved nor shall public
improvements be approved for any previously existing private street.
8-2.16. HARDSHIP TO OWNERS OF ADJOINING PROPERTY
AVOIDED. The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause
hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and
providing convenient access to it.
8-2.17. CORNERS. Roadways at street intersections shall be rounded by
a radius of not less than twenty (20) feet.
8-2.18. ADDITIONAL RIGHT-OF-WAY. Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing street of inadequate width, sufficient additional width
shall be provided to meet the required standards.
8-3. EASEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
20
8-3.1. UTILITIES. Easements twenty (20) feet wide, centered on rear
and other lot lines, shall be provided for utilities, where necessary. They
shall have continuity of alignment from block to block. At deflection points,
easements for pole-line anchors shall be provided where necessary.
8-3.2. DRAINAGE. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course,
drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines
of such water courses, together with such further width or construction or
both, as will be adequate for storm water run-off. The easement shall
include not only the stream channel, but also adjoining areas that have
been subject to flooding in years of heavy run-off.
8-4. BLOCKS.
8-4.1. LENGTH. Block lengths shall not exceed 1800 feet, and if
possible, should not be less than 400 feet in length.
8-4.2. ARRANGEMENT. A block shall be so designated as to provide
two tiers of lots, unless it adjoins a railroad or limited access highway and
unless topographic conditions necessitate a single tier or lots.
8-4.3. PEDESTRIAN WAYS. In blocks over 1200 feet long, a pedestrian
way or easement may be required by the Town Board in locations deemed
necessary to public health, convenience and necessity. Such an
easement shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width.
8-5. LOTS.
8-5.1. LOCATION. All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly
dedicated street.
8-5.2. LOT SIZE.
8-5.2.(a). Lots shall conform to Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning
Ordinance) of the Town of White Bear and Ordinance No. 8
(Building Code) of the Town of White Bear, except where in conflict
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
8-5.2(b). CORNER LOTS. Corner lots shall be platted at least
twenty-five (25) feet wider than the minimum lot size required.
8-5.2(c). SIDE LOT LINES. Side lot lines shall be substantially at
right angles.
21
8-5.2(d). WATER COURSES. Lots abutting upon a water course,
drainage way, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or
width, as required to assure house sites that are not subject to
flooding.
8-5.2(e). RESUBDIVISION. Where a lot is proposed to be 22,000
square feet in size, with 150 feet of frontage, considerations will be
given to the future resubdivision of the lot, without the need for
variances.
8-5.2(f). FEATURES. In the subdividing of any land, due regard
shall be shown for all natural features such as tree growth, water
courses, historic spots or similar conditions, which if preserved, will
add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
8-5.2(g). LOT REMNANTS. All remnants of lots below minimum
size left after subdividing of a larger tract, must be added to
adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
However, outlots may be used if there is a reasonable likelihood
that future subdivisions of adjoining land will absorb these outlots
into standard lots.
8-5.2(h). LOTS ALONG PRIMARY STREETS. Subdivisions along
collector and arterial streets shall be so designated that where
possible, there would be no direct vehicular access from residential
lots onto those streets. Residential lots shall be separated from
arterial streets and railroad rights-of-way by a twenty-five (25) foot
buffer strip, which may be in the form of added depth or width of
lots backing on or siding on the streets or railroad right-of-way. A
screen planting easement shall be granted to the Town for a
twenty-five (25) foot buffer strip, if it adjoins an intermediate or
principal arterial street.
SECTION 9. CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
9-1. GENERAL. Before the Board approves a final plat, the subdivider
shall give satisfactory assurances that the installation of any required public
improvements shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense in accordance with
the procedures in Section 9-2. All public improvement shall conform to the
following standards:
9-1.1. MONUMENTS. Monuments shall be placed at all block corners,
angle points, points of curvature in streets and at intermediate points as
shown on the final plat and as required by the Town Engineer. Pipes or
steel rods, three-quarter of an inch in diameter, shall be placed at the
corners of each lot and at each intersection of street centerlines where
22
possible. All U.S., State, County, or other official benchmarks,
monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be
preserved in precise position.
9-1.2. STREETS. The provisions of Town Ordinance No. 9 and this
Ordinance No. 15 shall govern the construction of all streets within a
subdivision.
9-1.3. CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER. Concrete curb and gutter
meeting the requirements of Town Ordinance No. 9 shall be installed.
9-1.4. SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS. Concrete sidewalks
shall be four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick placed on a four (4)
inch gravel base. Sidewalk grades shall coincide with street grades and
slope one-fourth inch per foot from property line. Sidewalk shall be placed
at the property line.
9-1.5. WATERMAIN. Minimum watermain size shall be six (6) inch
ductile iron pipe.
9-1.6. SANITARY SEWER LATERALS. A sanitary sewer of eight (8)
inch PVC pipe shall be required as minimum size place at not less than
0.4% grade.
9-1.7. HOUSE SERVICES. Each house service shall be run from the
main to the property line where a cap or plug shall be placed until the
service is extended to the house. A one (1) inch Type K copper water
service, corporation cock and curb box and stop and four (4) inch extra
heavy cast iron soil pipe sewer service shall be minimum requirements for
services placed in a common trench. For services placed with ten (1) foot
horizontal separation, four (4) inch PVC, SDR 35 sewer service pipe shall
be the minimum requirement.
9-1.8. INDIVIDUAL WELLS. Individual wells, where allowed, shall be
installed in accordance with Ordinance No. 8 (Building Code), of the Town
of White Bear, as amended.
9-1.9. INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEMS. Individual sewage systems,
where allowed, shall be installed in accordance with Ordinance No. 8
(Building Code), of the Town of White Bear, as amended.
9-1.10. FUTURE SEWER SERVICE STUB. When individual well and
septic tanks are used and the septic tank is placed at the rear of the
house, it shall be required that the plumbing be extended from the vent
stack or rear outlet to a point five (5) feet beyond the front footing of the
23
house and capped. Inside the basement, the vent elbow shall be set up to
be easily reversed for connection to the capped line.
9-1.11. DRAINAGE FACILITIES. All surface and underground drainage
systems shall be designed and constructed such that all runoff will be
adequately removed and that the system will be consistent with the
Town’s Comprehensive Plan.
9-1.12. STREET NAME SIGNS. These shall be placed at all street
intersections within or abutting the subdivision.
9-1.13. STOP SIGNS. Stop signs or yield right-of-way signs shall be
placed on all streets intersecting a primary street, if the Town Board so
requires.
9-1.14. TRUNK FACILITIES. Where a watermain, sanitary sewer, or
storm drain facility should, according to the Town Comprehensive Plan, be
constructed at a large size to serve areas outside the subdivision, the
larger facility should be constructed, the additional cost to be borne by the
Town, to be subsequently assessed to the benefited property.
9-1.15. SPECIFICATIONS. All of the required improvements shall
conform to the engineering standards and specifications as set forth by
this Ordinance and by the Town Engineer.
9-1.16. NOISE BARRIERS. On all lots abutting on a freeway right-ofway,
there shall be constructed a noise barrier pursuant to specifications
set forth by the Town Board and/or the Town Code Enforcement Officer, in
accordance with standards set out by the Town Board Resolution.
9-1.17. BOULEVARDS. The boulevards (areas between the backs of the
curbs and the property), shall be uniformly finished to match the top of the
curb and sodded or seeded to present a pleasing finished appearance.
9-2. PROCEDURE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS. Upon receipt of preliminary plat approval by the Town Board
and prior to the Town Board approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall make
provision in the manner hereinafter set forth, for the installation by the Town, at
the sole expense of the subdivider, of such public improvements as shall be
required by the Town, which improvements may include, but are not limited to,
streets, sidewalks, public water systems, sanitary sewer systems, surface and
storm drainage systems, and public utility services. The Town Engineer shall
prepare a preliminary report as to the feasibility and estimated costs of the public
improvements. After the report has been received by the Town Board, a
determination shall be made if the improvements are to be made. If the Town
Board and subdivider agree to proceed with the improvements, the subdivider
24
shall deposit an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the construction costs to be
used to defray costs of plans, specifications and legal services. The installation
of said improvements shall be in conformity with approved construction plans and
specifications and all applicable standards and Ordinances.
9-2.1. PERFORMANCE CONTRACT. Prior to the installation of any
required improvements and prior to approval of the final preliminary plat,
the subdivider shall enter into a contract with the Town which contract
shall require the subdivider to have said improvements constructed by the
Town at the sole expense of the subdivider and in accordance with the
plans and specifications prepared by the Town Engineer, and all
applicable standards and Ordinances. Said contract shall provide for the
supervision of construction by the Town Engineer; and said contract shall
require that the Town be reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Town for
planning, engineering and legal fees and other expenses in connection
with making of such improvements. The performance of said contract
shall be financially secured by a cash escrow deposit, irrevocable letter of
credit, or performance bond, as hereinafter set forth.
9-2.1.(a). The subdivider will concurrently with the execution of the
performance contract, make a cash escrow deposit or provide an
irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution with
the Town Clerk in a sum equal to 125 percent of the total cost, as
estimated by the Town Engineer, of all of the improvements to be
furnished and installed at the expense of the subdivider pursuant to
the contract and which have not been completed prior to approval
of the final plat, including actual construction costs, as well as legal,
administrative and engineering fees and expenses. The Town shall
be entitled to reimburse itself out of said cash deposit or irrevocable
letter of credit, for all costs and expenses incurred by the Town for
the completion of the work, and upon completion of the work, any
balance remaining in said deposit shall be refunded to the
subdivider. The subdivider shall agree to reimburse the Town for
any costs and expenses incurred in excess of the cash deposit or
irrevocable letter of credit.
1. In lieu of making the cash escrow deposit or irrevocable
letter of credit, above described, the subdivider may furnish
the Town with a public contractor’s performance bond in the
form prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 574.26, with
a corporate surety, in a penal sum equal to 125 percent of
the total cost as hereinbefore described as estimated by the
Town Engineer, which bond shall be approved by the Town
Attorney and filed with the Town Clerk.
25
9-2.1(b). In lieu of making the cash escrow deposit or irrevocable
letter of credit described in Section 9-2.1(a), or furnishing the
performance bond described in Section 9-2.1(a)(1), the subdivider
may, concurrently with the execution of the performance contract,
execute a Petition for Improvement pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
Section 429.031, Subdivision 3, requesting the Town to construct
said improvements and that the total cost of improvements be
assessed against the property included in the petition for said
improvements.
1. As security and part payment for the improvements to be
installed by the Town, the subdivider shall either deposit with
a state or national bank designated by the Town, as cash
escrow in the amount of 35% of the estimated total cost of
the improvements as reasonably determined by the Town
Engineer, or at the subdivider’s option, an irrevocable letter
of credit in the amount of 40% of said estimated total cost.
Said acceptable letter of credit shall be issued by one or
more state or national banks and irrevocable and
unconditional. Should the actual bids for improvement
cause the total cost of the improvement to exceed the
estimated total cost by more than 10%, the cash escrow
deposit or irrevocable letter of credit shall be increased
proportionally. Should such bids exceed the estimated
construction cost by more than 20%, the Town shall not
award the same without receiving the written consent of the
subdivider, which consent shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
2. The total cost of the improvements shall be assessed
against the property payable in three (3) equal annual
installments plus accrued interest. “Total Cost” shall mean
the actual construction costs; interest on the estimated total
project cost from the time of construction start or sale of
bonds to finance the improvements, whichever is earliest, to
the date of adoption of the assessment roll; interest on
assessments that are levied; legal, administrative,
engineering with reference to the improvements; and fiscal
consulting fees relating to the issuance of bonds to finance
the improvements.
3. Sixty (60) days prior to such time as the principal
payment on the temporary bonds issued to finance the
improvements becomes due, the Town may elect to use the
funds held in escrow or represented by the irrevocable letter
of credit referred to in Section 9-2.1(b) (1), in payment of the
26
principal balance due on the assessments levied for such
improvements together with the accrued interest thereon.
4. Assessments allocated to any lot within the plat shall be
paid in full by the subdivider or its agent, successor or
assigns, before or at the time a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued, unless the Board of Supervisors specifies an earlier
payment in the Developer’s Agreement with the subdivider.
5. Upon execution of the performance contract and the
Petition for Improvement hereinbefore referred to, the Town
will order the improvement and proceed pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429.
SECTION 10. PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, OPEN SPACE AND STORM WATER
HOLDING AREAS.
10-1. GENERAL. Because a new subdivision for residential, commercial,
industrial or other uses, or a planned development which includes residential,
commercial or industrial uses, or any combination thereof, creates a need for
parks, playgrounds, public open space, and in some cases storm water holding
areas or ponds, the following contributions are required:
10-1.1. For any residential development, a percentage of the proposed
subdivision shall be conveyed to the Town for use as parks, playgrounds,
trails or public open space, as follows:
Density of Subdivision Percent Dedicated
0 to 3.5 units/acre 10%
over 3.5 to 4.5 units/acre 11%
over 4.5 to 6.0 units/acre 12%
over 6.0 to 7.0 units/acre 13%
over 7.0 to 8.0 units/acre 14%
over 8.0 units per acre 15%
or in the alternative, at the option of the Town, the subdivider shall:
contribute an equivalent amount in cash based on the fair market value of
the undeveloped land. Said market value not to include the increase in
value created by the construction of public utilities if already constructed
and paid for or to be paid for by the subdivider or his predecessors or
successors;
or
27
a per unit sum as set by Town Board resolution in accordance with
Ordinance No. 54 (Fees and Charges) for each dwelling unit and for
subdivisions with multi-family units.
10-1.2. For any industrial or commercial development, ten (10) percent of
the proposed subdivision shall be conveyed to the Town for use as parks,
playgrounds, trails or public open space, or in the alternative, at the option
of the Town, the developer shall contribute an equivalent amount in cash
based on the fair market value of the undeveloped land. Said market
value not to include the increase in value created by the construction of
public utilities if already constructed and paid for or to be paid for by the
subdivider or his predecessors or successors.
10-1.3. Land conveyed to the Town for public recreational or passive
recreation open-space shall be dry, usable land and not wetlands or land
needed for drainage retention. Such land shall be dedicated to the Town
prior to approval of the final plat or subdivision.
10-1.4. If cash is accepted in lieu of land, it shall be paid to the Town prior
to approval of the final plat or subdivision. In major subdivisions of
residential property, the Town may allow payment of park fees with each
building permit, on a pro-rated basis. When park fees are paid on a per
unit basis they shall be the amount then in effect and set by Town Board
Resolution in accordance with Ordinance No. 54 (Fees and Charges).
Cash payments shall be placed in a special fund by the Town and used
only for park development or acquisition.
10-1.5. In minor residential subdivisions where one lot or parcel of land is
to be divided into two lots, a sum as set by Town Board Resolution in
accordance with Ordinance No. 54 (Fees and Charges), shall be paid by
the subdivider to the Town before approval of such minor subdivision,
which payment shall be hereinbefore provided.
10-1.6. When any multiple dwelling is to be constructed on any parcel of
land in the Town which has not been previously assessed for a park fee or
parkland dedication under this Ordinance, a sum as set by Town Board
Resolution in accordance with Ordinance No. 54 (Fees and Charges),
shall be paid to the Town before issuance of any building permit for such
construction, which payment shall be placed in a special fund and used
only for the purposes hereinbefore provided.
10-1.7. When so required in the opinion of the Town Engineer, a
reasonable portion of each proposed subdivision shall be dedicated to the
public for public use as storm water holding areas or ponds, or in the
alternative, at the option of the Town, the subdivider shall contribute an
equivalent amount of cash based on the fair market value, no later than at
the time of final approval, of the required undeveloped land. The property
28
shall be conveyed to the Town, or payment of the cash equivalent fee
shall be made to the Town, before approval of the final preliminary plat.
Cash payments received hereunder shall be placed in a special fund by
the Town and used only for the acquisition of lands for storm water holding
areas or ponds, development of existing storm water holding areas or
ponds, and debt retirement in connection with land previously acquired for
such public purposes.
SECTION 11. VARIANCES. Where there are practical differences or
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter or provisions of
this Ordinance, the Town Board shall have the power to vary the requirements of
this Ordinance in harmony with general purpose and intent thereof, so that the
public health, safety and general welfare may be secured and substantial justice
done. In particular, small subdivisions where one lot is divided into two lots, none
of which can be further divided, the submission of topographic maps, soil tests,
other data, and fee may not be necessary if the Town Board, following
consideration by the Town Planning Commission, determines.
SECTION 12. BUILDING PERMITS. No building permit shall be issued by a
governing official for the construction of any building, structure of improvement
on any land subdivided by this Ordinance until all requirements of this Ordinance
have been fully complied with.
SECTION 13. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided by Ordinance No. 26
(Maximum Fines).
SECTION 14. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid in any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole
or any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 15. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Adopted by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Minnesota,
this 18th day of May, 1964.
APPROVED:
______________________________
KENNETH A. KUMM, Chairman
ATTEST:
___________________________
MARY E. POPE, Clerk-Treasurer
29
Town Board of Supervisors:
KENNETH A. KUMM, Chair
TERRENCE ROONEY, Supervisor
JOHNSON, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press July 30, 1964.
Historical Notes
2016
Section 6-2-4 passed September 7, 2016, and effective September 21, 2016 by Kermes
(Chair), Prudhon and Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2004
Sections 3-1.28 and 11 passed May 3, 2004, and effective June 16, 2004 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2001
Section 3-1.29(a) passed December 3, 2001, and effective December 12, 2001 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2000
Section 6-1.4 passed December 18, 2000, and effective December 27, 2000 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1994
Sections 10-1.1, 10-1.4, 10-1.5 and 10-1.6 passed March 21, 1994, and effective April 6,
1994 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford: Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1993
Section 10-1.1, 10-1.4 and 13 passed January 11, 1993, and effective January 27, 1993
by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 3-1.29 passed September 20, 1993, and effective October 6, 1993 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1992
Section 7-2.8 passed August 17, 1992, and effective August 26, 1992 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1990
Section 9-1.3 passed July 9, 1990, and effective August 15, 1990 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 10-1, 10-1.5, and 10-1.6 passed December 17, 1990, and effective January 2,
1991 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1989
Section 7-2.8 passed July 17, 1989, and effective July 26, 1989 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Jungunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1988
Sections 6-1.7 and 6-1.8 passed November 7, 1988, and effective _______ by
Weisenburger (Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1987
Section 2-6, 3-1.29, 6-1, 10-1.1, 10-1.5 and 10-1.6 passed November 16, 1987 by
Weisenburger (Chair), and effective December 16, 1987, Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-
Treasurer).
1984
30
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 passed April 30, 1984 by
Jungkunz (Chair), and effective ________________, 1984, Weisenburger and Hamilton; Malinen
(Clerk-Treasurer).
1979
Section 8-1.12 passed January 8, 1979 by Perron (Chair), and effective January 11,
1979, Sand and Jungkunz; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1978
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 passed August 14, 1978 by Perron
(Chair), and effective August 31, 1978, Sand and Jungkunz ; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1977
Section 3-2 passed February 7, 1977 by Perron (Chair), and effective February 17, 1977,
Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1975
Section 3-2 of Part III passed August 11, 1975 by Perron (Chair), and effective August
21, 1975, Sand and Ransom; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1974
Section 6-1 passed March 18, 1974 by King (Chair), and effective April 4, 1974, Perron
and Sand; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1970
Section 6-1 passed August 24, 1970 by Rooney (Chair), and effective September 2,
1970, Malloy and Perron; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1967
Section 1-48 passed October 2, 1967 by Rooney (Chair), and effective October 11, 1967,
Kuehnl and Malloy; Hovey (Clerk-Treasurer).
1964
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 originally passed May 18, 1964
by Kumm (Chair), and effective July 30, 1964, Rooney and Johnson; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer).




































ORDINANCE NO. 17
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO AND REGULATING THE
PARKING OF VEHICLES ON THE STREETS AND ALLEYS IN
THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA,
PROVIDING FOR THE REMOVAL OF VEHICLES THEREON
AND MAKING CHARGES FOR THE SAME AND PROVIDING
FOR THE IMPOSITION OF A POSSESSORY LIEN THEREON AS
WELL AS FOR PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
1-1. VEHICLES FOR SALE. No motor vehicle shall be parked on any
highway or street within the Town of White Bear for the purpose of displaying it
for sale.
1-2. TRUCKS, TRAILERS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, MOTOR
HOMES, AND BUSES. No truck, trailer, recreational vehicle, motor home, bus
or school bus shall be parked on any highway or street within the Town of White
Bear for more than ninety (90) minutes, or for any additional time than is
necessary to load or unload such truck, trailer, recreational vehicle, motor home,
or school bus.
1-2.a. “Recreational vehicle” means any vehicle as defined within the
White Bear Township Ordinances and shall include any selfpropelled
vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a selfpropelled
vehicle used for recreational purposes, including but not
limited to snowmobile, trail bike or other all-terrain vehicle,
hovercraft, or motor vehicle licensed for highway operation which is
being used for off-road recreational purposes.
1-2.b. “Motor home” means a unit designed to provide temporary living
quarters, built into as an integral part of, or permanently attached to
a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or van. A motor home must
contain permanently installed independent life support systems and
must provide at least two of the following facilities: 1) cooking
facility, 2) refrigerator, 3) a plumbing system, 4) heating or air
conditioning, or 5) an electrical system contained therein. For
purposes of this ordinance, “permanently installed” means built into
or attached as an integral part of a chassis or van, and designed
not to be removed except for repair or replacement. A system
which is readily removable or held in place by clamps or tie downs
is not permanently installed.
2
1-2.c. Motor homes include, but are not limited to the following:
(1) Type A Motor Home – a raw chassis upon which is built a
driver’s compartment and an entire body that provides temporary
living quarters as defined in this ordinance.
(2) Type B Motor Home – a van-type vehicle that conforms to
the motor home definition in this ordinance, and has been
completed or altered by the final stage manufacturer; and
(3) Type C Motor Home – an incomplete vehicle upon which is
permanently attached a body designed to provide temporary living
quarters as defined in this ordinance.
1-3. PASSENGER VEHICLES. No passenger vehicle shall be parked
on any highway or street within the Town of White Bear for more than seventytwo
(72) consecutive hours.
1-4. PASSAGE INTERFERENCE. No motor vehicle, truck, or trailer
shall occupy the driven portion of any road or street in the Town so as to interfere
with or interrupt the passage of other cars or vehicles.
1-5. ALLEYS. No motor vehicles shall be parked on any alley within the
Town of White Bear, except for the normal pickup or delivery not exceeding thirty
(30) minutes.
1-6. WINTER PARKING RESTRICTION. The parking of any motor
vehicle upon any road or street in White Bear Township is prohibited between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 1st through April 1st of each
year.
1-7. SNOWFALL RESTRICTION. No motor vehicle shall be parked on
any highway or street or boulevard within the Town of White Bear after a snowfall
of one (1) inch or more which necessitates the plowing and removal of snow from
the highways, streets, boulevards and alleys in the Town until such time as the
plowing and snow removal is completed. No motor vehicle, trailer, or other
obstruction shall be located within two (2) feet of any street, highway, boulevard
or alley after a snowfall of one (1) inch until such time as the plowing and snow
removal has been completed.
1-8. PARKING ON SIDEWALKS OR LAWNS. No driver of any motor
vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any public sidewalk, pedestrian walkways,
or boulevard within the Town, nor across or upon any public property which is
maintained as lawn or yard area, or across or upon any private property which is
maintained as lawn or yard without the permission of the owner, with the
3
exception of those areas which are part of a driveway or other clearly defined
area for the crossing of vehicular traffic, or by vehicles operated by the Town
Public Works Department during the course of such removal or other
maintenance functions.
1-9. VARIANCES. Sections 1-2, 1-3, 1-4, and 1-5 may be varied based
upon unique circumstances presented to the Town Board, and the minutes or
hours requested for a variance shall not exceed 48 hours. The Town Board may
require additional conditions in granting the variance.
1-9.a. NO PARKING ZONE WAIVER PERMITS. Residents can apply for
a permit to lift no parking restrictions. The nontransferable permit may be
acquired from the Town Clerk for specific dates and shall expire upon
such date stated in the permit. Permits will only be issued as long as
there is no undue interference with traffic safety or create such serious
problems during the use of such permit.
1-9.b. APPLICATION PROCESS. Residents shall submit a permit
request for Town Board approval at least 1 week prior to a regularly
scheduled Town Board meeting. The application shall set forth the
following information regarding the proposed street or road use:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant
or applicants.
2. If the proposed use is to be conducted for, on behalf of , or
by an organization, the name, address, and telephone
number of the headquarters of the organization and of the
responsible heads of such organizations.
3. The date and duration of time for which the requested use of
the street or road is proposed to occur.
4. An accurate description of that portion of the street or road to
be used, including a map.
5. The proposed use, described in detail, including a
description of the activities planned during the no parking
zone waiver.
1-9.c. AGENCY REVIEW. Once the application is received, Town Staff
will contact the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department, Ramsey County
Public Works Department, and White Bear Township’s Public Works
Department, for their advice regarding the request.
4
1-9.d. PLACING SIGNS OR HOODS. Once the permit is approved, it is
the applicant’s responsibility to obtain the proper signs or “hoods” from the
Township’s Public Works Department, and place them in the affected area
as specified by the Town Board, then return the signs and/or “hoods” the
next business day.
1-9.e. EMERGENCY RESTORATION OF NO-PARKING ZONE
WAIVER. The Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department or White Bear
Township reserves the right to immediately reinstate the no parking
restriction if it is determined there is a threat to public safety or the general
welfare of the residents of White Bear Township.
1-10. STREET MAINTENANCE, REPAIR OR EMERGENCY. The
Township may temporarily prohibit vehicular parking or traffic upon any
public street at such times as street maintenance, street improvements or
a public safety emergency exists on or near such streets.
1-10.a. POSTING. No person shall park or drive a vehicle on a public
street after it has been posted with signs installed by the Township or their
authorized agent, prohibiting vehicular parking or traffic pursuant to this
Ordinance.
SECTION 2. PRIVATELY AND PUBLICLY OWNED PARKING LOTS, AREAS
AND RAMPS. Parking of vehicles on privately or publicly owned parking lots,
areas or ramps in the Town shall conform to the markings of stalls or positions
for parking which are designated on the surface of the parking area. No vehicle
shall be parked or allowed to stand in any area of such parking lot or ramp which
has been designated or is used as a lane for moving traffic so that such parking
will interfere with the movement of traffic.
SECTION 3. ENFORCEMENT. When any peace officer finds a vehicle standing
or parked on any highway, street or alley in violation of this Ordinance, such
officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle or require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move the same. When any police officer finds
a vehicle unattended and standing or parked in violation of this Ordinance, such
officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle and
remove the same to the nearest convenient garage, outdoor area or other place
of safety, and such vehicle shall not be removed therefrom until reasonable costs
of moving and storing the same have been fully paid. In the event that any
vehicle held or stored under the direction of a police officer upon which there are
charges for storage or towing, or both, is not reclaimed, recovered or taken by
the vehicle owner thereof, there shall be deemed to be imposed upon such
vehicle a Possessory Lien in the amount so charged and unpaid, and should the
owner thereof fail to pay the same, then the Possessory Lien may be foreclosed
in the manner provided by law.
5
SECTION 4. PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any
prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing
or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint
was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the
Defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking, the registered
owner of such vehicle, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for such time during which such violation
occurred.
SECTION 5. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision
of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided in Ordinance No. 26 (Penalties).
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 7. ORIGINAL ENACTMENT. This Ordinance was originally passed
by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, the
10th day of February, 1965.
Approved:
____________________________
Kenneth A. Kumm, Chairman
Attest:
_____________________________
Mary E. Pope, Clerk
Town Board of Supervisors:
Kenneth A. Kumm, Chairman
Terrance M. Rooney, Supervisor
Thomas Jefferson, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press February 18, 1965.
7-1. Ordinance No. 17 (Parking), as originally enacted, was repealed by
the provisions of Ordinance No. 39 (Traffic & Licenses) on December 6, 1973.
SECTION 8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full
force from and after its passage and publication.
6
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County,
Minnesota, this 7th day of September, 1999.
APPROVED:
______________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Town Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chair
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
LINDA J. FORD, Supervisor
Historical Notes
2012
Section 1-6 passed June 4, 2012, and effective June 13, 2012, by Mample (Chair), Kermes,
Prudhon; Short (Clerk).
2005
Section 1-10 passed October 17, 2005, and effective November 2, 2005, by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2002
Section 1-2 and 1-9 passed October 7, 2002, and effective October 23, 2002, by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1999
Sections 1, 2, 3, & 4 passed September 7, 1999, and effective September 15, 1999 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1998
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 passed September 21, 1998, and effective
October 7, 1998 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1973
Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 repealed by Ordinance No. 39 (Traffic & Licenses) November 26, 1973, and
effective December 6, 1973 by King (Chairman), Rooney and Perron; Rolph (Clerk).
1965
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 originally passed February 10, 1965, and effective
February 18, 1965 by Kumm (Chairman), Rooney and Jefferson; Pope (Clerk).
ORDINANCE NO. 18
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO AND REGULATING THE USE OF
SEWER IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, ESTABLISHING RULES
AND REGULATIONS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE SEWER
SYSTEM IN THE TOWN AND MATTERS RELATING THERETO,
INCLUDING ALL PROPERTIES, MAINS, RATES AND CHARGES
IN CONNECTION THEREWITH AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
AND ADOPTING BY REFERENCE THE MINNESOTA STATE
PLUMBING CODE
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR DOES ORDAIN:
SECTION 1. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT. There is hereby
established a Sewer Department for the Town of White Bear. The sewer system
as now constituted, or as shall hereafter be enlarged or extended, shall be
operated and maintained under the provisions of this Ordinance subject to the
authority of the Town Board at any time to amend, alter, change or repeal the
same.
SECTION 2. TOWN BOARD. The Town Board shall have charge and
management of the sewer system subject to such delegation of authority to the
Town Engineer, Sewer Superintendent and to other Town employees as the
Town Board shall provide.
SECTION 3. The Minnesota Plumbing Code as adopted by the Minnesota State
Board of Health on July 20, 1937, and as amended on May 9, 1939, on January
14, 1947, and on October 16, 1951, consisting of 38 pages, 16 articles and 175
sections, together with Appendix A, is hereby adopted and incorporated as an
Ordinance of the Town of White Bear, in all its terms and provisions, except as
modified, qualified, or otherwise stated herein.
Such adoption by reference shall be valid only for the specific issue of the
code referred to above and shall not include revisions or succeeding issues
except by amendment of this Ordinance or enactment of a subsequent
Ordinance.
Three official copies of the Minnesota State Plumbing Code shall be
properly marked and filed for use and examination by the public in the office of
the Town Clerk.
Except as specifically stated herein, the Plumbing Inspector shall follow
and enforce the provisions of the Minnesota Plumbing Code as adopted by the
Minnesota State Board of health on July 20, 1937, together with all amendments
thereof.
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS. The terms used herein shall be defined as follows:
BUILDING DRAIN. The building drain is that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from other drainage
pipes and which lies within the perimeter of the building.
BUILDING SEWER. The building sewer is that part of the building
drainage system that extends from the building drain to the sewer service line at
the property line.
SEWER SERVICE. The sewer service line is that which receives the
building sewer discharge at the property line and extends to the Town sewer
main in the street and is located entirely within the street right-of-way.
SECTION 5. SUPERVISION AND PLUMBING STANDARDS. The Town
Inspector shall inspect all house sewer connections made to the municipal
sanitary sewer system and excavations for the purpose of installing or repairing
the same.
The expense of cleaning any debris causing blockage or any of the repairs
in the building sewer drainage system, building drain, and sewer service lines up
to the Town sewer main line in the street, including the wye, or otherwise shall be
borne by and paid for by the owner of the property served by the sewer service
line. All such work shall be done by or at the direct supervision of Town forces.
The owner of the property shall also pay for any damages done to the Town
sewer main line, including the cleaning and any repairs of the said sewer main
line caused by said debris and cleaning or repairs of said building sewer
drainage system, building drain, and sewer service lines. The Town shall have no
obligation to clean any blockage in or repair any such building sewer drainage
system, building drainage, or sewer service line whether on private property or
public property.
SECTION 6. APPLICATIONS, PERMITS AND FEES. No person, firm or
corporation shall make any type of connection, repair, enlargement or alteration
to the sewer system except upon making an application therefore on a form
provided by the Town and receiving a permit issued by the Town for such
purposes. The application shall include the legal description of the property to be
served, the uses for which the connection is requested, and a sketch of the
service showing approximate location and the size of the service line to be used.
At the time of taking such application, there shall be paid to the Town the
following fees for the following purposes:
6-1. No connection shall be made with respect to any sanitary sewer
serving the property of any person or occupants of the land, parcel or premises
affected unless all assessments for such sewer, or such installments thereof as
are due and payable have been paid in full, and unless such owner, occupant or
2
user has paid or provided for the payment of the full and proportionate share of
the utility, which share shall be payable as follows:
6-1.1. For service to the property for which a sewer service line has not
been previously installed from the main sewer line to the property line, the
owner, occupant or user shall contract with a licensed sewer installer or
plumber for the installation of said line and all payments required shall be
assumed by the owner, occupant, or user. Only sewer installer or plumber
licensed to operate in the Town of White Bear shall be allowed to install
service lines within public right-of-ways.
6-1.2. For service to property outside of the Town, the owner, occupant or
user shall pay to the Town of White Bear at the time of application for
permit an amount not less than the payments made by or charges placed
against comparable properties for like service within the Town of White
Bear in an amount as may be established by the Town Board.
6-1.3. The applicant shall pay to the Town a permit fee in the amount of
$10.00 for any sanitary sewer construction, connection, enlargement,
alteration or repair, which is to defray the Town costs of inspections and
administrations. Where no assessment for the cost of construction of trunk
lines, lift stations, force mains and disposal facilities has been levied
against the property sought to be connection, a connection fee established
by the Town Board shall be collected in cash with the permit fee.
6-1.4. CONNECTION CHARGES. For the purpose of providing monies
necessary for the construction, maintenance and operation of the sewer
system, as well as additions thereto, or extensions thereof, including
payment of principal and interest due or accruing on bonds or other
obligations issued or incurred to finance such construction, maintenance
and operation, there is hereby charged with respect to every lot, parcel of
land, building or premises other than a single family dwelling, a sum of
money hereinafter termed the “connection charge”. Such charge is made
for the privilege of making a connection, direct or indirect to the disposal
system through which connection the facilities of the Town are made
available for disposal of sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquid
from such premises.
6-1.4(a). PAYMENT OF CONNECTION CHARGES. Connection
charges are payable at the time of building permit issuance. The
Building Inspector shall not issue a building permit until such
connection charge is paid. If a building permit was issued prior to
December 1, 1973, but connection has not been made to the
disposal system, connection charges are then payable prior to the
time of connection.
3
6-1.4(b). APPLICATION AND PERMIT. No connection from any
premises to the disposal system is authorized without there being
first obtained for such connection a permit issued by the Town. No
permit may be obtained from the Town, and no representative of
the Town is authorized to issue a permit for connection unless and
until an authorized representative of the Town receives an
application for such connection, determines and establishes the
type of connection to be made and receives the connection charge
required or unless by approval of the Town Board such payment is
deferred or is to be made in installments. The Town shall prepare
and provide for and furnish any form and instrument found
necessary to the connection applications and permits of the Town
and perform all acts reasonably required with respect thereto.
Applications and permits shall be uniform, in accordance with this
Ordinance.
6-1.4(c). INCREASED CONNECTION CHARGES BASED ON
MEASUREMENTS. The determination and establishment in the
first instance of the connection charge represented by the
connection, especially when made by estimate based upon
representation of the owner or occupant of the premises, is at all
times subject to further determination and establishment after the
connection has been made and used by an actual measurement by
the Town or Metropolitan Sewer Board of the sewage or water
discharge from such connection entering into the system of the
Town. The receipt and acceptance by the Town of any money paid
and received by the Town, as previously imposed, does not bar the
Town’s right to payment of the correct amount of money due
therefore, and may be determined and established by actual
measures; and the Town’s right to recover therefore is not
impaired. After a connection has been made and the connection
charge established, imposed and paid, no diminution in discharge
from the premises shall entitle the owner (or occupant) to a
reduction, reimbursement or refund with respect to the connection
charge imposed and paid.
6-1.4(d). CALCULATION OF CONNECTION CHARGES.
6-1.4(d).1. There shall be charge for each connection unit
as established from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board.
6-1.4(d).2. The following are hereby established as
connection units:
4
6-1.4(d).2(a). Townhouses, duplex units,
condominium units shall each comprise one unit.
6-1.4(d).2(b). Mobile homes shall each comprise one
unit.
6-1.4(d).2(c). Public housing units and housing units
subsidized under any program for low and moderate
income housing shall be counted as 80% of the unit
equivalent for that type of housing.
6-1.4(d).2(d). Commercial, institutional, industrial and
other building types shall be assigned a minimum of
one unit. Unit assignments for various commercial,
industrial and institutional building types shall be as
follows:
Type of Facility Parameter Connection Units
Arenas 100 seats 1
Automobile Service
Center
2 service bays 1
Barber Shop 1
Boarding House 5 beds 1
Bowling Alleys 3 alleys 1
Car Wash 30
Car Wash (self-service) 1 stall 3
Churches 250 seats 1
Cocktail Lounge 25 seats 1
General Office Building 2,400 sq. ft. floor space 1
Hospitals 1 bed 1
Laundromats 2 machines 3
Motels & Hotels (assume
2 persons/room)
2 rooms 1
Nursing Home 3 beds 1
Restaurant (drive-in) 9 parking spaces 1
Restaurant (24 hr
service)
6 seats 1
Restaurant (not 24 hr
service)
12 seats 1
Restaurant (with cocktail
lounge)
9 seats 1
Retail Stores 3,000 sq. ft. floor space 1
Rooming Houses 7 beds 1
Schools (elementary) 20 students 1
Schools (secondary) 15 students 1
5
Service Station (gas
pumping only)
1
Service Station (with
service center)
2
Service Station (with
service center & car
wash)
8
Swimming Pools Per 900 cubic feet 1
Theater 75 seats 1
Theater (drive-in) 55 parking spaces 1
Warehouses 14 employees 1
6-1.4(d).2(e). The connection unit for those building
uses not in Section 6-1.4(d).2(d)., shall be determined
by the Sewer Board. The Town shall provide
appropriate forms to those required to get Sewer
Board approval and shall submit the completed form
to the Sewer Board. No building permit may be issued
until the Sewer Board has designated and transmitted
to the Town the connection unit assigned. The Sewer
Board may review actual sewage flow one year after
the initial discharge, and the Town shall impose such
additional connection charges in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
6-1.4(d).2(f). RIGHT OF ACTION. Any charges
levied pursuant to Section 6-1.4, and which have
been properly billed to the occupant of any premises
served, and not paid, may be covered in a civil action
by the Town in any court of competent jurisdiction.
6-1.4(d).2(g). APPLICATION OF FUNDS. The funds
received from the collection of charges authorized by
this Ordinance shall be deposited, as collected, in a
fund known as the Water and Sewer Fund, and shall
be disbursed:
6-1.4(d).2(g).1. To meet costs of operation:
6-1.4(d).2(g).2. To the debt redemption to
provide funds for the payment of principal and
interest on bonds issued to finance the costs of
constructing improvements to the Town
sanitary sewer system as prescribed by
resolutions or covenants authorizing or
securing such bonds; and
6
6-1.4(d).2(g).3. To provide funds for the
reasonable requirements of extending,
improving and replacing Town Sanitary Sewer
facilities.
6-2. Multiple connections of more than one building to a single building
sewer or sewer service line shall be permitted only by special application to the
Town. The applicant shall submit a detailed sketch showing location, grades and
special structures to the Town Engineer for review prior to applying for a permit.
All costs involved for the engineering review shall be paid by the applicant along
with the other required fees at the time of issuance of the permit. The charge for
the cost of the trunk lines, lift stations, force mains and disposal facilities as
defined in Section 4, shall be levied against each property sought to be
connection either through single sewer services or multiple connections.
6-3. TOWN SEWER AVAILABILITY CHARGE. The owner of any
property desiring to connection such property to an existing municipal sanitary
sewer main where such property has not previously been connected to said main
may do so on the approval of the Town and upon paying a Town sewer
availability charge. The Town sewer availability charge shall be determined by
Town Board Resolution in accordance with Ordinance No. 54. This Town sewer
availability charge shall be in addition to the sewer availability charge made by
the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission.
SECTION 7. DELAYED CONNECTION CHARGE. To protect the general
health and welfare of the Town, it is required that the liquid waste from any
plumbing system of any residence, dwelling, or building be discharged to the
public sewer system, the owner of each residence, dwelling, or building to which
the sewer service is or becomes available shall be subject to an additional
charge of $100.00 plus other penalties as provided herein if such connection is
not made within eighteen (18) months after the property has been assessed and
the sewer service becomes available.
7-1. EXTENSION. The Town Board may, in their discretion, grant an
extension from the eighteen (18) month connection requirement. The extension
period shall be for eighteen (18) months and shall be granted on the condition
that the owner provides the Town Board with a certificate of compliance for their
septic system in accordance with Ordinance No.70 (Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems). Further extension beyond the initial 18-month extension
may be considered by the Town Board, and in it sole discretion, granted for a
further period of time determined by the Town Board, and shall be granted on the
condition that the owner provides the Town with a certificate of compliance for
their septic system in accordance with Ordinance No. 70 (Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems).
7
SECTION 8. PLUMBING INSPECTOR. The Plumbing Inspector shall examine
all applications before construction is begun and after the construction,
enlargement, alteration or repair is complete, the Plumbing Inspector shall be
notified. It shall be unlawful to cover any affected lines until an inspection has
been made and such connection and the work incidental thereto has been
approved by the Town as a proper and suitable connection.
It shall be the duty of the sewer installer and/or plumber to notify the
Plumbing Inspector by telephone or in writing, not less than eight working hours
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. before work is to be inspected or
tested.
SECTION 9. EXISTING DRAINAGE AND PLUMBING SYSTEMS. Prior to
connection to the public sanitary sewer system, the Plumbing Inspector shall
examine the existing drainage system and the interior plumbing system. All such
systems shall conform to the requirements of this Ordinance and the requirement
of the Minnesota Plumbing Code. In the event that such drainage system or
plumbing system is determined to be non-conforming to the above requirements,
the contractor, owner or occupant shall do whatever corrective work which may
be necessary before final hook-up to the public sanitary sewer system is made.
The decision of the Plumbing Inspector as to the extent of corrective work to be
done in each individual case to conform to the above requirements shall be final.
SECTION 10. INSTALLATION OF CONNECTIONS. All sewer services shall be
installed by a Master Plumber licensed in the State of Minnesota and the Town of
White Bear. And owner, occupant or licensed plumber may install, repair or
make alteration to the building drain or building sewer lines provided that said
construction is conducted under the regulations of this Ordinance. Prior to
receiving a permit for plumbing work as outlined herein, a satisfactory showing
must be made that such plumber excavator, or sewer installer is carrying liability
insurance in an accredited company with the Town against loss in the sum of
$25,000.00 and $50,000.00 as customarily provided in such policies. Plumbers,
excavators and sewer installers shall pay an annual license fee of $12.00 upon
application for license to the Town Clerk.
SECTION 11. EXCAVATING WORK.
11-1. All installation work or repair of connection to the sewer system
including grades, bends and backfilling shall be inspected by the Plumbing
Inspector. No work shall be covered or backfilled until directed by said inspector.
All work and excavations shall be protected by barricades and warning markers
and lights reasonable and suitable for the purpose. The Town shall be held
harmless of any claim or loss as might otherwise arise for damage, loss or injury
caused by or arising by reason of such work being performed.
8
11-2. No digging in any permanent type street shall be permitted except
by special written permission from the Town. Backfilling shall be thoroughly
compacted by mechanical means to 95% Standard Proctor density. The top 12
inches of the excavation shall be backfilled with M.H.D.; Class 5 gravel base
material. The base shall be primed and a 2 inch thick bituminous surface
installed in accordance with Minnesota Highway Department Specification No.
2341.
Where excavations are unsatisfactorily filled and surfacing is improperly
patched, the Town Board shall cause them to be placed in a satisfactory
condition and the cost thereof shall be charged to such plumber making the
same, and the privilege of such plumber doing further work within the Town shall
be suspended until such charge is paid. Such plumber shall be given notice
thereof and ten days within which to pay such charge.
SECTION 12. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. All building sewers and
sewer service lines shall be of extra strength cast iron soil pipe. Joints shall be
made by use of jute and pure molten lead well caulked in place or by using a
Town approved pre-formed compression gasket. Individual service lines shall not
be less than 4 inches in diameter and shall be placed at a uniform grade of not
less than 1/8 of an inch per foot. Sewer service lines shall contain no more than
two (2) 45 degree bends, clean out shall be at intervals not to exceed 80 feet.
Multiple connections of more than one building shall be as approved by the Town
Engineer as described under Section 6-2. No interconnection of the existing
private sewer system shall remain upon connection to the public system. If a
sewer service connection is such that gravity flow can be had to the public sewer
main and a sump pump is presently used, said sump pump shall be
disconnected, discontinued and removed from service.
The sewer connection stub is marked by a 2” x 2” wood stake
approximately 8 feet long. The sewer installer should verify the location and
elevation of the connection before proceeding with the installation. Any deviation
from the plan location which will affect the installing of the sewer house
connections, should be brought to the attention of the Town immediately. The
Town will assume no responsibility for extra charges as a result of such
misplaced connection unless it is notified before any work is done and has had
an inspection made by its representative to confirm the condition and to authorize
extra work.
SECTION 13. PROHIBITED DISCHARGES INTO SANITARY SEWER
SYSTEMS.
13-1. The Town Board has found that the discharge of water from any
roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or natural precipitation from any
other source into the Town’s sanitary sewer system may flood and overload the
sanitary sewer system, and cause detrimental effects to the environment and is
9
not allowed by the Town Ordinance. Such overloading may cause backup of
sewage into the living quarters of residents and in addition to other damage
create a hazard to health and additional charges tot the Town by the Metropolitan
Waste Control Commission because of increased flow. The Town Board
therefore, finds it is essential to the maintenance of health and to minimize
damage to property and to protect our natural water resource, that the provisions
of this section be strictly enforced to avoid emergencies, and detrimental affects
to the environment in the future.
13-2. DEFINITION AND METHOD. No water from any roof, surface,
ground, sump pump, footing tile, or natural precipitation from any other source
shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Sump pump systems shall
have permanently installed discharge line which shall not at any time discharge
water into the sanitary sewer system, except as provided herein. A permanent
installation shall be one which provides for year-around discharge capability to
either the outside of the dwelling, building or structure, or is connected to the
Town storm sewer or discharges through the curb and gutter to the street. It shall
consist of a rigid discharge line without valving or quick connections for altering
the path of discharge, and if connected to the Town storm sewer line, include a
check valve.
13-3. DISCONNECTION. Before January 1, 1993, any person, firm or
corporation having a roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile now
connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer systems hall disconnect
and/or remove the same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall
be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
13-3.1. Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the
Town’s sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee of the Town of
White Bear or their designated representative to inspect the buildings to
confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the
sanitary sewer system. Any person refusing to allow their property to be
inspected shall immediately become subject to the surcharge hereinafter
provided for. Any property found to violate the Ordinance shall make
necessary changes to comply with the Ordinance, shall furnish proof of
the changes to the Town, and be inspected by the Town within 30 days of
notification of non-compliance. Notification of non-compliance will be given
to the property owner by the Code Enforcement Officer at the time of
inspection.
13-4. FUTURE VIOLATIONS. At any future time the Town may conduct
random inspections periodically, or if the Town has reason to suspect that an
illegal connection exists in a premises, to insure compliance of this Ordinance.
10
13-5. VARIANCES. The Town Board shall have the power and duty of
hearing and deciding requests for variances from the applicability of the
provisions of this Ordinance where strict enforcement would cause undue
hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration or cause a safety problem.
13-5.1. Application for variances pursuant to this section shall be
addressed in writing to the Town of White Bear. The applications shall at a
minimum identify the property for which the variance is being applied for,
the name of the property owner/applicant and describe in detail what
characteristics of the subject property create an undue hardship safety
concern. within 30 days after application the Town shall make their order
deciding on the matter and serve a copy of such order upon the applicant
by mail. Upon receipt of an application for variance the Town shall allow
the property owner to temporarily discharge directly into the sanitary
sewer system. Upon approval of a variance a property owner shall be
allowed to discharge directly into the sanitary sewer system as provided
for in the conditions of the approval.
13-6. PENALTY. A surcharge of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars per
month is hereby imposed and added to every sewer billing mailed on and after
June 1, 1993, to property owners who are not in compliance with this Ordinance.
This surcharge is in addition to any other penalties that may be incurred under
this Ordinance.
SECTION 14. USER CHARGES.
14-1. For the purpose of providing monies necessary to the construction,
maintenance, and operation of the disposal system of the Town and the
Metropolitan Sewer Service Board as well as additions thereto, or extensions
thereof, including payment of principal and interest due or accruing on bonds and
other obligations issued or incurred to finance such construction, maintenance,
and operation, there is hereby charged a “use charge” to be collected by the
Town with respect to each lot, parcel of land, building or premises, having any
connection, direct or indirect, with the disposal system of the Town or otherwise
discharging sewage, industrial waste, water or other waste directly or indirectly to
the Town disposal system. The “use charge” is to be paid periodically
commencing with connection and continuing (unless for good cause, waived or
excused) for as long as the premises remain connected, whether or not such
connection is actively used for discharge or sewage or waste during any
particular period of time.
14-2. COMPUTATION OF USER CHARGES. Charges for sewer use
shall be payable on a quarterly basis, and the unit rate shall be established from
time to time by Town Board resolution. Unit assignments shall be as follows:
11
14-2.1. Residential within the Town of White Bear - one unit.
14-2.2. Residential outside the Town of White Bear - one unit.
14-2.3. Non-Residential within the Town of White Bear - minimum of one
unit;
14-2.4. Non-Residential non-tax exempt within the Town of White Bear,
charge for each 1,000 gallons in excess of 20,000 gallons of waste
disposal per quarter as determined in Section 14-3 - five-hundredths (.05)
of a unit;
14-2.5. Non-Residential outside the Town of White Bear or tax exemptminimum
of one and one-half units; and
14-2.6. Non-Residential tax exempt or outside the Town of White Bear,
charge for each 1,000 gallons in excess of 20,000 gallons of waste
disposal per quarter as determined in Section 14-3 - five hundredths (.05)
of a unit.
14-3. COMPUTATION OF NON-RESIDENTIAL GALLONAGE. For the
purpose of this Ordinance, waste disposal gallon age is hereby determined to be
equal tot the most recent winter quarter water usage. Quarterly use charges for
non-residential users shall be based on the most recent winter quarter water use
figures available. Winter quarters include November - January; December -
February; January - March. In any case where waste disposal gallon age cannot
be fairly and equitably determined form winter quarter water usage, the Director
of Public Works shall estimate or determine the waste disposal gallon age based
upon other available information or measurements.
14-4. USER CHARGE SURCHARGE. In the event the Sewer Board
makes an industrial waste surcharge to the Town of White Bear, such surcharge
shall be charged by the Town to the designated industrial user causing such
discharge. Such surcharge shall be in addition to other charges required herein.
14-5. A connection, once made, shall not, nevertheless, thereafter be
continued in use, except and unless there is paid and received by the Town with
respect to such connection a sum of money at least equal to the “use charge”
imposed and to be collected by the Town (with respect to such connection) for
each quarterly period of time that such connection exists, whether such
connection is then being actively used or otherwise. Such “use charge” shall be
promptly paid when due by the owner (or occupant) of the premises affected
directly to the Town for the (Quarterly) period of use represented by such
payment.
12
14-6. INDUSTRIAL USER STRENGTH CHARGE. Recitals. The
Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, a metropolitan commission organized
and existing under the laws of the State of Minnesota (the “Commissioner”), in
order to receive and retain grants in compliance with the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972 and regulations thereunder (the ‘Act”), has
determined to impose an industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the
Metropolitan Disposal System(as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section
473.121, Subdivision 24) to recover operation and maintenance costs of
treatment works attributable to the strength of the discharge of industrial waste,
such sewer strength charge being in addition to charge based upon the volume
of discharge. In order for the Town to pay such costs based upon strength of
industrial discharge and allocated to it each year by the Commission, it is hereby
found, determined and declared to be necessary to establish sewer strength
charges and a formula for the computation thereof for all industrial users
receiving waste treatment services within or served by the Town. Furthermore,
Minnesota Statutes, Section 472.12 provides that for the purpose of Chapter 423,
“Local Government Unit” means any - - - Town, - - - lying in whole or part within
the metropolitan area; Section 472.501 provides that for the purposes of Section
473.501 to 473.549 “Local Government Unit” or “government unit” means any - -
- governmental subdivision located in whole or in part in the metropolitan area,
authorized by law to provide for the collection and disposal of sewage: Section
473.521, Subdivision 3, provides that to accomplish any duty imposed on it by
the Metropolitan Council or the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, the
governing body of every governmental unit in the metropolitan area may exercise
the powers granted any municipality by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 117, 412,
429, 475 and Sections 115.46, 444.075, and 471.59; and Section 444.075,
Subdivision 3, empowers the Town to make such sewer charge a charge against
the owner, lessee, occupant or all of them and certify unpaid charges to the
county auditor as a tax lien against the property served.
14-6.1. ESTABLISHMENT OF STRENGTH CHARGES. For the purpose
of paying the costs allocated to the Town each year by the Commission
that are based upon the strength of discharge of all industrial users
receiving waste treatment services within or served by the Town, there is
hereby approved, adopted and established, in addition to the sewer
charge based upon the volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon each
person, company or corporation receiving waste treatment services within
or served by the Town, based upon strength of industrial waste
discharged into the sewer system of the Town (the “Strength Charge”).
14-6.2. ESTABLISHMENT OF STRENGTH CHARGE FORMULA. For the
purpose of computation of the Strength Charge established by Section 14-
6.1 hereof, there is hereby established, approved and adopted in
compliance with the Act the same strength charge formula designated in
Resolution No. 76-172 adopted by the governing body of the Commission
of June 15, 1976, such formula being based upon pollution qualities and
13
difficulty of disposal of the sewage produced through an evaluation of
pollution qualities and quantities in excess of an annual average base and
the proportionate costs of operation and maintenance of waste treatment
services provided by the Commission.
14-6.3. STRENGTH CHARGE PAYMENT. It is hereby approved,
adopted and established that the Strength Charge established by Section
14-6.1 hereof shall be paid by each industrial user receiving waste
treatment services and subject thereto before the twentieth (20th) day next
succeeding the date of billing thereof to such user by or on behalf of the
Town, and such payment thereof shall be deemed to be delinquent if not
so paid to the billing entity before such date. Furthermore, it is hereby
established, approved and adopted that if such payment is not paid before
such date an industrial user shall pay interest compounded monthly at the
rate of two-thirds of one percent (2/3%) per month on the unpaid balance
due.
14-6.4. ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX LIEN. As provided by Minnesota
Statutes, Section 444.075, Subdivision 3, it is hereby approved, adopted
and established that if payment of the Strength Charge established by
Section 14-6.1 hereof is not paid before the sixtieth (60th) day next
succeeding the date of billing thereof to the industrial user by or on behalf
of the Town, said delinquent sewer strength charge, plus accrued interest
established pursuant to Section 14-6.3 hereof, shall be deemed to be a
charge against the owner, lessee and occupant of the property served,
and the Town, or its agent shall certify such unpaid delinquent balance to
the County Auditor with taxes against the property served for collection as
other taxes are collected; provided, however, that such certification shall
not preclude the Town or its agent from recovery of such delinquent sewer
strength charge and interest thereon under any other available remedy.
SECTION 15. BILLING REGULATIONS.
15-1. The Town Clerk or other designated person shall compute the
amount due to the Town for sewage use on a quarterly basis payable quarterly
for the preceding quarter and shall be set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees &
Charges). All amounts due as described herein shall be payable at the office of
the Town Clerk or other designated person by the date established on the
quarterly bill.
15-2. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by
the date established in Section 15-1.
SECTION 16. SEWER FUND. All funds received from the collection of
assessments, connections charges, and sewerage use rates, shall be deposited
by the Town Clerk or other designated person within seven days after the receipt
14
thereof and kept by him as a separate and distinct fund which shall be known as
the Sewer Fund. These funds shall be used for the payment of all costs incurred
by the Town of White Bear in connection with the construction, maintenance and
operation of the sanitary sewer system within the Town, and any excess received
shall be used for retiring indebtedness incurred for the construction of such
sewage disposal system.
SECTION 17. COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES. Each charge
levied by and pursuant to this Ordinance is hereby made a lien upon the
corresponding lot, land, parcel or premises served by a connection to the sewer
system of the Town. All such charges which are on September 1st of each year
more than 30 days past due and having been properly billed to the occupant of
the premises served, shall be deemed a delinquent account and may be certified
to the Town Clerk who shall prepare an Assessment Roll each year providing for
assessment of the delinquent account against the respective property served. In
preparing the assessment roll, the Town shall collect an administrative charge for
each account as provided in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges). This
assessment roll shall be delivered to the Town Board for adoption on or before
September 15th of each year, and upon approval thereof, the amount due shall
be certified by the Town Clerk to the Auditor of Ramsey County before the 15th
day of October of each year, and the Town in so certifying such charges to the
County Auditor shall specify the name of the owner of the premises, the
description of the premises served and the amount thereof. The amount so
certified shall be extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls against such premises
in the same manner as other taxes. Such action may by optional or subsequent
to using legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
SECTION 18. SEPARABILITY OF SECTIONS. If any portion of this Ordinance
shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such portion shall not affect the validity of
the other provisions of this Ordinance which shall continue in full force and effect.
SECTION 19. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided by Ordinance No. 26
(Maximum Fines).
SECTION 20. VARIANCES. Where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the provisions
of this Ordinance, the Board shall have the power to vary the requirements of this
Ordinance in harmony with the general purpose and intent thereof, so that the
public health, safety and general welfare may be secured and substantial justice
done.
SECTION 21. ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY. The Town Engineer and
other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall at reasonable times be permitted to enter upon all properties
15
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
connection with the operation of the municipal sanitary sewer system.
SECTION 22. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and
effect from and after its passage and publication according to law.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Minnesota,
this 10th day of May, 1965.
APPROVED:
_________________________________
KENNETH A. KUMM, Chairman
ATTEST:
____________________________
MARY E. POPE, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
KENNETH A. KUMM, Chairman
TERRENCE ROONEY, Supervisor
JOHNSON, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press on May 27, 1965.
Historical Notes
2013
Section 15-1 and 15-2 passed August 5, 2013, and effective August 14, 2013 by Mample
(Chair), Kermes and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2011
Section 7-1 passed July 5, 2011, and effective July 13, 2011 by Mample (Chair), Kermes
and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2000
Section 7 passed March 6, 2000, and effective March 29, 2000 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1993
Section 13 and 19 passed January 4, 1993, and effective January 13, 1993 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1992
Section 17 passed July 20, 1992, and effective August 5, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 5 passed August 17, 1992, and effective August 26, 1992 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1991
Section 6-3 passed April 15, 1991, and effective May 1, 1991 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1990
Section 7 passed December 3, 1990, and effective December 19, 1990 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Acting Clerk-Treasurer).
16
17
1988
Section 5 passed June 6, 1988, and effective June 15, 1988 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1980
Section 17 passed July 28, 1980, and effective August 7, 1980 by Perron (Chair), Sand,
Jungkunz; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer).
1977
Section 14A passed July 11, 1977, and effective August 31, 1979 by Perron (Chair),
Sand, Jungkunz; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1974
Section 14 passed May 21, 1974, and effective May 30, 1974 by Rooney (Chair), Perron,
Sand; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1973
Section 5, 6, 14, and 17 passed December 17, 1973, and effective December 27, 1973
by King (Chair), Rooney, Perron; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1964
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, and 22 originally passed May 10, 1965 by Kumm (Chair), and effective May 27, 1965,
Rooney, Johnson; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer).




ORDINANCE NO. 21
ORDINANCE RELATING TO WEAPONS AND THE CARRYING
OR CONCEALING OF THE SAME ON A PERSON, THE DISCHARGE
OF THE SAME, PROVIDING FOR PERMITS TO CARRY, WEAR,
CONCEAL OR DISCHARGE THE SAME, AND PROVIDING
FOR PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR DOES ORDAIN:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT. Ordinance No. 21 of the Town of White Bear is
amended to read as follows:
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.
2-1. WEAPON. Any gun, pistol, air gun, paintball gun, B-B gun, pellet
gun, firearm of any description, designed to shoot a pellet, B-B, buckshot, or
other projectile by the use of compressed gas, tension or springs, whether such
device was designed and manufactured for such purpose or designed for some
other purpose but put to such use, bow and arrow when arrows are pointed or
tipped, dagger, slingshot, knuckles of lead, brass or other metal, bowie knife,
switch blade, razor or any device designed as a weapon, and capable of
producing death or great bodily harm.
2-2. PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation.
SECTION 3. CARRYING OF FIREARMS OR BOW AND ARROWS AND
OTHER DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
3-1. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any gun, pistol, air gun, BB
gun or firearm of any description within the Town of White Bear unless it is
unloaded and contained in a case or unloaded and broken down except as
provided in Section 4.
3-1.1. The Town of White Bear adopts Minnesota Statutes, Section
624.711 through 624.716.
3-1.2. Persons holding a valid permit to carry recognized by the State of
Minnesota may carry a pistol to the extent allowed by the permit.
3-2. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any bow and arrow when
the arrows are pointed or tipped within the Town of White Bear, unless unstrung
or completely contained in a case or unless contained in the trunk of the car with
the trunk door closed except as provided in Section 4.
3-3. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or wear concealed about
his person any dagger, slingshot, knuckles of lead, brass or other metal, bowie
knife, switch blade knife, razor, or any other device designed as a weapon and
capable of producing death or great bodily harm.
SECTION 4. DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND BOW AND ARROWS.
4-1. It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any cannon,
gun, pistol, or other firearm, air gun, air rifle, paintball gun, slingshot or similar
device commonly referred to as a B-B gun, within the Town of White Bear
except:
4-1.a. At a firearm hunt for deer conducted in the Town in designated
areas and upon conditions as established by Town Board resolution.
1. Application shall be made to the Town Board for issuance of a
special permit for firearm hunting in accordance with Town
regulations as established by Town Board resolution.
2. All State and Federal hunting rules and regulations shall be
complied with.
4-2. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a bow and arrow with
arrows that are pointed or tipped, within the Town of White Bear except:
4-2.a. On Archery Ranges as a Conditional Use in the “R-1” – Suburban
Residential District as provided for in Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning
Ordinance).
4-2.b. At a bow hunt for deer conducted in the Town in designated areas
and upon conditions as established by Town Board resolution.
1. Application shall be made to the Town Board for issuance of a
special permit for bow hunting in accordance with Town regulations
as established by Town Board resolution.
2. All State and Federal hunting rules and regulations shall be
complied with.
SECTION 5. CONFISCATION. Any such weapons described in this Ordinance,
duly adjudged by any Court to have been handled, held in possession, under
control, or fired, discharged, released through or in any other manner propelled in
violation of this Ordinance shall be forfeited to and confiscated by the Town of
White Bear’s law enforcement agency and by it kept, sold or disposed of in the
manner provided by law.
2
SECTION 6. PEACE OFFICERS EXCEPTED. The provisions of this Ordinance
pertaining to weapons shall not apply to peace officers, nor to any officer of any
Court whose duty it may be to serve warrants or make arrests nor to persons
whose business or occupation may require the carrying of weapons for protection
and who shall have obtained a valid permit.
SECTION 7. PENALTY. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision
of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided by Ordinance No. 26 (Maximum
Fines).
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole
or any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVE DATE. The Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Minnesota,
this 26th day of April, 1966.
APPROVED:
_______________________________
TERRANCE M. ROONEY, Chairman
ATTEST:
___________________________
MARY E. POPE, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
TERRANCE M. ROONEY, Chair
WALTER H. KUEHNL, Supervisor
THOMAS F. MALLOY, JR., Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press May 5, 1966.
Historical Notes
2012
Section 3-1.1 and 3-1.2 passed October 1, 2012, and effective October 10, 2012 by Mample
(Chair), Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2003
Section 4-1 passed August 4, 2003, and effective August 27, 2003 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2002
Section 2-1 and 4 passed May 20, 2002, and effective May 29, 2002 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
3
4
1998
Section 2 and 4 passed July 21, 1998, and effective July 29, 1998 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1993
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 passed May 17, 1993, and effective May 26, 1993 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1992
Section 3 passed September 24, 1992, and effective October 7, 1992 by Weisenburger (chair),
Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1983
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 passed August 1, 1983, and effective August 10, 1983 by
Jungkunz (Chair), Weisenburger and Hamilton; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer).
1966
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 originally passed April 26, 1966, and
effective May 5, 1966 by Rooney (Chair), Kuehnl and Malloy; Pope (Clerk-Treasurer).







































TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 32
AN ORDINANCE LICENSING AND REGULATING THE SALE AND CONSUMPTION
OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
Section 1.
1-1. Amendment and Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. Ordinance No. 32 of
the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, adopted May 16, 1994, as
amended, is hereby completely amended to be as follows. All other Town Ordinances
or parts of Town Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. In all other
respects all other Town Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
1-2. Provisions of State Law Adopted. The Town of White Bear is authorized
to issue all forms of liquor licenses by Laws 2011, Chapter ____, Section 13, which
became effective on May ___, 2011. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
340A, with reference to the definition of terms, applications for license, granting of
license, conditions of license, restrictions on consumption, provisions on sales,
conditions of bonds of licensees, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the
retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor are hereby adopted and
made a part of this ordinance as if fully set out herein.
Section 2. License Required.
2-1. No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent authorized
under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for sale any
intoxicating liquor without first having received a license to do so as provided in
this ordinance.
2-2. "On sale" liquor licenses shall be issued only to restaurants defined in
Section 2-2.1 and shall permit "on sale" of intoxicating liquor only, for
consumption on the licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definition is adopted:
2-2.1. Restaurant – On-Sale Liquor License. Any establishment having
appropriate facilities to prepare food on the premises, serve meals, and is
equipped with a commercial refrigerator and freezer and outside vented
grill, and has seating for not less than 100 guests at one time and where,
in consideration of payment therefore, meals are regularly served at tables
to the general public, and which employs an adequate staff for the usual
and suitable service to its guests and which complies with the State Fire
Code regulations.
2
2-2.1(a). Any establishment receiving a license pursuant to the
terms of this section shall have at least 50% of the gross sales of
the establishment attributable to the service of meals.
2-3. On sale wine licenses shall be issued only to restaurants defined in Section
2-3.1 and shall permit the sale of wine up to 24% alcohol by volume for
consumption with the sale of food.
2-3.1. Restaurant – On-Sale Wine License. Any establishment having
appropriate facilities to prepare food on the premises, serve meals, and is
equipped with a commercial refrigerator and freezer and outside vented
grill, if required and has seating for not less than 40 guests at one time
and where, in consideration of payment therefore, meals are regularly
served at tables to the general public, and which employs an adequate
staff for the usual and suitable service to its guests and which complies
with the State Fire Code regulations.
2-3.1(a). Any establishment receiving a license pursuant to the
terms of this section shall have at least 50% of the gross sales of
the establishment attributable to the service of meals.
2-3.2. The holder of an on-sale wine license outlined in Section 2-3 and 2-
3.1 above, who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor at on-sale
may sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license.
2-4. Sunday on sale liquor licenses shall be issued only to restaurants which hold
a regular on sale liquor license and shall permit the sale of intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays, provided that the
establishment is in compliance with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act as stated
in Minnesota Statutes, § 340A.504. A Sunday on-sale license is not needed for
Sunday sales by wine licensees.
2-4.1. A Sunday On-Sale Liquor License shall not be required by on-sale
wine license holders who also hold a 3.2 percent malt liquor at on-sale
license.
2-5. "Off sale" licenses shall be issued only to "off sale" exclusive liquor stores
and shall permit the licensee to sell intoxicating liquor in original packages for
consumption off the premises only.
2-6. No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent authorized
under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for sale any
3.2% malt liquor without first having received a license to do so as provided in
this ordinance. Licenses shall be “On-Sale(s)” and “Off-Sale(s)” and shall be
3
issued as “3.2% Malt Liquor License” valid for sales any day except Sunday and
“Special Sunday 3.2% Malt Liquor License” for “On-Sale(s)” on Sundays only.
2-7. Temporary “on-sale” licenses may be issued to a club or charitable
organization, religious, or non-profit organization in existence for at least three (3)
years in connection with social events within the Town, for up to three (3) days in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes, § 340A.404, Subd. 10.
Section 3. Application for License.
3-1. Every application for a license to sell liquor shall be verified and filed with the
Town Clerk. It shall state the name of the applicant, his age, representations as
to his character, with such references as may be required, his citizenship, the
type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed
license will operate and its location and type of building, whether the applicant is
owner and operator of the business, how long he has been in that business at
that place, and such other information as the council may require from time to
time. In addition to containing such information, each application for a license
shall be in the form prescribed by the State Commissioner of Public Safety. No
person shall make a false statement in an application.
3-2. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by proof of financial
responsibility specifying coverage for liquor liability and loss of means of support
in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) of coverage
because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence; two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00) because of bodily injury to two or more persons
in any one occurrence; twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) because of injury to
or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence; one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of support in any one person in any one
occurrence; and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for loss of means
of support for two or more persons in any one occurrence.
3-2.1. In the event such policy provides for a three hundred thousand
dollar ($300,000.00) annual aggregate policy limit as provided in
Minnesota Statutes, § 304A.409, said policy shall further require that in
the event that the policy limits are reduced in any given year because of
the three hundred thousand dollar annual aggregate policy limit, the
insurance carrier shall provide the Town of White Bear written notice of
said reduction in policy limits within thirty (30) days of said reduction
becoming effective.
3-2.2. Thereafter, the Town Board may require the licensee to take further
action with regard to liability insurance in order to protect citizens of the
Town during the period of the reduced aggregate policy limit.
4
3-3. The proof of financial responsibility offered under Section 3-2 shall be
approved by the Town Board and, in the case of applicants for off sale licenses,
by the State Commissioner of Public Safety. Liability insurance policies shall be
approved as to form by the Town Attorney. The operation of such off-sale or onsale
liquor business without having on file at all times with the municipality the
proof of financial responsibility required in Section 3-2 shall be grounds for
immediate revocation of the license. All insurance policies shall state that the
Town will be given ten days’ notice, in writing, of cancellation.
Section 4. License Fees.
4-1. The annual license fees for each classification of license is as set out in
Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges). All fees shall be paid in full prior to
issuance of a license. All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the
municipality. Upon rejection of any application for a license, the treasurer shall
refund the amount paid, except where the rejection is for willful mis-statement on
the license application.
4-2. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December of each year. Each
license shall be issued for a period of one year except that if a portion of the
license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be issued
for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing such fee, any
unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
4-3. Following approval, no refund of any fee shall be permitted except as
authorized under Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.408.
Section 5. Granting of Licenses.
5-1. The Town Board shall investigate all facts set out in the application. The
Town shall conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the
applicant in regard to all intoxicating liquor license applications.
5-2. An applicant seeking an “on-sale” intoxicating liquor license shall pay an
investigation fee with the required annual license fee. If investigation outside the
State of Minnesota is required by the Town Board or the State Commissioner of
Public Safety, the applicant shall pay the actual cost of the investigation, up to
$10,000.00, prior to any action to approve or deny the license.
5-3. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license. After such investigation and hearing, the Town Board
shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion. In addition to the other
requirements of state law and this Ordinance in determining whether to issue a
license for a particular premises, the Town Board shall consider all relevant
factors relating to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town
5
including, but not limited to, the effect on the market value of neighboring
properties, proximity to churches and schools, effect on traffic, and parking.
5-4. No "off sale" intoxicating license shall become effective until it, together with
the proof of financial responsibility furnished by the applicant, has been approved
by the State Commissioner of Public Safety.
5-5. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only. Each license shall be
issued only for the premises described in the application. No license may be
transferred to another person or to another place without the approval of the
Town Board. Before a transfer is approved, the transferee shall comply with the
requirements for a new application. Any transfer of 50% or more of the stock of a
corporate licensee is deemed a transfer of the license, and the transfer of stock
without prior Town Board approval is ground for the revocation of a license.
Section 6. Persons Ineligible for License. No license shall be granted to or held by
any person made ineligible for such a license by state law. A person ineligible to hold
an intoxicating liquor license is also ineligible to hold a 3.2% malt liquor license.
Section 7. Places Ineligible for License.
7-1. No license shall be issued for any place or for any business ineligible for
such a license under state law.
7-2. No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which taxes,
assessments or other financial claims of the Town are delinquent and unpaid.
Section 8. Conditions of License.
8-1. Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the following
subdivisions and all other provisions of this ordinance and of any other applicable
ordinance of the Town or state law.
8-2. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of their place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises authorized to sell or serve intoxicating liquor shall be deemed
the act of the licensee as well and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties
provided by this ordinance equally with the employee. Every licensee shall
appoint a designated “on-site manager” who is responsible for the compliance of
such rules and regulations on the premises. The licensee shall notify the Town
of the identity of the “on-site manager.”
8-2.1. The licensee shall notify the Town within thirty (30) days of any
change of the designated “on-site manager.” The licensee shall provide
the Town with the full name, address and birth date of the proposed
replacement “on-site manager” and that person shall sign a waiver,
6
provided by the Town, permitting the Town to access any and all records
including, but not limited to, driver’s license and criminal record prior to
appointment to the position of “on-site manager.”
8-3. Any peace officer, health officer, or any properly designated officer or
employee of the Town shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and
search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a warrant.
Section 9. Restrictions on Purchase and Consumption.
9-1. No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of obtaining
liquor.
9-2. No person shall induce a minor to purchase or procure liquor.
9-3. No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place or
place of business not licensed to sell liquor "on sale" and no person shall
consume liquor in any such place.
9-4. No liquor shall be sold or consumed on a public highway or in an
automobile.
Section 10. Evacuation of “On Sale” Establishments.
10-1. All patrons of an “on sale” establishment selling intoxicating liquor or 3.2%
malt liquor must vacate the premises within thirty (30) minutes of the 1:00 a.m.
termination of sales time. Any patron who remains on the licensed premises
beyond that limit, or any licensee or employee who allows a patron to remain on
the licensed premises beyond that limit, is in violation of this Ordinance.
10-2. If an “on sale” establishment remains open for the sale of food beyond the
thirty-minute evacuation limit, all intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor must be
secured within the thirty minute limit in such a manner as to prevent
consumption. Any patron who consumes intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor
on the licensed premises, or any licensee or employee who allows such
consumption or allows intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain on the
licensed premises beyond the thirty minute limit is in violation of this Ordinance.
Section 11. “On Sale” Hours. No intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor shall be furnished to
anyone, including employees, between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M. Monday
through Saturday, and before 10:00 A.M. on Sundays.
Section 12. “Off Sale” License Restrictions. In addition to the other requirements of
State law and this Ordinance, the following regulations are applicable to “off sale”
intoxicating liquor licenses:
7
12-1. Number of Licenses. The number of licenses which may be issued is
three.
12-2. Hours of Operation. An “off sale” establishment may be open for
business from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and from 11:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Sunday, beginning July 1, 2017.
12-3. Use of License. If the license is not used within one year, the license shall
automatically terminate.
12-4. Size of Premises. A licensed premises shall have at least 1,600 square
feet of sales floor space including sales coolers, and excluding walk-in storage
coolers.
Section 13. Prohibition of Certain Conduct on Licensed Premises. Certain acts or
conduct on any premises licensed by this Ordinance or licensed pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 340A, is deemed contrary to public welfare and is prohibited, and no
license issued pursuant to this Ordinance or licensed pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 340A may be held or maintained where such acts or conduct is permitted. The
prohibited acts or conduct referred to are:
13-1. The employing or use of any person in the sale or service of beverages in
or upon the licensed premises where such person is unclothed or in such attire,
costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below
the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks,
vulva or genitals.
13-2. The employing or use of the services of any host or hostess while such
host or hostess is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in
Section 13.1.
13-3. The encouraging or permitting of any person on the licensed premises to
touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any person.
13-4. The permitting of any employee or person to wear or use any device or
covering exposed to view which simulates the breast, genitals, anus, pubic hair
or any portion thereof.
13-5. The permitting of any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate:
13-5(a). With or upon another person, sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
13-5(b). Masturbation or bestiality;
8
13-5(c). With or upon another person the touching, caressing or fondling
of the buttocks, anus, genitals or female breast; or
13-5(d). The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or female
breasts below the top of the areola.
13-6. The permitting of any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to
depict any of the prohibited activities described herein.
13-7. The permitting of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises
who exposes to public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus.
13-8. The permitting or showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproductions, or
other reproductions depicting:
13-8.1(a). Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which
are prohibited by law;
13-8.2(b). Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast,
buttocks, anus or genitals;
13-8.2(c). Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva, the anus, or the
genitals; or
13-8.2(d). Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are
employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the
activities described in this section.
Section 14. Violations, Administrative Penalty. The Town Board may suspend or
revoke any liquor license for violation of any provision or condition of this ordinance or
any state law regulating the sale of intoxicating liquor and shall revoke such license if
the licensee willfully violates any provision of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A.
14-1. Procedures. The following procedures shall be implemented regarding
alleged violations of this Ordinance, should the Town elect to proceed with an
administrative violation:
14-1.1. Notification of Violation. Upon discovery of an alleged violation, the
alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a notice that sets
forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of their
right to be heard on the accusation.
14-1.2. Hearing. If a Person accused of violating this Ordinance so requests,
a hearing shall be scheduled before the Town Board, the time and place of
which shall be published and provided to the alleged violator. The Board
shall receive evidence of the violation and evidence provided by the alleged
9
violator by testimony, in written form, or both. The hearing shall be taperecorded.
14-1.3. Findings. If the Town Board finds that a violation of this Ordinance
did occur, that decision, along with the Board’s reasons for finding a violation
and the penalty to be imposed, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which
shall be provided to the accused violator. If the Board finds that no violation
has occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings
shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
14-1.4. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the final Findings of the Town
Board under this Section may seek judicial review by petition to the Court of
Appeals in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 14.63 to § 14.68.
14-1.5. Misdemeanor Prosecution. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit
the Town from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged
violation of this Ordinance. If the Town elects to seek misdemeanor
prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed against the individual
charged with a misdemeanor.
14-1.6. Continued Violation. Each violation and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues to occur shall constitute a separate violation.
14-2. Civil Penalty. On a finding by the Town Board that a licensee has failed to
comply with an applicable statute, rule or ordinance relating to alcoholic
beverages, the Town Board may revoke the license, suspend the license for up
to 60 days, impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000.00 for each violation, or impose
any combination of these sanctions.
Section 15. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety (90) days or both
plus the costs of prosecution in either case.
Section 16. Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of
this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part hereof,
other than the part held to be invalid.
Section 17. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, this 1st day of August, 2011.
APPROVED:
______________________________
10
BILL MAMPLE, Chair
ATTEST:
_________________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Chair
ROBERT J. KERMES, Supervisor
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor
Synopsis published in the White Bear Press August 10, 2011.
Historical Notes:
2017
Section 12-2 passed April 3, 2017, and effective
2016
Sections 2-1, 2-2, 2-2.1, 2-2.1(a), 2-3, 2-3.1, 2-3.1(a), 2-3.2, 2-4, 2-4.1 passed August 3, 2016,
and effective August 10, 2016 by Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2016
Sections 2-2, 2-3, and 2-4 passed May 2, 2016, and effective May 11, 2016 by Kermes (Chair),
Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer)
2011
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 passed August 1, 2011, and
effective August 10, 2016 by Mample (Chair), Kermes and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer)
2002
Section 10 passed April 15, 2002, and effective April 24, 2002 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2000
Sections 5 & 6 passed February 14, 2000, and effective February 23, 2000 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1995
Section 9 passed March 6, 1995, and effective March 15, 1995 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1994
Sections 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, & 10 passed December 19, 1994 and effective January 25, 1995 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, & 18 passed May 16, 1994 and
effective June 1, 1994 by Weisenburger (Chair); Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1991
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 & 21 passed January 7,
1991 and effective January 23, 1991 by Weisenburger (Chair); Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1970
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6 originally passed December 14, 1970 and effective
December 23, 1970 by Rooney (Chairman), Perron and King; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
ORDINANCE NO. 33
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO AND REGULATING THE
LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF SIGNS AND
BILLBOARDS IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY
COUNTY, MINNESOTA; PROVIDING PENALTIES
FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; AND REPEALING
ALL ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN
CONFLICT THEREWITH
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE. The purpose of this Ordinance is to
protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare within the Town
of White Bear by establishing a set of standards covering the fabrication,
erection, use or display of signs, symbols or markings that serve as visual
communication media. The provisions of this Ordinance are intended to
allow for creativity, give a reasonable degree of freedom of choice and grant
opportunities for effective communication to those that design, display or
utilize the type of media covered by this Ordinance, while at the same time
ensuring that the public is not endangered, annoyed, distracted or
displeased by unsafe, disorderly, indiscriminate and unnecessary use of this
communication media.
1-1. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. Those parts of Ordinance
No. 8 (Building Code), Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning Ordinance) and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed. In all other respects said Ordinance No. 8 (Building Code),
Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning Ordinance) and other ordinances shall remain in
full force and effect.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Ordinance the
following terms and words are defined as follows:
2-1. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. For the purpose of this
Ordinance the Code Enforcement Officer shall be the person or party
responsible for issuing sign permits, examining design plans for sign,
inspecting all signs within the Town of White Bear on a regular basis,
determining the status of said signs, issuing notice(s) of violation and for
ordering the removal and/or destruction of obsolete or hazardous signs.
2-2. SIGN – Identification, description, display, illustration, structure
or display which is affixed or constructed directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or land which directs attention to a product, place,
activity, events, service, person, institution or business.
2
2-2.1. SIGN, AREA – The entire area within a continuous perimeter
enclosing a sign, exclusive of sign embellishments, which may
extend beyond said perimeter as regulated herein; such perimeter
shall not include any structural elements lying outside of said sign
and is not an integral part of the display. Double faced signs are
permitted with the maximum square footage allowed on each face as
that allowed for a single faced sign; multi-faced sign areas may not
exceed the area permitted for a single faced sign.
2-2.1(a). SIGN, AREA IDENTIFICATION – A free standing
sign which identifies the name of a neighborhood, a residential
subdivision, multiple family complex of three or more
structures or 10 or more units or a shopping center of 3 or
more stores or any combination of the above.
2-2.1(b). SIGN MONUMENT – Any sign that is self-supported
by a solid base extending horizontally.
2-2.2. SIGN, COMBINATION – A sign incorporating any
combination of the features of ground, projecting and roof signs.
2-2.3. SIGN, ELECTRIC – Any sign containing electrical wiring, but
not including signs illuminated by an exterior, unattached light
source.
2-2.4. SIGN, GROUND – A sign supported by one or more uprights,
poles or braces in or upon the ground other than a combination sign.
2-2.5. SIGN, IDENTIFICATION – In a residential district, a
nameplate sign identifying a resident (name, address and profession
or occupation), school, church or other non-business use.
2-2.5(a). In a business or industrial district, a nameplate or
directory sign identifying the business, industry or occupant of
the lot (name, address, business(s), industry or lot occupant).
2-2.6. SIGN, ILLUMINATED – Any sign which has characters,
letters, figures, design or outline illuminated by electric lights or tubes
as part of the sign proper. Also can be a sign on which the artificial
light does not remain stationary and/or is not constant in intensity and
color.
2-2.6(a). SIGN, ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SCREEN – An
illuminated sign or portion of a sign that displays an electronic
text or uses changes in lights to form a sign message or
messages in text form wherein the sequence of messages
3
and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can
be modified by electronic process. This definition includes
digital screens, and LED screens only. Any electronic display
screen shall meet the requirements of Section 4-1.4 of this
Ordinance.
2-2.7. SIGN, MARQUEE – A sign attached to or hung from a
permanent roofed structure which is attached to a building.
2-2.8. SIGN, OFF PREMISE – (Advertising Sign). A sign which
directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or
entertainment which is conducted, offered, sold or manufactured
elsewhere than on the premises upon which the sign is placed.
2-2.9. SIGN, ON PREMISE – A sign which directs attention to
business, enterprise, or profession conducted, or a commodity or
service sold or offered upon the real property where such a sign is
located.
2-2.10. SIGN, PROJECTING – Any sign permanently attached to a
structure which is designed to physically protrude from that structure.
2-2.11. SIGN, REAL ESTATE – A sign offering property (land and/or
buildings) for sale, lease or rent.
2-2.12. SIGN, REVOLVING – A sign which has moving structural
parts but, does not include flashing signs which blink on and off. It
does include signs which produce moving effects through the use of
illumination; signs that revolve or turn on an axis point shall not be
considered revolving if less than 2 complete revolutions are made
per minute.
2-2.13. SIGN ROOF – A sign erected upon a roof or parapet of a
building.
2-2.14. SIGN, STRUCTURE – The supports, uprights, braces and
framework of the sign.
2-2.15. SIGN, TEMPORARY – A sign which is not solidly affixed to
any building, structure, or land and announces an event such as a
bazaar, garage/rummage, and estate sale and/or a sporting or
special event of limited duration and certain real estate, construction
or development related signs.
2-2.15(a). SIGN, TRANSIT BENCH – A sign which is affected
to or painted on a transit bench backrest.
4
2-2.16. SIGN, WALL – A sign attached to or erected against the wall
of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to
the plane of said wall.
2-2.17. SQUARE FOOTAGE – As used in this Ordinance “square
footage” and “square feet” shall mean the area of the total display
surfaces which contain lettering, symbols, numbers, or other graphic
features. If a sign has more than one display surface, the area of
each display surface must be taken into account.
2-2.17(a). TRANSIT BENCH SIGNS. Transit bench signs are
permitted, subject to obtaining a permit.
2-2.18. YARD AREA – The definition of YARD AREA as provided in
Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning Ordinance), Section 7, Table 7-1, is
hereby adopted by reference.
SECTION 3. PERMITTED SIGNS.
3-1. General Regulations.
3-1.1. General Set Back Requirements. Except those signs
designated, any sign, in any district, which exceeds one and one-half
(1 1/2) square feet shall be set back ten (10) feet from any property
line and not within any public easement.
3-1.2. Height Above Grade Level. Except for necessary poles,
uprights, pedestals, and other supporting structural elements, no
portion of any sign designed to be placed overhead shall be less than
eight (8) feet above grade level, except for signs that are designed
such that they present no hazard to pedestrians or vehicles.
3-1.2(a). Exceptions. Certain circumstances may exist
where a sign may be required to be at another elevation
depending upon location or pedestrian or vehicle safety.
3-1.3. Corner and Through Lots; Alleys. All corner and through
lots (more than one lot line on public street) shall be considered as
having two front lot lines for application of regulations pertaining to
signs.
3-1.4. Exemptions. No signs shall be permitted within the public
right-of-way or upon any public easement, except as follows:
3-1.4(a). Public traffic control signs.
5
3-1.4(b). Banners, decorations, and other temporary signs.
3-1.4(c). Mailboxes.
3-1.4(d). Bus shelter and bench signs.
3-1.4(e). Newspaper boxes.
3-1.5. Repealed.
3-2. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs for any lawful purpose,
under eight (8) square feet of display surface, may be erected for thirty (30)
days or less without a permit.
3-2.1. Portable and Trailer Signs. A sign designed to be movable
from one location to another which is not permanently attached to the
ground or any other structure, other than the trailer. Such sign shall
be a maximum of fifty (50) square feet of display surface, and shall
not be used more than two (2) times within a calendar year at the
same locations. Display of such a sign shall be allowed for thirty (30)
consecutive days or for the duration of the event, whichever is less.
These signs require a permit which must be prominently displayed
during the period of validity. The sign, supports and portable stand
shall be removed from public view at the end of the display period.
No such sign will be allowed if it interferes with the use and
enjoyment of adjacent land or constitutes a hazard or endangers the
public.
3-2.2. Construction/Development Assistance. These are
considered temporary signs that denote a construction project or
advertise the fact that an agency has assisted in financing, instigating
or continuing a project. These signs must be on the construction
site, no larger than fifty (50) square feet of display surface and must
be removed upon final inspection of construction project.
3-2.3. Grand Opening Signs. A sign announcing the opening of a
new business or enterprise. Such a sign shall not exceed fifty (50)
square feet of display surface and shall not be located within fifteen
(15) feet of a public right-of-way. A permit is required for such a sign.
Such a sign may be made of cloth or other suitable material and
should be securely attached to the new business, enterprise or
physical structure. Such a sign shall be removed within three (3)
days after completion of event.
6
3-2.4. Employment Opportunity Sign. One sign announcing
employment opportunities for each business is permitted, within the I-
1, B-1 and B-2 Zoning Districts. Such sign shall be secured to the
ground but not permanently affixed by footings, must be placed on
the site of the business advertising employment opportunities, and
shall not exceed 20 square feet of display surface. Such sign shall
be constructed of wood or metal, shall be limited to the wording
“Employment Opportunities”, a phone number, positions available,
and hours of operation, and shall display the company name or logo
and shall be painted to match the building and company monument
or pylon sign. Employment opportunity signs may be displayed for a
period of one (1) year from the date of issuance of a sign permit.
Permits may be renewed upon review and approval by the Town
Board. Each permit renewal shall not exceed a period of more than
one (1) year, additional one (1) year renewals may be approved by
the Town Board.
3-2.4(a). Temporary Banners. Temporary banners may also be
displayed on site or mounted to a building advertising employment
opportunities. A banner shall be limited in size to 160 square feet in
area.
3-3. Campaign and Election Signs. Election signs are permitted in
any district on private property, with owner approval. Such signs must be
removed within ten (10) calendar days following any public election.
Election signs are regulated in size to a maximum provided by Minnesota
State Statutes. Election signs are exempted from any other regulations of
this Ordinance.
3-3.1. The volunteer or political committee, however organized and
required by law or ordinance to identify itself in support of a
candidate or issue, shall be the responsible entity for conformance to
this section regarding size, display and removal of temporary
campaign and election signs.
3-4. Electric Signs. Any sign illuminated and located within 50 feet
of a residential district lot line shall be diffused or indirect so as not to reflect
direct rays of light into adjacent residences. All illuminated signs in
business and industrial districts in close proximity to residential districts
shall be designed so as to illuminate the sign and not the residential
property to the fullest extent practicable. Signs lighted by any means as an
integral part of the sign, by flood lights, or by other means which cast light
away from the sign shall be governed as follows:
7
3-4.1. Any combination of signs or light sources which cast light on a
public street shall not exceed one (1) foot candle per meter reading
as measured from the centerline of the said street.
3-4.2. Any combination of signs or lights illuminating signs which
cast lights on property zoned for residential use shall not exceed a
four tenths (0.4) foot candle per meter reading as measured from any
part of said residential area.
3-4.3. All signs and displays using electric power shall have a cut-off
switch on the outside of the premises and on the outside of the sign.
All electrical work shall conform with the Building Code and be
subject to inspection by the Electrical Inspector.
3-5. Ground Signs. All ground signs shall meet the following
requirements:
3-5.1. No ground sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt
or relocated to a height exceeding thirty-five (35) feet above ground,
except where an advanced speed artery or thoroughfare faced by the
ground sign is elevated above the surface on which the ground sign
is placed, the height shall be measured from the nearest road
surface of the advanced speed artery.
3-5.2. The uprights and basic sign structure of the ground
advertising signs shall be of metal or weather resistance material
construction.
3-5.3. The bottom of the facing of every ground sign shall be at least
thirty (30) inches above the ground, which space may be filled with
platform or decorative trim of light wood or metal construction.
3-5.4. No private sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained
within the boundary of any street, avenue, highway, alley, or public
ground of the Town, County or State.
3-5.5. The soil replaced after an anchor or post has been placed in
the ground shall be thoroughly compacted. The anchors or posts
shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost
line.
3-5.6. Portable signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached
to bases shall be so proportioned that the weight and size of the
bases are adequate to resist the wind pressure specified in the
Building Code. Such signs shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height.
8
3-5.7. The owner of a lot upon which there is a ground sign or the
person occupying such a lot or both are hereby required to keep
such a lot and ground sign clean, sanitary, inoffensive and free and
clear of all obnoxious substances and unsightly conditions.
3-6. Marquee Signs. Fire resistant signs may be attached to or
hung from a marquee. When attached to or hung from a marquee such
signs shall be at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or grade level. No
such sign shall extend outside the vertical lines of such marquee. Marquee
signs shall require a Conditional Use Permit if they overhang the public
right-of-way.
3-7. Projecting Signs. Signs shall in no case project from a
building or structure to any point within two (2) feet of a line drawn
perpendicularly upward from the curb line. No projecting sign shall
be less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or the ground level. All
projecting signs, for which a permit is required, shall be constructed
entirely of fire resistant material in accordance with Ordinance No. 8
(Building Code). Projecting signs shall be securely attached to a
building or structure by metal bolts, anchors, supports, chains, fire
ropes or steel rod, in accordance with Ordinance No. 8 (Building
Code). All metal supports and braces for projecting signs shall be
galvanized or of corrosive resistant material or painted annually.
3-8. Real Estate Signs. All real estate signs will conform to the
following conditions:
3-8.1. Temporary real estate signs located on the premises of the
structure or land advertised for sale or lease, shall not exceed six (6)
square feet of display surface and shall be no closer than ten (10)
feet to a front property line. There shall be only one such sign per
front property lot except for corner lots, which are considered as
having two front property lots. These signs shall be removed from
the property within ten (10) days following the lease or closing of
sale. These signs do not require a sign permit.
3-8.2. Temporary real estate signs located off the premises of the
structure or land advertised for sale or lease, shall not exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet of display surface and shall be no closer than
twenty (20) feet from any front property line. If this sign is displayed
on private – residential property, the owner must give consent to
having the sign displayed. This type of sign shall not be illuminated.
This type of sign does require a sign permit.
3-8.3. Temporary real estate signs announcing or promoting a new
residential, commercial or industrial project, multi-family
9
development, provided that each residential project contains at least
six (6) dwellings or lots must meet the following conditions:
3-8.3(a). Sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet
of display surface.
3-8.3(b). Sign shall be at least one hundred and thirty (130)
feet from any pre-existing home.
3-8.3(c). One such sign is permitted for each major
thoroughfare the project abuts.
3-8.3(d). The sign(s) are removed within two (2) years unless
an extension of time is granted by the Town Board.
3-8.4. Temporary real estate signs located on the premises of a
multiple dwelling unit advertised for sale, lease or rent, shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet of display surface and only one
ground or wall sign is allowed per building on front lots facing public
streets. This type of sign does require a Sign Permit.
3-9. Roof Signs. Every roof sign shall be constructed entirely of fire
resistant materials including the uprights, supports, and braces, except the
ornamental battens, cappings and nailing strips, platforms, decorative
trimmings and facings may be constructed of combustible materials.
3-10. Service Stations. Service stations may erect a pylon or
pedestal sign not to exceed thirty (30) feet in height anywhere in a setback
area, but no part of any such sign shall be closer to side lot lines than the
required side yard setback or within five (5) feet of the rear lot line or street
right-of-way line.
3-11. Wall Signs. Signs attached to exterior walls of solid masonry
or concrete shall be safely and securely attached to the same. Refer to
Ordinance No. 8 (Building Code).
3-12. Area Identification Signs and Entrance Monuments. Area
identification signs and entrance monuments shall be located a minimum of
10 feet from any property line, shall not exceed 6 feet in height, and shall
not be located on drainage and utility easements unless approved by the
Town Board. Sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet and shall be
required to incorporate the Township logo or the words “White Bear
Township” into the sign design.
3-13. On-Site Directional Signs. On-site directional signs intended
to facilitate the movement of pedestrians and vehicles within the site upon
10
which such signs are located are limited to not more than 2 signs per lot.
Square footage for directional signs shall not exceed a total of 25 square
feet in area.
3-14. Transit Benches. All transit benches shall be subject to the
following requirements:
3-14.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the
placing and maintenance of transit benches in public rights-of-ways
in order to control location, appearance, proliferation and traffic
safety.
3-14.2. License and Permit Required. It is unlawful for a person to
place a transit bench in White Bear Township without first above
been issued a permit and license by the Town. Any license issued
shall expire on December 31st of each year.
3-14.2(a). Permit/License Fee. The permit and license fees
shall be as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
3-14.2(b). Permit & Application. Application for permits
shall be made to the Town Clerk. The application shall
contain the following:
(1). A scale drawing showing the size and location of
the transit bench relative to all other objects on the
property, including the layout of applicable adjacent
roadways, intersections, traffic signage, sidewalks,
trails, utility poles, fences and other objects in the
vicinity.
(2). Name, address, and phone number of applicant.
(3). Detailed plans and specifications of each proposed
bench, including the general nature of the advertising
matter, if any, to be posted thereon, and total surface
area intended as signage, not to exceed 12 square
feet, using the front or seating side surface of the bench
back.
(4). Current general liability Certificate of Insurance
from an insurance company, and authorized to do
business in the State of Minnesota, naming the
Township as additional insured in the minimum amount
of $500,000 for any and all claims arising out of the use
or existence of the transit bench. The certificate shall
11
provide for automatic notification of the Town with a
minimum 30 days advance notice in the event of
cancellation.
(5). An executed hold harmless agreement from the
licensee, protecting the Town from any and all claims
arising out of the use and existence of the transit
bench.
(6). Written permission from the road authority as
defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 160.02, if White
Bear Township is not the road authority for the right-ofway
adjacent to the transit bench location.
(7). Such other information the Town Clerk may
require.
3-14.2(c). Town Board Review. The Town Clerk shall
forward all completed permit applications to the Town Board
for review and approval.
3-14.2(d). Revocation and License. The Town Board may
revoke a license for failure to comply with the conditions of the
permit.
3-14.3. Permitted Locations. Transit benches may only be placed
in public rights-of-ways when posted and designated as bus stop
locations.
3-14.4. Installation and Maintenance. The permitee shall install
benches in accordance with the following criteria:
3-14.4(a). Location. Transit benches shall be installed
parallel with the curb, sidewalk or trail, and set back at least 3
feet.
3-14.4(b). Size. Size limitations on transit benches are as
follows:
(1). Height – 42 inches maximum;
(2). Width – 30 inches maximum;
(3). Length – seven feet maximum.
3-14.4(c). Construction. A transit bench shall be installed
and maintained on a durable level surface, including but not
limited to, concrete, bomanite or decorative brick. The durable
12
surface shall extend six inches on either end of the bench and
one and one-half feet in front. The transit bench shall be of
sufficient weight or shall be secured in a manner to minimize
the potential of accidental tipping or vandalism. No transit
bench shall be fastened, secured, or anchored to Township
property.
3-14.(d). Materials. A transit bench shall be constructed of
durable materials, including but not limited to, concrete, wood,
plastic or combination thereof, with colors limited to whites,
earthtones of subdued greens, grays, browns, reddishbrowns,
and golds.
3-14.4(e). Conditions. It is the responsibility of the licensee
to maintain each bench in a safe condition and to keep
benches neat, clean and in usable condition. The licensee
shall keep the transit bench and bench base free of ice and
snow and accessible at all times.
3-14.4(f). Advertising Matter. Advertising matter may be
displayed only on the front (roadway side) surface of the
backrest of the transit bench, and shall not exceed 12 square
feet in surface area. Advertisements for liquor, beer, tobacco,
political advertisements, obscene, immoral or illegal matter is
prohibited on all transit bench signs. No advertising matter on
any transit bench may display the words “Stop”, “Look”, “Drive
In”, “Danger”, or any other word, phrase or symbol, reflective
materials, or illumination device, which might interfere with,
mislead or distract traffic.
3-14.5. Removal of Transit Bench.
3-14.5(a). Removal by Licensee. Licensee shall remove
transit benches within ten (10) days of license expiration or
revocation.
3-14.5(b). Removal by Town. Upon the revocation or
expiration of any license without renewal, if the licensee fails
promptly to remove a bench, the Town Public Works
Department may do so within ten (10) days after written notice
given by mail, directed to the address of the licensee on file,
and if the licensee shall fail to pay the cost of removal and
storage thereof, within a period of sixty (60) days after the
giving of such notice, the licensee’s rights in said bench shall
be forfeited, but such forfeiture shall not excuse the licensee
13
from the payment of the cost of removal and storage of said
bench.
3-15. Commercial/Industrial Monument and Pylon Signs. All
monument and pylon business identification signs shall include the words
“White Bear Township” or the White Bear Township logo on all sign faces.
White Bear Township lettering or logo shall occupy an area which is not less
than 10% of the sign face. The White Bear Township lettering/logo shall not
be included when calculating the display surface square footage of any
sign.
3-16. Off-Premise Advertising Signs. Off premise advertising
signs are permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) in the
I-1 Zoning District, subject to the conditions set forth by Ordinance No. 35,
Section 9-4, and the following requirements:
3-16.1. Location. Off premise advertising signs are permitted only
on lots defined by Section 7-18 of Ordinance No. 35, the Advertising
Sign Overlay Area.
3-16.2. Height. Off premise advertising signs shall have a
maximum height of 40’ measured from the grade at the base of the
sign or the elevation of the adjacent travel lane of I-35E, whichever is
greater.
3-16.3. Spacing. Off premise advertising signs shall be located no
closer than 800 feet measured along the freeway, from any other off
premises advertising sign.
3-16.4. Size. No off premise advertising sign shall have more than
two faces, and each sign face must be intended to read from an
opposite direction. The area of the basic sign face shall not be more
than 672 square feet, but, may, in addition to the basic sign face,
contain extensions, cutouts or top lettering provided such extensions
do not exceed 20% of the area of the basic sign face and are an
integral part of the design of the message of the basic sign face.
3-16.5. Design. The design of the off premises advertising sign
must provide a balance between the sign structure and the sign face,
and express the message of quality, permanence and elegance.
3-16.6. Structure Design. The design of the off premise advertising
sign structure must be innovative and custom, and capture the
opportunity to install elements that provide order, rhythm, verticality,
illumination and image to the roadside experience. The design
features of the structure shall be readable at a freeway scale and
14
speed, provide a balance between the sign structure and the sign
face, and express the message of quality, permanence and
elegance.
3-16.7. Off premise advertising signs are permitted to have a digital
display. The sign face shall not change more than once every 8
seconds. No video or word changes may take place during the 8
second interval.
3-16.8. All dynamic display billboards shall be equipped and
operated with an ambient light monitor or a mechanism that
automatically adjusts the brightness level of the sign in response to
light conditions. Dynamic display billboards shall be equipped with a
means to immediately turn off the display or lighting in the event of a
sign malfunction. The dynamic display billboard sign and all
associated lighting shall be turned off within one hour or as soon as
reasonably possible after receiving a notification by the Town that the
sign does not meet the standards of this section.
3-16.9. No dynamic display billboard sign shall exceed five hundred
(500) nits (candelas per square meter) at night or seven thousand
five hundred (7,500) nits (candelas per square meter) during the day.
3-16.10. Dynamic display billboards shall not operate at brightness
levels of more than three-tenths (0.3) foot-candle above ambient
light, as measured using a foot-candle meter at a preset horizontal
distance of two hundred fifty feet (250’) from the nominal size (14 feet
x 48 feet) sign face.
SECTION 4. PROHIBITED SIGNS.
4-1. General Regulations.
4-1.1. Signs that provide refuge from police surveillance.
4-1.2. Signs that accumulate debris and present a fire hazard.
4-1.3. Except for temporary signs, a sign which directs attention to a
business or profession or to the commodity, service or entertainment
not sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or
to which it is attached.
4-1.4. Flashing signs or revolving signs, except those with symbols
or numerals indicating time and temperature and word changes,
provided the words do not change more frequently than once every
eight (8) seconds.
15
4-1.5. Red, yellow or green lights that by position or color or in any
other manner would cause confusion in the proper reading of traffic
signs or signals.
4-1.6. Revolving beacons, beamed lights or similar devices that
would distract automobile traffic constituting a safety hazard.
4-1.7. Any sign which obstructs the vision of drivers, obstructs or
detracts from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on
public streets and roads by reason of the size, location, coloring or
illumination of the sign.
4-1.8. Signs which made use of words such as “stop”, “look”,
“danger” or other similar words, phrases, symbols or characters or
the existence of danger.
4-1.9. Any sign containing obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
4-1.10. Any sign now or hereafter existing which advertises a
business, activity, campaign, service or product which no longer
exists.
4-1.11. Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
4-1.12. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to, or egress from a
required door, window, fire escape, or other required exit way, or as
required in the Town Code.
SECTION 5. DISTRICT REGULATIONS. The following table sets forth the
requirements for signs in each zoning district (as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance), subject to various exceptions contained in this Ordinance.
5-1. Residential Zoning Districts (R-1, R-2, and R-3).
Type of Signs Allowed: Identification, ground, combination wall,
pedestal, real estate, election, temporary
off-premises, school, church, exempt and
other non-business.
Number & Size Allowed: One sign per front lot, except corner and
through lots. Residential Identification: 2
square feet of display surface. On
Premise Real Estate: 6 square feet of
display surface. Off Premise Real Estate:
16 square feet of display surface.
16
Height: Not over ten (10) feet from ground level
except as otherwise provided herein.
Setback: Any sign over 1½ square feet shall be set
back at least ten (10) feet from any lot
line.
Illumination: No sign permitted in the Residential
District may be illuminated (except for
holiday displays). A church, funeral home
or school within a Residential District may
have an electronic display screen as part
of or as their permitted sign.
Business Signs: For special home occupations which are
permitted by Ordinance No. 35, any
business related sign shall not be
illuminated, shall be set back at least 10’
from any property line, shall be a
monument type sign, and shall be
complimented by landscaping. The sign
display surface shall not exceed 6 square
feet in area.
5-2. Business Zoning Districts (B-1, B-2).
Type of Signs Allowed: Identification, on premise, wall, roof,
combination, ground, real estate, election,
temporary off-premises, marquees, pylon,
electric, church, school, window and
exempt signs.
Number & Size: One identification sign per business, plus
one overall business or identification sign
per business center. No sign shall be
larger than one hundred (100) square feet
of display surface. The total combined
square footage for all signs in a business
center on a pylon or monument, shall not
exceed a total of 100 square feet in area.
Height: No more than two (2) feet above highest
wall of building in an existing business
district. Not over six (6) feet above
highest outside wall, except that an
17
overall shopping center sign may extend
forty (40) feet above ground level except
where an advanced speed artery or
thoroughfare faced by a roof or ground
sign is elevated above the surface on
which the sign is placed, the height
limitation shall be measured from a point
level from the nearest road surface to the
advanced speed artery.
Setback: Overall shopping center sign may be
located in any yard area, but not within
ten (10) feet of any other lot line or in any
public easement.
All other signs may project a maximum of
two (2) feet into building setback area
subject to any easement restrictions.
Illumination: Illuminated signs are permitted.
5-3. Industrial Zoning District (I-1).
Type of Signs Allowed: Identification, on premises, wall, roof,
combination, ground, marquee, pylon,
pedestal, real estate, election, temporary,
electric, temporary off-premises, church,
school and exempt signs.
Size & Number: One business or identification sign per
business or building by permit. No sign
shall be larger than one hundred (100)
square feet of display surface. Light
industrial business with multiple buildings
may place up to two (2) signs on each
building over 50,000 square feet in size.
Signs on these large buildings (over
50,000 square feet) may not exceed 250
square feet each and the total of the two
signs may not exceed 400 square feet.
The maximum number of signs allowed
for a light industrial business is four.
One business or identification sign per
business or building by permit is allowed
for each lot for buildings up to 70,000
18
square feet in area. No sign or
combination of signs shall be larger than
100 square feet of display surface.
For buildings exceeding 70,000 square
feet in area adjacent to a Federal
Highway (I-35E), one building mounted
and one monument/pylon sign is
permitted per building or lot. Sign size
shall not exceed 250 square feet or a total
of 400 square feet for both signs.
For buildings exceeding 70,000 square
feet in area adjacent to a Federal
Highway (I-35E), with multiple
businesses, the total square footage of all
business signs shall not exceed 250
square feet per pylon/monument and 400
square feet for building mounted signs
and a pylon/monument combined.
For free standing businesses not located
within a shopping center, each business
may have one building mounted and one
pylon/monument sign. The total square
footage of both signs shall not exceed
100 square feet in area.
Height: No ground or pedestal sign more than
forty (40) feet above ground level. No
more than two (2) feet above highest wall
of building in an existing business district.
Not over six (6) feet above highest
outside wall, except that an overall
shopping center sign may extend forty
(40) feet above ground level except where
an advanced speed artery or thoroughfare
faced by a roof or ground sign is elevated
above the surface on which the sign is
placed, the height limitation shall be
measured from a point level from the
nearest road surface to the advanced
speed artery.
Setback: A sign may be located in any yard area,
but not within ten (10) feet of a street
19
right-of-way or within ten (10) feet of any
other lot line or in any public easement.
All other signs may project a maximum of
two (2) feet into building setback area
subject to any easement restrictions.
Illumination: Illuminated signs are permitted.
5-4. Open Space District (OS).
Type of Signs Allowed: Identification, boundary and ground.
Size & Number: One identification sign per park or open
space area, no larger than 32 square feet
of display surface. Boundary signs, one
square foot of display surface, as
necessary. Ground signs, either
identification or welcome, 32 square feet
of display surface.
Heights: No ground, identification or welcome sign
more than 10 feet above the ground.
Setback: A sign may be located in any yard area,
but not within ten (10) feet of a street
right-of-way or within ten (10) feet of any
other lot line or in any public easement.
All other signs may project a maximum of
two (2) feet into building setback area
subject to any easement restrictions.
Illumination: Illuminated signs are not permitted in any
open space area.
5-5. Conservation Wetland (CW) Overlay District. No signs are
allowed in a Conservation Wetland Overlay District.
SECTION 6. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
6-1. Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall be appointed by the Town Board and shall:
6-1.1. Administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in
accordance with it’s literal terms and shall not have the power to
20
permit any sign or change of sign which does not conform to this
Ordinance.
6-1.2. Issue sign permits.
6-1.3. Maintain a permanent file of all sign permits.
6-2. Code Conformity. All signs shall comply with the provisions of
the Town Ordinance and Building Code of the Town of White Bear.
6-3. Permits. No signs, except exempted signs, shall be erected,
constructed, altered, rebuilt, or relocated until a sign permit has been issued
by the Town.
6-3.1. Permit Fee. An application fee in an amount established by
Town Ordinance shall accompany each application for a sign permit.
6-3.2. Expiration of a Permit. If the work authorized under a sign
permit has not been completed within twelve (12) months after the date of
issue, the permit shall lapse and be of no further force and effect.
6-3.3. Exemptions. The following is a list of signs exempt from
obtaining a sign permit:
6-3.3(a). A sign not to exceed two (2) square feet of display
surface on residential property stating only the name, address,
and profession of the occupant.
6-3.3(b). Real estate signs under six (6) square feet of display
surface.
6-3.3(c). Street, hazard and other official non-advertising
signs erected by a government body or others where
regulated pursuant to a legal authority.
6-3.3(d). Election signs.
6-3.3(e). Temporary signs for use by civic groups.
6-3.3(f). Church signs.
6-3.3(g). Newspaper boxes.
6-3.3(h). Temporary Signs. Temporary signs for any lawful
purpose, under eight (8) square feet of display surface, may
be erected for thirty (30) days or less without a permit.
21
6-3.3(i). The exemptions permitted by the preceding
paragraph shall apply only to the requirement of obtaining a
permit. This shall not be construed as relieving the owner of
the sign from the responsibility for its erection and
maintenance in a state of good and safe condition.
6-4. Application for a Permit. Applications for a sign permit shall
be made to the Town. The application must include the following
information:
6-4.1. Name, address and telephone number of the property owner.
6-4.2. Name, address and telephone number of the sign owner and
party responsible for the erection, maintenance and removal of said
sign if different than the property owner.
6-4.3. Street address of the property for the proposed sign.
6-4.4. Legal description of the property.
6-4.5. A site plan, sketch or drawing of the property showing the
location of all buildings, roads, driveways, and the proposed site and
position of the proposed sign.
6-4.6. The Code Enforcement Officer will recommend to the Town
Board, based on information received in the application process, for
approval or denial of each sign.
6-4.7. Periodic Inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer will
inspect, as necessary or as directed by the Town Board, each sign to
ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure and whether it is in
need of removal or repair.
6-5. Licensing and Insurance. No person, firm or corporation shall
erect, install, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or remove any sign within
the Town of White Bear unless a copy of the certificate of current liability
insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of Minnesota is on file in the Town office.
6-5.1. Exceptions.
6-5.2. Insurance is not required for work on signs not requiring a
permit, as provided by this Ordinance.
22
6-5.3. The owner, lessee or bona fide occupant of the property upon
which a sign is located may perform the actual work of installing a
sign without insurance, provided that the person has acquired a
permit.
6-6. Non-Conforming Use. Any sign lawfully existing or under
construction on the effective date of this Ordinance which does not conform
to one (1) or more of the provisions of this Ordinance may be continued in
operation and maintained indefinitely as a legal non-conforming sign subject
to compliance with the requirements of Section 6-6.1.
6-6.1. Maintenance and Repair of Non-Conforming Signs.
Normal maintenance of legal, non-conforming signs, including
changing of copy, necessary non-structural repairs, and incidental
alterations which do not extend or intensify the non-conforming
features of the sign, shall be permitted. However, no structural
alteration, enlargement, or extension shall be made to a legal nonconforming
sign unless the alteration, enlargement, or extension will
result in the elimination of the non-conforming features of the sign. If
a legal non-conforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means
to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its replacement value at
that time, the sign may not be rebuilt or used thereafter unless it
conforms to all of the provisions of this Ordinance. In the event the
damage or destruction of the non-conforming sign is less than fifty
(50) percent of its replacement value at that time, the sign may be
rebuilt to its original condition and may continue to be displayed.
6-7. Obsolete Signs. Any sign which the display becomes obsolete
because of non-existence shall be taken down and removed by the property
and/or sign owners within thirty (30) days. Upon failure to comply within the
time specified, the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to cause
removal of such sign and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the
property and/or sign owner.
6-8. Town Board Review. A permit application or permit holder
may appeal any order or determination made by the Code Enforcement
Officer pursuant to this Ordinance by filing a notice of appeal with the Town
Clerk requesting a review before the Town Board. The Town Board will
hear:
6-8.1. Appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
administrative officer in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
6-9. Variances. Variances from the literal provisions of this
Ordinance may be considered in instances where the strict enforcement
23
would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the
individual property or sign under consideration. Such variances shall be
granted only when it is demonstrated that such a request will be in keeping
with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance. Economic considerations alone
shall not constitute an undue hardship if reasonable use of the property and
accompanying sign(s) exists under the terms of this Ordinance. Variances
shall not be granted for any sign that is not permitted under this Ordinance
for property in the district where the affected property is located. Conditions
may be imposed in the granting of variances to insure compliance and to
protect adjacent properties.
6-9.1. Applications. Applications for variances shall be filed with
the Town Clerk together with the review and approval of all
governmental agencies having such authority.
6-9.1(a). An application fee in an amount established by
Ordinance No. 54 (Fees and Charges) shall accompany the
application.
6-9.1(b). The applicant shall provide ten (10) copies of the
site and sign plans together with all supporting data. This
information shall be submitted in the following manner:
(1). The sign plan shall contain the following data:
(i). A scale no greater than one inch equals ten
feet (1” = 10’), and not less than one-quarter inch
equals one foot (1/4” = 1’).
(ii). The location of the site and the use of
adjacent land.
(2). The applicant shall include a time schedule for the
proposed construction.
(3). The Town Board may require the applicant to
provide additional information where such information is
deemed necessary for review of the application. The
Town Board may waive any of the requirements where
such information is deemed not necessary for review of
the application.
6-9.1(c). The applicant shall provide a statement signed by
the affected property owners, recording their comments
relative to the requested action. Affected property owners are
defined as those having a recorded legal or equitable
24
ownership interest in property adjacent to the property to
which the action relates. If such a signed statement is not
provided, the Town Board shall conduct a public informational
meeting relative to the variance application.
SECTION 7. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided by Ordinance No.
26 (Maximum Fines).
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or
other provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be
invalid.
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be
in force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of
White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 3rd day of May, 1971.
APPROVED:
_____________________________
TERRANCE M. ROONEY, Chairman
ATTEST:
__________________________
MARIE ROLPH, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
TERRANCE M. ROONEY, Chair
JEROME L. PERRON, Supervisor
KENNETH L. KING, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press May 20, 1971.
Historical Notes
2020
Sections 3-16 and Section 4-1.4 passed February 2, 2020, and effective February
12, 2020 by Prudhon (Chair), Ruzek, McCune; Christopherson (Clerk-Treasurer).
2018
Sections 3-2.4(a) and Section 5-3 passed April 2, 2018, and effective April 18,
2018 by Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2016
25
Section 5-1 passed November 21, 2016, and effective January 17, 2018 by
Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2014
Section 5-1 passed September 15, 2014, and effective October 1, 2014 by Kermes
(Chair), Mample, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2004
Section 5-2 – Number and Size passed April 19, 2004, and effective May 5, 2004
by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
2003
Section 2-2.6(a) and 5-1 passed August 4, 2003, and effective August 20, 2003 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2002
Section 3-16.3 passed November 18, 2002, and effective November 27, 2002 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2001
Section 2-2.8 passed June 18, 2001, and effective July 4, 2001 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 3-16 passed June 18, 2001, and effective July 4, 2001 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2000
Section 5-3 passed October 2, 2000, and effective October 25, 2000 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 3-2 passed February 14, 2000, and effective March 1, 2000 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1999
Section 5-1 passed June 7, 1999, and effective June 7, 1999 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1998
Section 3-15 passed September 8, 1998, and effective September 16, 1998 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 2-2 passed March 16, 1998, and effective March 25, 1998 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1997
Section 3-13 passed May 5, 1997, and effective May 21, 1997 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1995
Section 2-2, 3-12 passed February 27, 1995, and effective March 8, 1995 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1991
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 passed June 17, 1991, and effective August 21,
1991 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1988
Section 3-6 passed August 1, 1988, and effective September 28, 1988 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1978
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 10 passed August 7, 1978, and effective August 24,
1978 by Perron (Chair), Sand and Jungkunz; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1971
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 passed May
3, 1971, and effective May 21, 1971 by Rooney (Chair), Perron and King; Rolph (Clerk-
Treasurer).
1
ORDINANCE NO. 35
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 35 OF THE TOWN OF
WHITE BEAR (TOWNSHIP), RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA, DATED
APRIL 17, 1942, AS AMENDED, AND ENTITLED ZONING ORDINANCE
FOR THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR (TOWNSHIP), RAMSEY COUNTY,
MINNESOTA, RELATING TO AND REGULATING THE USE OF LAND
FOR RESIDENCES, BUSINESS, INDUSTRY AND OTHER PURPOSES
AND LOCATION AND HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES, SIZE OF YARDS AND
OTHER OPEN SPACES, AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOTS, AND DENSITY
OF POPULATION; DIVIDING THE TOWN INTO DISTRICTS OR ZONES;
PROVIDING FOR ADMINISTRATION THEREOF; ESTABLISHING A
BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS; AND PROVIDING FOR
PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF AND REPEALING ALL
ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT
THEREWITH.
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. The
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of White Bear (Township), Ramsey County, Minnesota,
adopted April 17, 1942, as amended, is hereby amended to be as follows, and all other
Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. In all other
respects all other Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
1-1. The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of White Bear (Township), Ramsey
County, Minnesota, adopted September 18, 1972, as amended, is hereby amended to be
as follows, and all other Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed. In all other respects all other Ordinances shall remain in full force and
effect.
SECTION 2. TITLE AND PURPOSES. This Ordinance may be cited as the "ZONING
ORDINANCE FOR THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR (TOWNSHIP), RAMSEY COUNTY,
MINNESOTA". This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to powers granted by Minnesota
Statutes, Section 462.357 and other applicable sections, for the purpose of promoting the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare, and for the purpose of:
2-1. Promoting orderly development of the residential, business, industrial,
recreational and public areas.
2-2. Providing adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property.
2
2-3. Limiting congestion in the public right-of-ways.
2-4. Preventing over-crowding of land and undue concentration of structures by
regulating the use of land and buildings in relating to the land and buildings surrounding
them.
2-5. Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate
use of land.
2-6. Conserving and developing natural resources.
2-7. Securing safety from flood.
2-8. Conserving the natural and scenic beauty and attractiveness of roadsides
and lakeshores.
2-9. Providing for the administration of this Ordinance and amendments thereto.
2-10. Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies.
2-11. Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or
any amendment thereto.
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS. Certain words used in this Ordinance are defined herein.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular shall include the
plural and the plural the singular; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive.
3-0. ABANDONMENT. The relinquishment of a project by the person issued the
Zoning Certificate by not resuming substantial improvement and/or use of the site for a
period of six (6) months.
3-1. ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A self-contained rental unit created within a
house initially constructed as a single family dwelling. The accessory apartment is
subordinate to the dwelling and may be located in any part of the house. It is defined as
the rental unit when the owner also lives in the same structure.
3-2. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure detached from a principal building
or single family dwelling and garage on the same parcel(s) of land customarily incidental
and subordinate to the principal building or single family dwelling and garage, not used for
living quarters.
3-2.1. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, LIMITED. A structure detached from a
principal building or single family dwelling and garage on the same parcel(s) of land
incidental and subordinate to the principal building or single family dwelling and garage
3
and not used for living quarters which is limited in size to one-hundred and fifty (150)
square feet and fifteen (15) feet maximum height.
3-3. ACCESSORY USE. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and
located on the same parcel(s) of land with such principal use.
3-3.A. ADULT USES. Adult body painting studios, adult bookstores, adult
cabarets, adult carwashes, adult hotels or motels, adult motion picture theaters, adult
mini-motion-picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult health/sports clubs, adult
saunas/steam rooms/bathhouses, adult companionship establishments, adult
rap/conversation parlors, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult
modeling studios, and all other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses, and
places open to some or all members of the public at or in which there is an emphasis
on the presentation, display, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas which the public could see. This definition does not apply to
the practice of medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry
by state-licenses. Activities classified as “obscene” as defined by Minnesota Statutes,
Section 617.241 are not lawful and are not included in this definition.
3-3.B. ADULT USE ACCESSORY. The offering of goods and/or services
classified as “adult uses” on a limited scale that are incidental to the primary activity and
goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include
adult magazines, adult movies, adult novelties, and the like.
3-3.C. ADULT USE PRINCIPAL. The offering of goods and/or services classified
as “adult uses” as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and include
but are not limited to the following:
3-3.C(1). ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business that
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or
nontransparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude
in terms of specified anatomical areas.
3-3.C(2). ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment, building or business
engaging in the barter, rental, or sale of items or merchandise consisting of printed
matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes, computer or video disks,
motion picture film, or any other similar materials, if such a shop is not open to the
public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor
because of age, if more than 20 percent of the usable floor area of the establishment,
building or business or if at least 500 square feet, whichever is smaller, has products
or materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
4
3-3.C(3). ADULT CABARET. An establishment, building or business that
provides dancing or other live entertainment if such dancing or other live entertainment
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance, presented,
display, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
3-3.C(4). ADULT CARWASH. A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle that
allows employees, agents, independent contractors, or persons to appear in a state of
partial or total nudity in terms of specified anatomical areas.
3-3.C(5). ADULT COMPANIONSHIP. An establishment or business if such
establishment excludes minors because of age or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
3-3.C(6). ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. A building or space in which an
admission is charged for entrance or food or nonalcoholic beverages are sold or
intended for consumption and in which may be observed live presentation of
entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
3-3.C(7). ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment, building or business
engaging in any of the following activities or which uses any of the following business
procedures or practices:
(1). Any business conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and about
which minors are specifically excluded from patronage threat either by law or by
the operators of such business; or
(2). Any other business that offers its patrons services, products or entertainment
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing,
discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Specifically included in the term, but without limitation, are adult bookstores,
adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture theaters, adult massage
parlors, adult health clubs, adult saunas, adult companionship establishments,
adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult carwashes, adult novelty businesses,
adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels or motels, and
adult body painting studios.
3-3.C(8). ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are
5
specifically excluded from patronage and in which materials is presented that is
distinguishes or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
3-3.C(9). ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A massage
parlor or health/sport club that restricts minors because of age, which provides the
services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
3-3.C(10). ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business or building
or establishment in an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used
for presenting visual media material if such business as a prevailing practice excludes
minors by virtue of age or if such materials are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons.
3-3.C(11). ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment or business whose
major business is the provision to customers, of figure models who are so provided with
the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers who
engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being
observed, painting, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted by such customers.
3-3.C(12). ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any building or place to which
the public is allowed or invited in which coin or slug operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors,
computers, or other image-producing devices are operated that show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at once and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
3-3.C(13). ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business premises within
an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting visual
media material if such business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of
age or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons.
3-3.C(14). ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business that has at least 20
percent of its floor area as a principal activity for the sale of materials or devices that
stimulate human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation or which depict or
relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
6
3-3.C(15). ADULT SAUNA/STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE. A sauna/steam
room/bathhouse that excludes minors because of age or which provides a steam bath
or heat bathing room used for bathing, pleasure, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam
or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the
sauna/steam room/bathhouse is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
3-3.C(16). NUDITY.
(1). The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less
than a fully opaque covering;
(2). The showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of
any portion thereof below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
(3). The depiction or showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
3-3.C(17). SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, adult body
painting studio, adult carwash, adult cabaret, adult hotel or motel, adult companionship
establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion-picture theater, adult
massage parlor, adult entertainment facility, adult health or sports clubs, adult novelty
business, adult modeling studio, or adult sauna as defined in this section. Activities
classified as “obscene” as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 617.241 are not
lawful and are not included in the definition of adult uses.
3-3.C(18). SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Anatomical areas consisting of:
(1). Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or
pubic hair, buttock, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola or any combination of such; and
(2). Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
3-3.C(19). SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Activities consisting of the
following:
(1). Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, annual intercourse,
oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or fondling of unclothed
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, flagellation or torture in a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in a sexual relationship, and any of
the following sexually oriented acts or conduct, analogous, buggery, coprophagy,
7
coprophilous, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, picquerism,
sophism, sodomy, zooerasty.
(2). Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence.
(3). Use or acts of human or animal ejaculation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation.
(4) Fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttocks,
or female breast.
(5) Situations involving persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments
or in sexually revealing costumes, who are engaged in activities involving the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such
person.
(6) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an
animal by a human being.
(7). Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
3-4. AGRICULTURE. The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or
personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages
and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products, poultry products;
livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats, or any
mutations, or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and graving of any or all of such
animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all
kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and
greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management
program.
3-4.A. ANIMAL UNIT. Animal unit means a unit of measure used to compare
differences in the production of animal manure’s that employs as a standard the amount
of manure produced on a regular basis by a slaughter steer or heifer. The following
equivalents shall apply:
A. One mature dairy cow, 1.4 animal unit.
B. On slaughter steer or heifer, 1.0 animal unit.
C. One horse, 1.0 animal unit.
D. One swine over 55 lbs., .4 animal unit.
E. One duck, .2 animal unit.
F. One sheep, .1 animal unit.
G. One swine under 55 lbs., .5 animal unit.
8
H. One turkey, .18 animal unit.
I. One chicken, .1 animal unit.
For animals not listed in items A to I, the number of animal units shall be defined
as the average weight of the animal divided by 1000 lbs.
3-5. AREA. Area of a parcel of land shall be calculated from the dimensions
derived by horizontal projections of the site.
3-5.A. AUTO REPAIR, LIMITED. Repair of automobiles, trucks under 10,000 lb.
GVW and RV’s only. Excludes dispensing of automobile fuels.
3-6. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building, land area or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales
of vehicular fuels; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of
lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories.
3-6.A. BLUFF. “Bluff” means a topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or
embankment having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less
than 18 percent over a distance of 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the
bluff):
3-6.A.(1). Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
3-6.A.(2). The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of
the water body;
3-6.A.(3). The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or
more above the ordinary high water level averages 30 percent or greater; and
3-6.A.(4). The slope must drain toward the water body.
An area with an average slope of less than 18 percent over a distance of 50 feet or
more shall not be considered part of the bluff.
3-6.B. BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. “Bluff impact zone” means a bluff and land
located within 20 feet from the top of a bluff.
3-6.C. BOATHOUSE. “Boathouse” means a structure designed and used only for
the storage of boats or boating equipment.
3-7. BUILDING. The definition of BUILDING as provided in Ordinance No. 8
(Building Code), Section 2-17, is hereby adopted by reference.
9
3-8 BUILDING HEIGHT. See Ordinance No. 8, Section 2-43 and 2-44 for the
definition of building height.
3-8.A. BUILDING LINE. “Building line” means a line parallel to a lot line or the
ordinary high-water water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not
extend.
3-9. BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the parcel(s) on which it is located.
3-10. CLINIC. Any establishment where human patients are examined and
treated by doctors, dentists or where animals are examined and treated by veterinarians,
but on an outpatient basis only.
3-11. CLUB. Any establishment operated for social, recreational or educational
purposes, but open only to members and not the general public.
3-11.A. COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. “Commercial
planned unit developments” are typically uses that provide transient, short-term lodging
spaces, rooms, or parcels and their operations are essentially service-oriented. For
example, hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks,
and other primarily service oriented activities are commercial planned unit developments.
3-11.B. COMMERCIAL USE. “Commercial use” means the principal use of land
or buildings for the sale, lease, rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.
3-11.C. COMMISSIONER. “Commissioner” means the commission of the
Department of Natural Resources.
3-11.D. CONDITIONAL USE. “Conditional use” means a land use or
development as defined by ordinance that would not be appropriate generally but may be
allowed with appropriate restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that
certain conditions as detailed in the Zoning Ordinance (Ord. 35) exist, the use or
development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of the community, and the
use if compatible with the existing neighborhood.
3-11.E. CONSIGNMENT/THRIFT STORE. “Consignment/thrift store” is a
retail business where second hand merchandise is sold, and may include a place where
people take new or used merchandise for resale and receive money from the retail store
owner when the merchandise is sold.
3-11.F. COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL RECORDING STUDIO. A
commercial music, film and television production and post-production facility which
houses the equipment necessary for such work and also allows for a residential living
10
area.
3-12. COVERAGE. That percentage of lot covered by principal and accessory
use structures, parking areas, driveways and other hard, non-landscaped surfaces.
3-12.A. CRITICAL STORM EVENT. That run-off event of a certain duration that
creates the highest water surface elevation.
3-12.B. DECK. “Deck” means a horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without
attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a
principal use or site and at any point extending more than three feet above ground.
3-13. DENSITY, MAXIMUM NET. The maximum number of dwellings per acre of
buildable land exclusive of wetlands, drainage retention areas, floodplains, lakes,
streams, public parks and the right-of-way of any public or private roadway.
3-13.A. DANCE STUDIO. A place in which dance is taught in individual or group
sessions, including tap, ballet, jazz, lyrical, modern/contemporary, pointe,
character/musical, theatre, pom pom, hip hop, and creative movement, specifically
excluding dancing that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
performance, presentation, display, depiction, or description of specific sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
3-14. DAY CAMPING. Organized, outdoor, day time camping activities related to
hiking, picnicking, nature study games and crafts, scheduled to occur during daylight and
early evening hours. Overnight camping is not included as a day camping activity.
3-15. DAYCARE CENTERS. Any facility, public or private, which regularly
provides care for persons of pre-school age for less than 24 hours per day. Included are
pre-schools, nurseries, and nursery schools., All commercial daycare centers shall be
licensed by Ramsey County. Excluded is daycare provided to relatives, nursing homes,
or persons from a single unrelated family.
3-15.A. DESIGN STUDIO. A business devoted to the design and sale of goods
and materials related to decorating the interior of a home or business office including:
flooring, wall and window coverings, lighting fixtures, cabinets, bathroom or kitchen
fixtures and related accessories.
3-16. DEVELOPMENT. The construction, installation or alteration of any
structure, the extraction, clearing or other alteration of terrestrial or aquatic vegetation,
land or the course, current or cross-section of any water body or the division of land into
two or more parcels.
11
3-17. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS. The minimum and maximum setbacks,
yard regulations, height and size regulations.
3-18. DOMESTIC FARM ANIMAL. Animals commonly kept for commercial food
production and recreational purposes, including but not limited to: cattle, hogs, horses,
ponies, sheep, goats, chickens, geese, ducks and bees.
3-19. DRIVEWAY. Private road from the street to a garage or off-street parking
area.
3-19.A. DUPLEX, TRIPLEX AND QUAD. “Duplex, triplex, and quad” means a
dwelling structure on a single lot, having two, three, and four units, respectively, being
attached by common walls and each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking,
eating, living and sanitation facilities.
3-20. DWELLING. Any structure designed or used as the living quarters for one
(1) or more families, but not including hotels and motels.
3-21. DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A structure containing more than two (2)
dwelling units.
3-22. DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling which is designed for and
occupied by not more than one (1) family and surrounded by open space or yards, and
which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
3-22.A. DWELLING SITE. “Dwelling site” means a designated location for
residential use by one or more persons using a temporary or movable shelter, including
camping and recreational vehicle sites.
3-23. DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A one-family (1) dwelling in a row of at least
three (3) such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no
unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or
more common fire resistant walls.
3-24. DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A structure containing two (2) dwelling units,
neither of which is an accessory apartment, each of which is totally separated from the
other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof, or an unpierced ceiling and
floor extending from exterior to both dwelling units.
3-25. DWELLING UNIT. One (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking facilities provided within the
dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
12
3-26. EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
3-26.A. EXTRACTIVE USE. “Extractive use” means the use of land for surface or
subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals,
and peat not regulated under Minnesota Statutes.
3-27. FAMILY. The definition of FAMILY as provided in Ordinance No. 47
(Housing Maintenance Code), Section 4-6 is hereby adopted by reference.
3-28. FARM CROPS. The production of vegetables and fruits of all kinds, hay,
grain, forage, pasture and nursery stock.
3-29. FEEDLOT. A relatively small, confined land area for fattening livestock or
for the holding of livestock temporarily for shipment.
3-29.A. FITNESS CENTER. A place with facilities and equipment for people to
maintain or improve their physical fitness.
3-30. GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building, shed or enclosure or a part thereof
designated or used for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles containing flammable
liquids.
3-30.A. GARAGE SALES. A sale of used merchandise located in a residential
property, including the terms yard sale, rummage sale, estate sale, moving sale or
auction (see Ord. No. 37 (Peddling) relating to auctions).
3-31. GREEN AREA. Land shown on a development plan, master plan, or official
map for preservation, recreation, landscaping or park. Land which is not occupied by
buildings, streets, parking or other hard surfaces.
3-31.A. GUEST COTTAGE. “Guest cottage” means a structure used as a
dwelling unit that may contain sleeping spaces and kitchen and bathroom facilities in
addition to those provided in the primary dwelling unit on a lot.
3-31.B. HARDSHIP. “Hardship” means the same as that term defined in
Minnesota Statutes.
3-31.C. HEIGHT OF BUILDING. Defined in Ordinance No. 8 (Building Code),
Sections 2-43 and 2-44.
3-32. HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation that results in a product or service
which is clearly secondary to the principal residential use of the premises as a dwelling.
13
3-33. HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. A community association which is
organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests in open
space of facilities.
3-34. INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A system for the disposal of
sanitary sewage in the ground, which is so designed and constructed as to treat sewage
in a manner that will retain most of the settled solids in the septic tank and discharge the
liquid portion to an adequate disposal field.
3-34.A. INITIATION OF A PERMIT. “Initiation of a permit” means a permit
application must be received, determined by the Town to be complete, and payment
received to be considered initiated.
3-35. INDUSTRIAL PARK. A large tract of land that has been planned,
developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses,
with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
3-35.A. IN-HOME CRAFT SALE (BOUTIQUE). A temporary sale of crafts which
is contained completely within residential property.
3-35.B. INDUSTRIAL USE. “Industrial use” means the use of land or buildings for
the production, manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products,
commodities, or other wholesale items.
3-35.C. INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. “Intensive vegetation clearing”
means the complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
3-35.D. INTERSECTION. Intersection means (a) the area embraced within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another, at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at
any other angle may come in conflict; and (b) where a highway includes two roadways 30
feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
3-35.E. LEGACY TREE. A legacy tree is a tree that has been sparred or has
survived stand replacing disturbances. A legacy tree is any live tree greater than or
equal to 21” DBH and greater than 150 years old, located in a non-old forest stand.
3-36. LIGHT MANUFACTURING. The processing and fabrication of certain
14
materials and products where no process involved will produce noise, vibrations, air
pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emissions which will disturb or endanger neighboring
properties. Light manufacturing includes, but is not limited to, the production of the
following: home appliances, electrical instruments, office machines, precision instruments,
electronic devices, timepieces, jewelry, optical goods, musical instruments, novelties,
wood products, printed material, lithographic plates, type composition, machine tools, dies
and gates, ceramics, apparel, lightweight non-ferrous metal castings, film processing, light
sheet metal products, plastic goods, pharmaceutical goods, and food products, but does
not include animal slaughtering, curing, or rendering of fats.
3-36.A. LIMITED OUTSIDE STORAGE. Raw materials or finished product stored
outside of a light industrial building not to exceed 10% of the site must be screened with
100% opaque fence constructed of material which compliments the building. Material
shall not be stacked so it exceeds the height of the fence. Fencing shall be
complimented with landscaping. The 10% outside storage provision of this section shall
become null and void and cease and desist effective June 1, at 11:59 p.m., 2003, and
shall revert back to a maximum of 3% thereafter.
3-37. LIVESTOCK. Includes, but not limited to: cows, goats, horses, sheep,
swine, and other hoofed animals.
3-38. LOT. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or
more structures.
3-39. LOT, DEPTH OF. A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.
3-40. LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF. The horizontally projected contiguous area of a
lot computed exclusive of wetlands, drainage retention areas, floodplains, lakes, streams,
public parks and the right-of-way of any public or private roadway.
3-41. LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which individually or as a part of a subdivision,
has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of the County.
3-42. LOT, WIDTH OF. The distance between side lot lines measured at the
right-of-way line of the public or private thoroughfare, except at a cul-de-sac or lot located
on a curve, where lot width will be measured at the front yard setback. A curve will be
determined based upon satisfying requirements established in Ordinance No. 15
(Subdivision).
3-42.A. MAKER SPACE. A public or private community center that provides
technology manufacturing equipment and educational opportunities and makes available
to the public or its private membership equipment and facilities allowing them to design,
15
proto-type, and manufacture items using tools that would otherwise be inaccessible or
unaffordable. Maker Spaces are typically funded by membership fees.
3-43. MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home means a structure,
transportable in one (1) or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight (8') feet or
more in width, or forty (40') feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three
hundred twenty (320) square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term includes any structure
which meets all the requirements, and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily
files a certificate required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development and complies with these standards established under Minnesota
Statutes 327, including the Manufactured Home Building Code adopted therein.
3-44. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. The definition of MOBILE HOME PARK
as provided in Ordinance No. 34 (MOBILE HOME ORDINANCE) Section 3-2, is hereby
adopted by reference.
3-45. MANUFACTURING. The processing and fabrication of any article,
substance or commodity, packaging, treatment, or assemble of products and materials.
3-45.A. MASSAGE THERAPY – COMMERCIAL. A building or portion of a
building which is used to offer massage-like contact, including stroking, kneading,
tapping or rolling of the body, for the purpose of pleasure, relaxation, physical fitness or
beautification, for a fee or other valuable consideration. Institutions for the
hospitalization or case of human beings by/or anyone licensed by the State of
Minnesota to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or
podiatry shall not be considered a massage practice per definition.
3-45.B. MASSAGE THERAPY – ADULT. A building or portion of a building
which restricts minors by reason of age and/or which offers massage-like contract,
including stroking, kneading, tapping or rolling of the body, for the purpose of pleasure,
relaxation, physical fitness or beautification with an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, for a fee or other valuable consideration.
3-46. MODEL HOME. A residential structure which is similar to others in a
development vehicle, is open to the public for inspection and for the purpose of selling
other homes.
3-47. MOTEL. An establishment providing transient accommodations containing
six (6) or more rooms with at least twenty-five (25%) percent of all rooms having direct
access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the
16
building.
3-47.A. NEW WETLAND CREDIT. New Wetland Credit or NWC means wetland
replacement credit that can be used for any portion of wetland requirements.
3-48. NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES. A structure designed, converted, or
adapted for use prior to the adoption of provisions prohibiting such use in such location.
3-49. NON-CONFORMING USE. Non-conforming use is any use or arrangement
of land legally existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance or any of its
amendments, which does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
3-49.A. NONCONFORMITY. “Nonconformity” means any legal use, structure or
parcel of land already in existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official
controls or amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become
established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the official controls
had been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded or authorized.
3-50. NUISANCE. The definition of PUBLIC NUISANCE as provided in
Ordinance No. 16 (NUISANCE ORDINANCE), is hereby adopted by reference.
3-50.A. OFF PREMISE ADVERTISING SIGN (BILLBOARD). A sign which
directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment which is
conducted, offered, sold or manufactured elsewhere than on the premises upon which
the sign is placed.
3-51. OFFICE BUILDING. A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity, that may include
ancillary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or
candy stand.
3-52. OPEN SPACE, ACTIVE. Space which is not occupied by buildings, street
or parking, or which is not part of the land required for building setback and suitable for
active recreational use.
3-52.A. ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. “Ordinary high water level” means
the boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the
highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes
from predominately aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary
high-water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and
flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer
pool.
17
3-53. OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24)
hours.
3-54. PARTY WALL. A common shared wall between two (2) separate
structures, buildings, or dwelling units.
3-55. PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other
private or governmental entity.
3-55.A. PET DAYCARE & BOARDING FACILITY. A facility which provides pet
services including day care, boarding, grooming, training of pets, and retail sales of pet
supplies.
3-56. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A tract of land which is
developed as a unit under single or unified ownership control and which includes two or
more buildings grouped or clustered in and around common open space area in
accordance with a pre-arranged site plan.
3-56A. PRACTICIAL DIFFICULTIES. “Practical difficulties means the same as
that term defined in Minnesota Statutes.
3-57. PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or predominant use of any lot or building.
3-58. PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. The office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of that profession.
3-58.A. PUBLIC VALUE CREDIT OR PVC. Public Value Credit or PVC means
wetland replacement credit that can only be used for the portion of wetland replacement
requiring greater than a 1:1 ratio.
3-59.A. REPAIR SHOP. General automotive, truck and heavy equipment repair.
3-59.B. PUBLIC WATERS. “Public waters” means any waters as defined in
Minnesota Statutes.
3-59. RECYCLING CENTER. A facility in which small recyclable materials,
including but not limited to paper, glass, plastics, aluminum, non-aerosol cans, and
batteries are temporarily deposited to await transportation to an off-site processing facility.
Specifically excluded are municipal non-recyclable solid wastes, motorized vehicles,
recreational vehicles and salvage operations.
18
3-59.B. REPLACEMENT WETLAND. Replacement wetland means a wetland
restored or created to replace area or public values lots at an impacted wetland.
3-60. RESTAURANT. An establishment where food and drink is prepared, served
and consumed primarily within the principal building.
3-61. RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A building or portion thereof where food and/or
beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a significant portion
of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the
building.
3-62. RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD. An establishment whose principal business
is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-toconsume
state for consumption, either within the restaurant building or off premises.
3-63. RESTRICTIVE COVENANT. A restriction on the use of land usually set
forth in the deed.
3-64. RETAIL SALES. Selling of goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption.
3-65. RETAIL SERVICES. Establishments providing services or entertainment,
as opposed to products, to the general public, including eating and drinking places, hotels
and motels, finance, real estate and insurance, personal services, motion pictures,
amusement and recreation services, health, educational and social services, museums
and galleries. Includes incidental repair, but not fabricating or manufacturing.
3-65.A. SALVAGE OPERATION. A facility collecting vehicles, construction
materials and scrap metal for the express purpose of dismantling and sales.
3-65.B. RIPARIAN LOT. A lot with lake frontage; HOWEVER, where a road
extends between the buildable portion of a lot and the unbuildable lake frontage portion,
such a lot shall not be considered a riparian lot.
3-65.C. RETAINING WALL. Structure used to keep or hold back earthen material
associated with a steep slope.
3-66. SCHOOL. Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed or
used for educational or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
3-66.A. SEMI-PUBLIC USE. “Semi-public use” means the use of land by a
private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some
persons outside the regular constituency of the organization.
19
3-66.B. SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. “Sensitive resource
management” means the preservation and management of areas unsuitable for
development in their natural sate due to constraints such as shallow soils over
groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to
flooding or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special protection.
3-66.C. SETBACK. “Setback” means the minimum horizontal distance between a
structure, sewage treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level,
sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility.
3-66.D. SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. “Sewage treatment system” means a
septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage
treatment system as described in Ordinance No. 70 (Individual Sewage Treatment
Systems).
3-66.E. SEWER SYSTEM. “Sewer system” means pipelines or conduits,
pumping stations, and force main, and all other constructions, devices, appliances, or
appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point
of ultimate disposal.
3-66.F. SHORE IMPACT ZONE. “Shore impact zone” means land located
between the ordinary high water level of public water and a line parallel to it at a setback
of 50 percent of the structure setback.
3-66.G. SHORELAND. “Shoreland” means land located within the following
distances from public water: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond
or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a flood plain
designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of
shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are founded by topographic
divides which extend landward from the waters from lesser distances and when approved
by the Commissioner.
3-66.H. SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. “Significant historic site” means any
archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for
eligibility to the national Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions
of Minnesota Statutes. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either
register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the
Minnesota State Archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All
unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.
20
3-66.I. SIGNIFICANT TREE. A significant tree is an aspen (quaking & big tooth),
honey locust, butternut, mountain ash, blue beech, tamarack, hickory, oaks, birch, pine,
spruce, basswood, hackberry, walnut, maple (except silver maple), apple, cherry and
other native fruit bearing trees and trees exceeding 15” in diameter as measured 4 ½’
above the ground.
3-67. SITE PLAN. The development plan for one (1) or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including: topography, vegetation,
drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of
ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices; and other information that reasonably may be required in order that an
informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
3-67.A. SIDEWALK. Structure consisting of concrete or bituminous surface which
provides access to an entryway.
3-67.B. SPORTS PERFORMANCE TRAINING CENTER. A place with facilities
and equipment for people to train for a specific sports activity using instructors trained to
coach a specific group of athletes.
3-68. SPECIALTY SHOP. A retail sales shop offering goods and services which
caters to a specific market or shopper. The goods offered in such a shop may include
high fashion apparel, accessories, flowers, arts and crafts, hobbies, gourmet foods,
books, imports, consignment goods, etc.
3-68.A. STEEP SLOPE. “Steep slope” means land where agricultural activity or
development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope
steepness and the site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county
soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction
techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having
average slopes over 12 percent; as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or
more, that are not bluffs.
3-69. STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in either the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders, or in the
dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls.
3-70. STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a fixed location on the ground or an attachment to something having a fixed location on
the ground, including, in addition to buildings, carports, porches, and other building
features, but not including fences, mailbox poles, newspaper box poles, public utility
uses, flagpoles, lawn ornaments, paving stones, off-premises advertising signs
21
(billboards), and retaining walls.
3-70.A. SUBDIVISION. Defined in Ordinance No. 15 (Subdivision), Section 3-
1.27.
3-71. SUPPLY YARDS. A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, sell supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and similar goods.
Supply yards do not include the wrecking, salvaging, dismantling or storage of
automobiles and similar vehicles.
3-71.A. SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. “Surface wateroriented
commercial use” means the use of land for commercial purposes, where access
to the use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of
business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples
of such use.
3-71.B. TOE OF THE BLUFF. “Toe of the bluff” means the lower point of a 50-
foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18 percent.
3-71.C. TOP OF THE BLUFF. “Top of the bluff” means the higher point of a 50-
foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18 percent.
3-71.D. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Traffic control signal means any device,
whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
3-72. TRAVEL TRAILER. A mobile vehicle, with wheels, designed for overnight
living or camping purposes, capable of being towed by a passenger automobile and
having an overall length less than forth (40) feet and an overall width less than eight (8)
feet.
3-72.A. VARIANCE. “Variance” means the same as that term as defined or
described in Minnesota Statutes.
3-73. WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
3-74. WAREHOUSING. Terminal facilities for handling freight with or without
maintenance facilities.
3-74.A. WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY.
“Water-oriented accessory structure or facility” means a small, above ground building or
other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks and retaining walls, which, because
22
of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located
closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures
and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses
and detached decks.
3-75. WETLANDS, A WETLAND, THE WETLAND, OR WETLAND AREA.
A. “Wetlands” means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems
where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow
water. For purposes of this subpart, wetlands must:
(1). Have a predominance of hydric soils;
(2). Be inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
(3). Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation.
B. “A wetland” or “the wetland” means a distinct hydrologic feature with characteristics
of item A, surrounded by non-wetland and including all contiguous wetland types, except
those connected solely by riverine wetlands. “Wetland area” means a portion of “a
wetland” or “the wetland”.
C. Wetlands does not include public waters wetlands and public waters that are
designated on the public waters inventory maps prepared under Minnesota Statutes.
3-76. WHOLESALE TRADE. Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or
professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and
buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies.
3-77. YARD, FRONT. A space extending across the front of a lot between the
inner side yard lines and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest building
line.
3-78. YARD, MINIMUM DEPTH. A yard area between a lot line and a buildable
area within which no structure shall be located except as provided in this Ordinance.
3-79. YARD, REAR. A space extending across the rear of the lot between the
inner side yard lines and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest building
line.
23
3-80. YARD, SIDE. A yard between the side lines of the lot and the nearest
building line.
3-81. ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT. A type of predetermined residential
development that allows one (1) or more sides of the principal structure to locate
immediately adjacent to the lot line.
3-82. ZONING CERTIFICATE. A document signed by the Town Clerk, as
required by this Ordinance, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or
the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion, or installation
of a structure or building which acknowledges that such use, structure or building
complies with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. ZONING MAP. A map entitled "TOWN OF WHITE BEAR (TOWNSHIP)
ZONING MAP", is hereby adopted as part of this Ordinance. The Zoning Map shall be
kept on file for examination in the office of the Town Clerk and in the Town Hall.
SECTION 5. COMPLIANCE. No structure shall be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, altered, converted, or enlarged; nor shall any structure or land be
used or be designated to be used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of this
Ordinance and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certificates required by this
Ordinance.
5-1. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Ordinance are either
more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by other ordinances, rules or
regulations, the ordinance, rule or regulation which imposes the more restrictive condition,
standard or requirement shall prevail.
5-2. Whenever in any zoning district a use is not specifically authorized as a
permitted or conditional use, the use shall be considered prohibited. In such case, the
Town Board or the Planning Commission, on its own initiative or upon a request, may
direct that a study be conducted to determine if a use is acceptable and in which zoning
district such use would be most appropriate. The study would also examine what
standards should be imposed relating to the development of such a use. The Town
Board or Planning Commission, upon receipt of the study, may initiate an amendment to
the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the particular use under consideration, or shall find
that the use is not compatible for development within the Town.
SECTION 6. DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
6-1. ZONING DISTRICTS. The Town is divided up into the following districts as
shown by the district boundaries on the Zoning Map:
24
"R-1" Suburban Residential
"R-2" Urban Residential
"R-3" Multiple Family Residential
"B-1" Limited Business
"B-2" General Business
"I-1" Light Industrial
"O-S" Open Space
"C-W" Conservation Wetland Overlay
6-2. DISTRICT PURPOSES:
A. "R-1" Suburban Residential District (low density).
Purpose: The purpose of the "R-1" Suburban Residential District is to provide for
low density, high quality living areas, protected from conflicting uses. Uses
provided for in this district include no more than one single family detached
residential dwelling unit per buildable lot and directly related complementary uses,
subject to the other provisions of this Ordinance.
B. "R-2" Urban Residential District (medium density).
Purpose: The purpose of the "R-2" Urban Residential District, is to provide for low
to medium density housing in single family, two family, and multiple family
structures in a neighborhood with a more urban, but limited density.
C. "R-3" Multiple Family Residential District (high density).
Purpose: The purpose of the "R-3" Multiple Family Residential District is to provide
for higher density residential uses and directly related uses.
D. "B-1" Limited Business District.
Purpose: The purpose of the "B-1" Limited Business District is to provide for the
establishment of local businesses for convenient, limited office, retail or service
outlets which deal directly with the daily requirements of the immediate
neighborhood. These businesses are not intended to draw customers from the
entire community.
E. "B-2" General Business District.
25
Purpose: The purpose of the "B-2" General Business District is to provide for the
establishment of commercial and service activities which draw from and serve
customers from the entire community or region. Such activities may include
businesses which serve other businesses as well as those catering to shopper
needs. Because of their scale and traffic generation, these businesses should be
located on major roadways. Buffering and screening from less intensive uses may
be needed.
F. "I-1" Light Industrial District.
Purpose: The purpose of the "I-1" Light Industrial District is to provide for the
establishment of warehousing, servicing and other light industrial uses which are
not likely to create offensive noise, vibration, glare, dust, heat, smoke, odor, or
cause any other objectionable impacts on adjacent property.
G. "O-S" Open Space District.
Purpose: The purpose of the "O-S" Open Space District, is to provide areas of
natural quality, primarily for wildlife habitat and for nature oriented outdoor
recreation, such as picnicking, boating, fishing, swimming, day camping, trail uses
and nature study.
H. "C-W" Conservation Wetland District.
Purpose: The purpose of the "C-W" Conservation Wetland District is to:
(1). Provide for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance and use
of wetlands for water filtration and recharge.
(2). To minimize the disturbance to wetlands and to prevent damage from
excessive sedimentation, eutrophication, or pollution.
(3). To prevent loss of fish and other aquatic organisms, wildlife, wildlife
habitats, and vegetation.
(4). To provide for the protection of the Town's fresh water supplies from
the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, or mismanagement.
(5). To reduce the financial burdens imposed upon the community through
rescue and relief efforts occasioned by the occupancy or use of areas
subject to periodic flooding.
(6). To prevent loss of life, property damage, and the losses and risks
associated with flood conditions.
(7). To preserve the location, character, and extent of natural drainage
26
courses.
I. “A-S” Airspace and Land Use Safety Regulations Overlay District.
Purpose: The purpose of the “A-S” Airspace and Land Use Safety regulations
overlay district is to regulate the location, size and use of structures and density of
population in airport hazard areas.
J. “S-M” Shoreland Management Overlay District.
Purpose: The purpose of the “S-M” Shoreland Management Overlay District is to
regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of public waters
and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the
economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the use
of waters and related land resources.
K. “F-C” Flood Plain Management Overlay District.
L. “BEI” Bald Eagle Island District.
Purpose: The purpose of the “BEI” Bald Eagle Island District is to provide for the
establishment of a residential/commercial district which provides for use of a
property for the recording of music and editing of film and also permits no more
than one single family dwelling unit per lot and directly related complementary
uses subject to other provision of this ordinance.
M. “I-2” Industrial District.
Purpose: The purpose of the “I-2” Industrial District is to provide for the
establishment of adult uses and sexually oriented businesses.
6-3. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. District boundaries shown within the lines of
roads, streams and transportation right-of-ways, shall not affect the location of such
district boundaries. When the Code Enforcement Officer cannot definitely determine the
location of a district boundary by such centerline, by the scale, or dimensions stated on
the Zoning Map, or by the fact that it clearly coincides with a property line, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall refuse action and the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, upon
appeal, shall interpret the location of the district boundary with reference to the scale of
the Zoning Map and purposes set forth in all relevant provisions of this Ordinance.
6-4. PERMITTED USES. The permitted uses for each district are listed below,
subject to Section 9-3 (Permitted Use Standards Permit Procedures). Uses not
specifically listed shall not be permitted except when authorized in Section 6-5
(Conditional Uses).
"R-1" Suburban Residential
27
(1). Agriculture (Section 7-12)
(2). Home Occupations
(3). Single Family Dwellings
(4). In-Home Day Care Centers
(5). Township Parks and Playgrounds and Green Area
(6). Township Government Buildings
"R-2" Urban Residential (Medium Density)
(1). Single Family Dwellings
(2). Two Family Dwellings
(3). Township Parks, Playgrounds and Green Area
(4). Township Government Buildings
(5). Home Occupations (Section 7-11)
(6). In-Home Day Care Centers
"R-3" Multiple Family Residential (High Density)
(1). Multiple Family Dwellings
(2). Single Family Dwellings
(3). Two Family Dwellings
(4). Home Occupations (Sec. 7-11)
(5). In-Home Daycare Centers
(6). Township Parks, Playgrounds and Green Area
(7). Township Government Buildings
"B-1" Limited Business
(1). Accounting
(2). Advertising/Marketing/Research Firm
(3). Appraisal Service
(4). Art Showroom (non-retail)
(5). Attorney
(6). Bank (Finance Company)
(7). Broker, Office/Professional type
(8). Carpet Showroom (non-retail)
(9). Chiropractor
(10). Township and County Government Office
(11). Collection Agency
(12). Computer/.com sales/service (non-retail)
(13). Consulting Services including:
a. Advertising
b. Career
c. Employee/Benefits
28
d. Engineering
e. Environmental
f. Financial
g. Human resource
h. Management
i. Wetland
j. Telecommunications
(14). Contractor Office
(15). Copy & Business Equipment (non-retail)
(16). Dentist Office
(17). Designer/Design Studio (non-retail)
(18). Development/building Company
(19). Drafting/architecture/Surveyor
(20). Educational Services including:
a. Building education
b. Dyslexia
c. Legal education
d. Real estate education
e. Technology
(21). Employment Services
(22). Engineer
(23). Environmental Service – office use
(24). Financial Planner
(25). Insurance
(26). Manufacturer Representatives including:
a. Advertising materials
b. Clothing
c. Computer parts/discs
d. Food products
e. Marketing
f. Medical
g. Packaging
h. Paper products
i. Technological
(27). Mortgage Company
(28). Physical Therapy
(29). Physicians Specializing in the Following:
a. Anesthesiology
b. Arthritis
c. Audiology (Hearing) and Hearing Aids
d. Cardiology and Outpatient Surgery
e. Dermatology and Outpatient Surgery
f. Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism
29
g. Family Practice
h. Gastroenterology (Stomach and Intestines) and Outpatient
Surgery
i. Geriatrics (Elder Care)
j. Hematology (Blood) and Coagulation Disorders
k. Immunology (Allergy and Asthma) and Outpatient Surgery
l. Infertility and Outpatient Surgery
m. Mammography and Outpatient Surgery
n. Nephrology (Kidney)
o. Neurology (Nerve)
p. Nutrition
q. Obstetrics (childbirth) and Gynecology (Female)
r. Occupational Health
s. Oncology
t. Ophthalmology
u. Optometry and Outpatient Surgery
v. Osteoporosis and Outpatient Surgery
w. Orthopedics and Outpatient Surgery
x. Otolaryngology (Ear, Nose and Throat) and Outpatient
Surgery
y. Pain Control and Outpatient Surgery
z. Pediatrics
aa. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and Outpatient Surgery
bb. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery and Outpatient Surgery
cc. Podiatry
dd. Proctology and Outpatient Surgery
ee. Psychiatry
ff. Pulmonary (Lung)
gg. Radiology
hh. Rheumatology
ii. Sleep Disorders
jj. Sports Medicine
kk. Urology and Outpatient Surgery
(30). Psychologist
(31). Real Estate
(32). Religious/Non-Profit-Business/Office
(33). Sales & Showroom (non-retail)
(34). Secretary Service
(35). Security Service
(36). Telecommunications Offices
(37). Title Company
(38). Travel Agency
30
"B-2" General Business
(1). Township Parks, Playgrounds and Green Area
(2). Convenience Store
(3). Landscaping Material Storage and Sales
(4). Animal Clinic
(5). Grocery Store
(6). Pharmacy
(7). Bank
(8). Restaurant
(9). Fast Food Restaurants
(10). Video Rental
(11). Automobile Service Station
(12). Daycare
(13). Dentist office
(14). Auto Repair, limited
(15). Nail Salon
(16). State of Minnesota Licensed Acupuncture and Chinese Herbology
Business
(17). Tanning Salon
(18). Sporting Goods Store
(19). Embroidery Shop
(20). Indoor Batting Cages
(21). Dry Cleaner – Pick-Up and Drop-Off only, Dry Plant
(22). Fitness Center
(23). Design Studio
(24). Dance Studio
(25). Consignment/Thrift Store
"I-1" Light Industry
(1). Light Manufacturing
(2). Offices
(3). Warehousing (enclosed in building)
(4). Building Materials Sales (enclosed in building)
(5). Offices, Workshops and Storage Buildings, but no exterior storage, for
carpentry, plumbing, paper hanging, roofing, ventilating, electrical,
welding, landscaping, sheet rocking, insulation, masonry general
contractors
(6). Township Government Buildings
(7). School Bus Parking Lot
(8). Township Parks, Playgrounds and Green Area
(9). Catering and Food Preparation Studio
31
"O-S" Open Space
(1). Preservation of natural resources and wildlife
sanctuaries
"C-W" Conservation Wetlands Overlay
Permitted uses in the "C-W" Conservation Wetlands Overlay District shall
comply with the requirements of Section 6-4 (Permitted Uses) for the
underlying district, Section 9-3 (Permitted Use Standards Procedures) and
Section 9-5 (Wetlands Permit Procedures).
“A-S” Airspace and Land Use Safety Regulations Overlay
Permitted uses in the “A-S” Airspace and Land Use Safety Overlay District
shall comply with the requirements of Section 6-4 (Permitted Uses) for the
underlying district, Section 9-3 (Permitted Use Standards Procedure) and
Sections 7-4 (Airspace Zones) and 7-5 (Land Use Safety Regulations in
Airport Hazard Areas).
“S-M” Shoreland Management Overlay
Permitted uses in the “S-M” Shoreland Management Overlay District shall
comply with the requirements of Section 6-4 (Permitted Uses) for the
underlying district, Section 9-3 (Permitted Use Standards Procedure) and
Section 8 (Management of Shoreland Areas).
“F-C” Flood Plain Management Overlay District
Permitted uses in the F-C, Flood Plain Management Overlay District shall
comply with the requirements of Section 6-4 (Permitted Uses) for the
underlying district, Section 9-3 (Permitted Use Standards Procedure), and
Ordinance No. 57, the Flood Plain Management Ordinance.
“BEI” Bald Eagle Island
(1) Single Family Dwelling
“I-2” Industrial District
(1). Township Parks & Playgrounds & Green Area
(2). Township Government Buildings
32
6-5. CONDITIONAL USES. The following Conditional Uses shall be authorized
for each district if the use complies with the requirements of Section 9-4 (Conditional Use
Permit Procedures). The Conditional Use shall be inspected by the Code Enforcement
Officer one year after the issuance of the permit and every three years thereafter to
ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance.
"R-1" Suburban Residential
(1). Cemeteries
(2). Public and Parochial Schools
(3). Two Family Dwellings
(4). Stables and Riding Academies
(5). Preschool Facilities
(6). Churches
(7). Planned Unit Development (single family and duplex units)
(8). Accessory Apartment
(9). In-Home Craft Sale (only if not qualified under
Section 7-11.1(o) of this Ordinance)
(10). Airport
(11). Guest Cottage
"R-2" Urban Residential (Medium Density)
(1). Multiple Family Dwellings
(2). Churches
(3). Residential Planned Unit Developments
(4). Accessory Apartment
(5). In-Home Craft Sale (only if not qualified under
Section 7-11.1(o) of this Ordinance)
(6). Funeral Homes Adjacent to County State Aid Highways and
Intersections with a Traffic Control Signal, and Located in a Planned
Unit Development
(7). Repealed
"R-3" Multiple Family Residential (High Density)
(1). Residential Planned Unit Developments
"B-1" Limited Business
(1). Auto Repair, Limited.
33
"B-2" General Business
(1). Commercial Planned Unit Developments
(2). Machine Shop
(3). Construction Contractor Office/Storage
(4). Theaters
(5). Electrical Sub-assembly Supplier
(6). Off-sale Liquor Sales
(7). Hair Salon
(8). Animal Supply retail store
(9). Office Chair Manufacturing
(10). Massage Therapy, Commercial
(11). Self-Storage
(12). Maker Space
"I-1" Light Industrial
(1). Wood Treating Facility
(2). Electric Utility Substation
(3). Uses Listed as Permitted with Limited Outside Storage
(4). Paint Shop
(5). Machine Shop
(6). Repair Shops
(7). Pottery Manufacturing and Sales
(8). Antenna Structure
(9). Advertising Signs
(10). Sports Performance Training Center
(11). Pet Daycare & Boarding Facility
(12). New Automobile Storage
"O-S" Open Space
(1). Trails (Snowmobiles)
(2). Archery Range
(3). Non-Motor Multi-Use Recreational Trails
(i.e. bicycle and equestrian)
(4). Picnic Areas
(5). Nature Center
(6). Swimming Beach
(7). Boat Launch
(8). Day Camping
(9). Fishing
(10). Nature Hiking
34
(11). Cross-Country Ski Trails
(12). Composting Sites
(13).Garages auxiliary to a nature center building, constructed in
accordance with Ordinance No. 8, Section 5-29
(14). Tree and Shrub Drop Off
(15). Off Leash Dog Area
(16). Lift Station Structure
"C-W" Conservation Wetlands Overlay
Conditional Uses in the "C-W" Wetlands Overlay District shall comply with
the requirements of Section 6-5 (Conditional Uses) for the underlying
district, Section 9-4 (Conditional Use Permit Procedures) and Section 9-5
(Wetlands Permit Procedures).
“A-S” Airspace and Land Use Safety Regulations Overlay
Conditional uses in the “A-S” Airspace and Land Use Safety Overlay District
shall comply with the requirements of Section 6-5 (Conditional Uses) for the
underlying district, Sections 9-4 (Conditional Use Procedure) and Sections
7-4 (Airspace Zones) and 7-5 (Land Use Safety Regulations in Airport
Hazard Areas).
“S-M” Shoreland Management Overlay
Conditional Uses in the “S-M” Shoreland Management Overlay District shall
comply with the requirements of Section 6-5 (Conditional Uses) for the
underlying district, Section 9-4 (Conditional Use Procedure) and Section 8
(Management of Shoreland Areas).
“F-C” Flood Plain Management Overlay District
Conditional uses in the F-C, Flood Plain Management Overlay District shall
comply with the restrictions of Section 6-5 (Conditional Uses) for the
underlying district, Section 9-4 (Conditional Use Procedure), and Ordinance
No. 57, the Flood Plain Management Ordinance.
“BEI” Bald Eagle Island
(1). Commercial/residential recording and film post production studio with a
single family dwelling
“I-2” Industrial District
35
(1). Wood Treating Facility
(2). Parking Lot
(3). Adult Uses & Sexually Oriented Businesses
SECTION 7. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
7-1. LOT & YARD REGULATIONS. The minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
minimum front yard depth, minimum rear yard depth and minimum side lot width, for each
zoning district, shall be published in Table 7-1.
36
TABLE 7-1
Zone standards
DISTRICT MIN LOT AREA MIN LOT WIDTH MIN FRONT YARD DEPTH MIN SIDE YARD DEPTH MIN REAR YARD DEPTH MAX. NET DENSITY MIN. PERCENT GREEN AREA
R-1 SUBURBAN Single Family Dwellings (without sewer) 22,000 sq.ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 2 75
R-1 SUBURBAN Single Family Dwellings (with sewer) 12,000 sq.ft. 80 ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 3 70
R-1 SUBURBAN Two Family Dwellings (with sewer) 18,000 sq.ft. 100 ft. 35 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 3 70
R-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY (Medium Density) Single Family Dwellings 12,000 sq.ft. 80 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 3 70
R-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY Two Family Dwellings 15,000 sq.ft. 100 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 6 60
R-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY Multi-Family Dwellings - 100 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 6 60
R-3 MULTIPLE FAMILY 12,000 sq.ft. 80 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 3 70
R-3 MULTIPLE FAMILY Two Family Dwellings 15,000 sq.ft. 100 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 6 60
R-3 MULTIPLE FAMILY Multi-Family Dwellings - 100 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 10 60
B-1 LIMITED BUSINESS
All Uses (with sewer) None 80 ft. 30 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. - - - 50
All Uses (without sewer) 22,000 sq.ft. 100 ft. 30 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. - - - 70
B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS
All Uses (with sewer) None 80 ft. 30 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. - - - 40
All Uses (without sewer) 22,000 sq.ft. 100 ft. 30 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. - - - 60
Multi-Family Dwellings (with sewer) None 100 ft. 30 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. 10 30
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
All Uses 1 acre 150 ft. 35 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. - - - 30
I-2 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
All Uses 1 acre 150 ft. 35 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. - - - 30
BEI BALD EAGLE ISLAND 2 acres 125 ft. 35 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 2 75
******************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************
NOTES:
1. Development in R-2 and R-3 Districts shall not be allowed without public sewer.
2. In all districts, structures shall be at least 50 feet from the one hundred (100) year/one percent (1%) storm elevation when a lot is adjacent to a lake, unless permitted by Section 8.
3. Corner lots shall meet the minimum lot width plus an additional twenty-five (25) feet of lot width along all streets except corner lots in the unsewered R-1 Zone which shall be a minimum width
of 105 feet.
4. Accessory structures shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from a rear property line.
5. A corner lot shall be considered to have two front yards and two side yards.
37
7-1.1. CORNER LOTS. Lots which abut on more than one street shall meet the
minimum front yard depth along each street, and shall provide an additional
twenty-five (25) feet of lot width along both streets. This provision shall not be
applicable to alley ways.
7-1.2. ENCROACHMENTS. All structures, whether attached to the principal
structure or detached and whether open or enclosed (including porches, carports,
balconies, decks and all other structures above or below grade level) shall not
project into any minimum front, side, or rear yard setback.
7-1.2(a). Driveways and sidewalks consisting of poured concrete or
bituminous paving shall be considered a structure and shall be allowed to
encroach into minimum front yard setback areas but shall conform to
minimum side and rear yard setback requirements.
7-1.2(b). Retaining walls may be allowed to encroach into minimum
setback areas and may incorporate stairways into the structure.
7-1.2(c). Paved parking areas in the I-1 (Light Industrial) Zoning District
shall have a minimum setback from a railroad right-of-way of 5 feet.
7-1.2(d). Paved parking areas in the I-1 (Light Industrial) Zoning District
shall have a minimum setback from North Birch Lake Boulevard and a
future street adjacent to Specialty Manufacturing Company of twenty (20)
feet.
7-1.2(e). Monopoles with cellular phone antennas in an I-1 Zoning District
shall have a minimum setback from a railroad right-of-way of 10 feet.
7-1.2(f). A garage or accessory structure in an R-1 – Suburban
Residential District shall have a rear yard setback no less than 10’ when
abutting an O.S. – Open Space Zoning District.
7-1.2(g). A 20’ rear yard setback is permitted when an industrial structure
is proposed abutting an undeveloped property containing a wetland,
provided that the distance from the wetland to the structure is no less than
30’.
7-1.2(h). Paved parking areas and driveways in the I-1 Light Industrial
Zoning District shall have minimum side and rear yard setbacks of at least
5’ provided that the front yard setback exceeds 60’, green space exceeds
50%, all adjacent properties are zoned I-1 (light industrial), and the parcel
area is 5 acres or less. The parking area/driveway shall be set back a
38
minimum of 15’ from the ordinary high water elevation of a stormwater
treatment pond or the edge of a delineated wetland.
7-1.3. UNDERSIZED LOTS. Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this
Ordinance and held in separate ownership different from the ownership of
adjoining lots, prior to October 5, 1972, may be used for the erection of a structure
conforming to the use regulation of the district in which it is located, even though its
area and/or width are less than the minimum requirements of this Ordinance.
Such lot of record may be used in conformance with the use regulations of the
district in which it is located, only upon the approval of the Town Board.
7-1.3(a). Any lot provided for in Section 7-1.3 that is served by public sewer
may be used for a single family dwelling without the specific approval of the
Town Board. Such lot and use shall comply with 60% of the requirements
of Table 7-1 (Lot, Yard and Density Regulations) for minimum lot area and
minimum lot width. In addition, the minimum side yard depth shall be based
on the following formula:
Minimum Required Lot Width Minimum Required Side Setback
Actual Lot Width = Allowable
In no instance shall the minimum side yard setback be less than 6 feet.
7-1.3(b). Any lot platted in an R-2 (Urban Residential District) between
October 5, 1972 and January 24, 1984, that is served by public sewer, may
be used for a single family dwelling unit without the specific approval of the
Town Board. Such lot and use shall comply with the requirements of Table
7-1, Lot, Yard and Density Regulations, except that the minimum lot area
shall be 9500 square feet and minimum lot width shall be 70 feet.
7-1.4. NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS LOTS. Non-residential structures or uses shall not be located or
conducted closer to any lot line of any residentially used lot than the distance
specified in the following schedule:
Minimum Side or Rear Yard
abutting any lot in any
"R" Residential District: Use:
20 feet Off-Street parking spaces and access drives for
non-residential uses.
40 feet Churches, schools and public or semi-public
39
structures.
70 feet Recreation facilities, entertainment
facilities, motels, all business uses and
industrial uses.
7-1.5. FRONT YARD SETBACK VARIANCES. Front yard setback variances may
be granted to conform to lesser setbacks of existing adjacent structures. For new
structures, the minimum front yard setback shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
7-1.6. ZERO LOT LINE. In all "B" Business Districts, "I" Industrial Districts, and
for two family and multiple family dwelling structures in all "R" Residential Districts,
the side and/or rear setback requirements may be waived by the Town Board.
Pursuant to this provision, a building may be located on a lot so that one or more
of its sides rest directly on a lot line. Uses sited with Zero Lot Line setbacks shall
comply with all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
7-1.7. Each lot shall have access to a public street or way, or to a private way
protected by a permanent easement which shall be of width and construction
suitable to traffic requirements of the neighborhood in which the property is
located. This shall not be construed to include alleys or service ways. Where a
private easement is to be used, it shall require special permission by the Town
Board.
7-1.8. In all zoning districts, structures shall conform to the minimum side and rear
yard setback requirements indicated in Table 7-1, from all wetland as provided in
Section 9-5.1.
7-2. DENSITY REGULATIONS. All uses shall comply with the density regulations
provided in Table 7-1.
7-3. HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
7-3.1. HEIGHT FOR ALL DISTRICTS EXCEPT THE SHORELAND
MANAGEMENT DISTRICT. The vertical distance of a structure measured from
the lowest elevation at grade adjacent to the structure to the top of the roof shall
not exceed 40 feet, except for water towers approved by the Town Board.
7-3.2. HEIGHT IN SHORELAND MANAGEMENT DISTRICT. For riparian lots in
the Shoreland Management District the distance from the highest grade to the
average of the highest gable shall be no more than 25 feet. For walkout
basements in no event shall the height from the lowest point of a walkout
basement to the top of a roof exceed 40 feet.
40
7-3.3. REPEALED. By amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-3.3. EXCEPTION. No structure may exceed forty (40) feet in Building Height,
as defined in Section 3-8, except water towers approved by the Town Board in any
district, and except in the “I-1” Light Industrial District, where structures in excess of forty
(40) feet in building height, but not exceeding forty-six (46) feet, nor lying in a shoreland
management district, will be identified as a Conditional Use. In addition to satisfying all of
the requirements, procedures, standards, and performance provisions established in
Section 9-4 – CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCEDURES, structures in excess of forty
(40) in the “I-1” District shall satisfy the following requirements:
The part of the structure that exceeds forty (40) feet:
1. Must house an essential part of business operation.
2. Shall not exceed 1,025 square feet in area or 2% of the building, whichever is less.
3. Shall be constructed of non-combustible material.
4. Shall be served by fire sprinklers.
7-3.3(a). No structure may exceed forty (40) feet in building height, as defined
in Section 3-8, except water towers approved by the Town Board in any district, and
except in the I-1 Light Industrial District where structures in excess of fifty (50) feet in
height, but not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet nor lying in a shoreland management
district, will be identified as a Conditional Use. In addition to satisfying all of the
requirements, procedures, standards and performance provisions established in
Section 9-4 – Conditional Use Permit Procedures, structures in excess of fifty (50) feet
but no greater than seventy-five (75) feet in the I-1 District shall satisfy the following
requirements:
The part of the structure that exceeds fifty (50) feet:
1. Shall not exceed 2% of the total lot area.
2. Shall be located at least 150 feet from all lot lines.
3. Must house essential part of business operations which requires requested
height.
4. Shall be open to the ceiling, not divided by floors.
5. Shall not be used for storage space above ground floor.
6. Shall be constructed of non-combustible material.
7. Shall be served by fire sprinklers.
8. Shall not exceed 34,000 square feet, or more than 12% of the area of all
buildings on the property.
9. That part of the structure that exceeds 40’, but is not greater than 50’, shall not
exceed 21,000 square feet, and shall be designed to compliment higher portions
of the building.
41
10. The property shall exceed 40 acres in size.
7-3.3(b). No antenna shall be located any higher on an antenna structure as
defined in Section 3-2 of Ordinance No. 73, than is reasonably necessary for proper
operation of the antenna. In no event shall antenna structures, including the antenna,
exceed 165 feet in height above grade.
7-3.3(c). No structure may exceed forty (40) feet in building height, as defined in
Section 3-8, except water towers approved by the Town Board in any district, and
except in the I-1, Light Industrial District, where an off-premise advertising sign structure
is approved in excess of 40’ in height but not exceeding 48’ in height, by Conditional
Use Permit. In addition to satisfying all of the requirements, procedures, standards,
and performance provisions established in Section 9-4 – Conditional Use Permit
Procedures, advertising sign structures in excess of 40’ in the I-1 District shall satisfy
the following requirements:
That part of the structure that exceeds forty (40) feet:
1. Shall be limited to a roof structure covering the sign base and foundation.
2. Shall not exceed 5% of the area of the sign and sign structure.
3. Shall contain no advertising sign.
4. Shall be constructed of non-combustible material.
7-3.4. REPEALED. By amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-4. AIRSPACE ZONES. In order to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance as
set forth above, the following airspace zones are hereby established: Primary Zone,
Horizontal Zone, Concical Zone, Approach Zone and Transitional Zone, and whose
locations and dimensions are as follows:
7-4.1(a). PRIMARY ZONE: All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary primary surface longitudinally centered on a runway. The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of
the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of the primary
surface: one hundred and thirty (130) feet.
7-4.1(b). HORIZONTAL ZONE: All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary horizontal surface one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary
42
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent
to those arcs. The radius of each arc is six thousand (6,000) feet.
7-4.1(c). CONICAL ZONE: All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary conical surface extending upward and outward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal
distance of four thousand (4,000) feet as measured radially outward from
the periphery of the horizontal surface.
7-4.1(d). APPROACH ZONE: All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary approach surface longitudinally centered on the extended
centerline at each end of a runway. The inner edge of the approach
surface is at the same width and elevation as, and coincides with, the end
of the primary surface. The approach surface inclines upward and outward
to a slope twenty to one (20:1). The approach surface expands uniformly to
a width of two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet at a distance of ten
thousand (10,000) feet to the periphery of the conical surface.
7-4.2. HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance,
and except as necessary and incidental to airport operations, no structure, tree or
exposed transmission line and other public utility uses shall be constructed,
altered, maintained, or allowed to grow in any airspace zone so as to project above
any of the imaginary airspace surfaces described in said Section 7-4 hereof.
7-4.3. BOUNDARY LIMITATIONS. The Town may regulate the location, size and
use of building and the density of population in that portion of an airport hazard
area under the approach zones for a distance not exceeding two (2) miles from the
airport boundary and may regulate height restriction zoning for a distance not to
exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) miles beyond the perimeter of the airport
boundary.
7-5. LAND USE SAFETY REGULATIONS IN AIRPORT HAZARD AREAS.
7-5.1. SAFETY ZONE BOUNDARIES. In order to carry out the purpose of this
Ordinance as set forth above, and also in order to restrict those uses which may
be hazardous to the operational safety of aircraft operating to and from the existing
airport, and furthermore, to limit population and building density in the runway
approach areas, thereby creating sufficient open space so as to protect life and
property in case of an accident, there are hereby created and established the
following land use safety zones:
7-5.1(a). SAFETY ZONE A: All land in that portion of the approach zones
of a runway, as defined
43
in Section 7-4.1(d) of Airspace Obstruction Regulations hereof, which
extends outward from the end of primary surface, a distance equal to twothirds
(2/3) of the planned length of the runway.
7-5.1(b). SAFETY ZONE B: All land in that portion of the approach zones
of a runway, as defined in Section 7-4.1(d) of Airspace Obstruction
Regulations hereof, which extends outward from Safety Zone A to a
distance equal to one-third (1/3) of the planned length of the runway.
7-5.1(c). SAFETY ZONE C: All that land which is enclosed within the
perimeter of the horizontal zone, as defined in Section 7-4.1(b) of Airspace
Obstruction Regulations hereof, and which is not included in Zone A or
Zone B.
7-5.2. USE RESTRICTIONS.
7-5.2(a). GENERAL: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth
in Section 7-5.2 (Airspace Obstruction Regulations), no use shall be made
of any land in any of the safety zones defined in Section 7-5.1 (Land Use
Safety Requirements), which creates or causes interference with the
operations of radio or electronic communications between airport and
aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impairs
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the land, taking
off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
7-5.2(b). ZONE A: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in
Section 7-4.2 of Airspace Obstruction Regulations, and to the general
restrictions contained in Section 7-5.2(d), of Land Use Safety
Requirements, areas designated as Zone A shall contain no buildings,
temporary structures, or other similar above-ground land use structural
hazards, and shall be restricted to those uses which will not create, attract,
or bring together an assembly of persons thereon. Permitted uses may
include, but are not limited to overhead electric transmission lines and such
uses as agricultural (seasonal crops), horticulture, animal husbandry,
raising of livestock, wildlife habitat, light outdoor recreation (non-spectator),
cemeteries, and vehicle parking lots.
7-5.2(c). ZONE B: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in
Section 7-4.2 of Airspace Obstruction Regulations, and to the general
restrictions contained in Section 7-5.2, areas designated as Zone B shall be
restricted in use as follows:
44
(1). Each use shall be on a site whose area shall not be less than
three (3) acres.
(2). Each use shall not create, attract, or bring together a site
population that would exceed fifteen (15) times that of the site
acreage.
(3). Each site shall have no more than one (1) building plot upon
which any number of structures may be erected.
(4). A building plot shall be a single, uniform and non-contrived area,
whose shape is uncomplicated and whose area shall not exceed the
following minimum ratios with respect to the total site area:
Site Area But Less Ratio of Building Maximum Site
at least then Site Area to Plot Area Population
(Acres) (Acres) Bldg. Plot Area (Sq. Ft.) (15 Person/Ac)
3 4 12:1 10,900 45
4 6 10:1 17,400 60
6 10 8:1 32,700 90
10 20 6:1 72,600 150
20 and up 4:1 218,000 300
(5). The following uses are specifically prohibited in Zone B:
churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums, hotels and motels,
trailer courts, campgrounds, and other places of frequent public or
semi-public assembly.
7-5.2(d). ZONE C: Zone C is subject only to height restrictions set forth in
Section 7-4.2 of Airspace Obstruction Regulations, and to the general
restrictions contained in Section 7-5.2.
7-6. OFF-STREET PARKING. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the specifications in Section 7-6.1, in any district, whenever any new use
is established or existing use is altered. The off-street parking may be furnished by
providing spaces so designated within the principal building or structure attached thereto.
7-6.1. Parking space requirements are established as follows:
45
USE PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
Bank 1 per 300 square feet of
floor space
Bowling Alleys 5 for each alley
Church and School 1 per 4 seats in principal
assembly room
Convenience Store 5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Day Care Center 1 per staff member plus 1 for
each 5 students
Funeral Homes 1 for every 100 square feet of
floor space
Hospital and Rest Homes 1 per 3 beds and 1 for each
employee on the maximum
working shift
Industrial 1 for each employee on the
maximum working shift, plus
1 for each company owned
vehicle, plus requirements
for adequate visitor parking or 1
space per 500 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is
greater. When the 1 space per
500 square feet requirement
exceeds the 1 per each
employee requirement, the
difference between the lower
required number and highest
required number may be
provided as proof of parking
Multiple Family Dwellings 2.5 per dwelling unit
Oil Change Shop 2 spaces per service station,
46
plus 2 per service bay. Service
bay is not a parking space
Printing and Publishing 1 space per 1,000 square feet
gross floor area or 1 space
per employee, whichever is
greater
Private Club or Lodge 1 per 4 members
Professional Offices, 1 space per 200 square feet
Sales and Services, of net lease able area on the
Wholesale Houses and ground floor and 1 space
Medial Clinics per 300 square feet of net
lease able area in the basement
areas and on all floors above
first floor
Recreational Assembly 1 for every 50 square feet of
Places: i.e., Dance floor space
Halls, Night Clubs
Restaurant 2 spaces per 100 square feet of
floor area
Restaurant, Fast Food 14 spaces per 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area plus 5 offstreet
waiting spaces per drive
lane
Shopping Center 1 space for each 100 square feet
of useable floor area for the first
15,000 square feet, 1 space for
each 125 square feet for the next
15,001 to 450,000 square feet of
useable floor area
Single Family House/ 2 per dwelling unit
Two Family House
Theater 1 per 3 seats
Warehouse 1 space for each two employees
47
or one space for each 1,000
square feet of floor area, whichever
is greater
7-6.1(a). All off-street parking spaces in a parking lot shall be a minimum of
9 feet in width and 18 feet in length.
7-6.2. PARKING ACCESSORY TO A RESIDENTIAL USE.
7-6.2(a). Off-street parking facilities for residential use shall be utilized
solely for the parking of currently licensed and operable vehicles of 15
passengers or less and trucks not to exceed 84” in height or 255” in length
or a maximum gross vehicle rating of 15,000 lbs. Boats, travel trailers,
campers and camping buses are excluded from these maximum size
requirements.
7-6.2(b). Boats, travel trailers, campers and camping buses are allowed
to park on or adjacent to a driveway from April 1st to November 1st of each
year. Snowmobiles may be parked from November 1st to March 31st.
Boats, snowmobiles, travel trailers, campers, camping buses and antique
cars may be stored in rear or side yards at any time of the year if they are
currently licensed and operable and the combined area of parking for all
recreational vehicles and trailers do not exceed 300 square feet.
7-7. OFF-STREET LOADING. One off-street loading berth of not less than thirtyfive
(35) feet by ten (10) feet shall be provided for every business and industrial use with a
floor area of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, with one (1) additional berth
required for each additional twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor area.
7-8. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-9. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
7-9.1. STANDARDS. All Accessory Structures are subject to the following
standards.
7-9.1(a). Accessory buildings shall be so located on the property as to
conform to the minimum side yard setback and the minimum rear yard
setback requirements of this Ordinance, and shall be located behind the
principal structure on the property. Such accessory structures shall not be
located within a utility easement, except limited accessory structures as
provided in Section 7-9.1(a).2.
48
7-9.1(a).1. An accessory structure shall be located a minimum of 10’ from a
rear lot line in a residential zoning district, shall be incidental and
subordinate to both the single family dwelling and garage, shall not be
located over any drainage and utility easement and shall not exceed 15’ in
height. Accessory structures exceeding 15’ in height shall conform to the
minimum rear yard setback requirements of this Ordinance.
7-9.1(a).2. Limited accessory structures with no foundation, or supported
on grade by wood or other non-permanent material, shall be located a
minimum of 5 feet from rear lot lines and 5 feet from side lot lines.
7-9.1(b). The architectural style and facing materials of accessory
structures shall be compatible with that of the principal structure.
7-9.1(c). Not more than one accessory building, in addition to an attached
or detached garage, may be located on a property in any "R" Residential
District. The requirements of this section shall not apply to structures used
in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-12 (Agricultural Operations).
7-9.1(d). All accessory structures shall meet the requirements of Section 5-
29 of Ordinance No. 8.
7-9.2. ACCESSORY APARTMENT STANDARDS. Accessory apartments
provide an alternate use of single family dwelling units. Such use allows an
expanded choice of housing for sole occupants.
7-9.2(a). Accessory apartments shall be located only within single family
dwelling units. In no event shall more than one (1) accessory apartment be
allowed in a single family dwelling unit.
7-9.2(b). Single family dwelling units having accessory apartments shall be
owner occupied, may not have a separate entrance to the outside and there
must be free movement between the accessory apartment and the single
family portion of the house.
7-9.2(c). The exterior architectural design and facing materials of the single
family dwelling unit shall not be altered by an accessory apartment.
7-9.2(d). Accessory apartments shall be subordinate to the principal single
family dwelling units in which they are located. An accessory apartment
shall not comprise more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the total
combined area of the single family dwelling unit and accessory apartment.
In no event shall the area proposed for use as an accessory apartment
49
reduce the total remaining area proposed for use as a single family dwelling
unit to less than the minimum area required by Ordinance No. 8 (Building
Code).
7-9.2(e). One (1) off-street parking space, in addition to the requirements of
Section 7-6 (Off-Street Parking), shall be required of a single family dwelling
unit having an accessory apartment.
7-9.2(f). Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 35.
7-9.3. PROCEDURE.
7-9.3(a). Accessory apartments shall be processed in accordance with the
application, review and performance requirements of Section 9-4
(Conditional Use Permit Procedure) and the provisions of Ordinance No. 8
(Building Code). Applications for accessory apartments shall be
accompanied by a fee established by Town Ordinance.
7-9.3(b). In addition to the requirements of Section 9-4 (Conditional Use
Permit Procedure) the Town Board may impose such conditions as deemed
necessary to the approval of any accessory apartment use, based upon the
health, safety and welfare of the Town, in order to carry out the purpose
and provisions of this section.
7-9.3(c). If an application for an accessory apartment is denied, no
proceeding for an accessory apartment involving the same property shall be
initiated within one (1) year from the date of its denial, unless authorized by
the Town Board.
7-9.3(d). The Town Board reserves the right, upon allowing any accessory
apartment, to inspect the premises in which the apartment is being located,
to insure compliance with the provisions of this section or any conditions
additionally imposed.
7-9.3(e). Failure of an accessory apartment permittee to comply with the
provisions of this section or any conditions imposed in the Zoning
Certificate, shall result in the revocation of such permit, after notice and
hearing by the Town Board.
7-9.4. REPEALED. By amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-9.5. REPEALED. By amendment to Ordinance 35.
50
7-9.6. POLE BARNS. Metal post and beam buildings, metal sided or so called
pole barns are prohibited in all districts.
7-9.6(a). Post and beam construction shall be permitted for hangars at all
airports in Land Use Safety Zone C. The exterior of any post and beam
building shall utilize horizontal vinyl, wood or metal siding or vertical
prepainted metal siding, using a minimum of 29 gauge thickness, painted
an earth tone color.
7-9.6(b). Post and beam construction shall be permitted for agricultural
properties greater than 5 acres in size. The exterior of any post and beam
building shall utilize horizontal vinyl, wood or metal siding, painted an earth
tone color.
7-9.7. GUEST COTTAGE. A guest cottage may be permitted in the R-1 Zoning
District on lots which are at least 24,000 square feet in size in sewered areas and one
acre or larger in size in unsewered areas, if all of the following criteria and standards
are met:
7-9.7(a). The structure, design, building materials and color shall be
compatible with the principal structure and surrounding land uses.
7-9.7(b). The structure shall not be used for rental purposes.
7-9.7(c). The guest cottage shall maintain one (1) service for each utility
serving the property. Each dwelling unit shall pay two (2) times the sanitary
sewer service charge as provided by Ordinance No. 18 (Regulating Use of
Sewer) and two (2) times the water service charge as provided by Ordinance No.
12 (Regulating the Use of Water).
7-9.7(d). A guest cottage shall not cover more than 700 square feet of land
surface and shall not exceed 15’ in height.
7-9.7(e). Any guest cottage located in the Shoreland Management Overlay
Zone shall be located or designed to reduce its visibility as viewed from public
waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks,
color, and other means acceptable to White Bear Township, assuming summer
leaf-on conditions.
7-9.8. PROCEDURE.
7-9.8(a). Guest cottages shall be processed in accordance with the application,
review and performance requirements of Section 9-4 (Conditional Use Permit
Procedure) and the provisions of Ordinance No. 8 (Building Code). Applications
51
for a guest cottage shall be accompanied by a fee established by Town
Ordinance.
7-9.8(b). In addition to the requirements of Section 9-4 (Conditional Use Permit
procedure), the Town Board may impose such conditions as deemed necessary
to the approval of any guest cottage, based upon the health, safety and welfare
of the Town, in order to carry out the purpose and provision of this section.
7-9.8(c). If an application for a guest cottage is denied, no proceeding for a
guest cottage involving the same property shall be initiated within one (1) year
from the date of its denial, unless authorized by the Town Board.
7-9.8(d). The Town Board reserves the right, upon allowing any guest cottage,
to inspect the premises in which the guest cottage is located, to insure
compliance with the provisions of this section or any conditions additionally
imposed.
7-9.8(e). Failure of a guest cottage permittee to comply with the provisions of
this section or any conditions imposed in the Zoning Certificate, shall result in a
revocation of such permit, after notice and hearing by the Town Board.
7-10. RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. Residential
Planned Unit Developments provide more flexibility in site plan and building plan designs
than otherwise allowed by the strict application of the Lot, Yard and Density Regulations
of this Ordinance and the provisions of Ordinance No. 15 (Subdivision Ordinance). All
Residential Planned Unit Developments shall comply with the provisions of Ordinance No.
9 (Construction of Streets).
7-10.1. STANDARDS. A Residential Planned Unit Development application shall
be approved if it is found to meet all standards set forth in the following provisions.
7-10.1(a). HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. A Homeowners Association
shall be required in all Residential Planned Unit Developments having
multiple family dwelling units. Membership in the Homeowners Association
shall be mandatory for all owners of such multiple family dwelling units. The
Homeowners Association shall maintain legal ownership and keep in good
repair private driveways, parking spaces and common areas.
7-10.1(b). USES. Land uses shall comply with the permitted or conditional
use regulations of the Zoning District in which the residential planned unit
development is located.
7-10.1(c). MINIMUM AREA. The minimum area of land for a Residential
52
Planned Unit Development shall be not less than five (5) acres, exclusive of
lakes, streams, wetlands and the right-of-way of public thoroughfares.
7-10.1(d). LOT REQUIREMENTS. The minimum lot area, minimum lot
width, minimum front yard set back, minimum side yard set back, minimum
rear yard set back, minimum percentage of green area and off-street
parking space requirements shall comply with the zoning district regulations
in which the Residential Planned Unit Development is proposed to be
located. Departures from such regulations may be permitted where the
resulting requirements will not have an adverse effect upon the health,
safety and welfare of the Town. In no event shall single family dwelling
units in a Residential Planned Unit Development have a minimum lot area
of less than nine thousand five hundred (9,500) square feet, a minimum lot
width of less than seventy (70) feet and a minimum corner lot width of less
than ninety-five (95) feet. Where departures from such regulations are
permitted the average lot area shall be no less than the minimum lot area in
the zoning district.
7-10.1(e). DENSITY. The maximum net density of dwelling units per acre
shall not be greater than the density regulation of the zoning district in which
the Residential Planned Unit Development is proposed to be located.
7-10.1(f). MINIMUM GREEN AREA. A minimum of thirty-five (35%)
percent of the area of a Residential Planned Unit Development having
multiple family dwelling units shall be reserved for passive recreational open
spaces. Areas for passive recreational open space shall be exclusive of
lakes, streams, wetlands and the right-of-way of public thoroughfares.
Passive recreational open space shall be located within the Residential
Planned Unit Development so as to abut parks, playgrounds, trails, open
spaces, lakes, streams or wetlands on adjacent properties.
7-10.1(g). RECREATIONAL AREAS. Active recreational areas shall be
provided in all Residential Planned Unit Developments. The amount of
area provided for active recreational use shall be in the proportion of two (2)
acres of land per one hundred (100) dwelling units. In no event shall less
than one-half (1/2) acre of land be provided for active recreational use.
Areas for active recreational use shall be exclusive of lakes, streams,
wetlands and the right-of-way of public thoroughfares. Active recreational
areas shall be provided in addition to the requirements of Section 7-10.1(f)
(Minimum Green Area) and to the park land dedication requirements of
Ordinance No. 15 (Subdivision Ordinance).
7-10.1(h). PUBLIC UTILITIES. All Residential Planned Unit Developments
53
shall be served by public sanitary sewer and public water services. Utilities,
such as electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television, shall be
provided to Residential Planned Unit Developments in a manner approved
by the Town.
7-10.1(i). ACCESS. All uses in a Residential Planned Unit Development
shall abut a public street or abut a private street which has adequate access
to a public street. The alignment and design of all private streets shall
comply with the provisions of Ordinance No. 9 (Street Ordinance).
7-10.1(j). DRIVEWAYS. All driveways for multiple family dwelling units in a
Residential Planned Unit Development shall be provided and maintained in
good repair, by the developer and the successor Homeowner's Association,
in a manner approved by the Town.
7-10.1(k). STORAGE AREAS. Screened storage areas shall be provided
for each multiple family dwelling unit in a Residential Planned Unit
Development. The minimum area for screened storage shall be one
hundred (100) square feet per dwelling unit. The Town Board may waive
the requirements for screened storage where the Homeowner's Association
maintains and enforces restrictive covenants upon the property. Such
restrictive covenants shall prohibit the exterior storage of building materials,
boats, recreational vehicles, snowmobiles and other similar personal
property, except in a screened storage area approved by the Town Board.
Also, the Residential Planned Unit Development shall reserve an area
adequate for providing the necessary screened storage pursuant to the
requirements of this section.
7-10.1(l). ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN. An environmental design
preserving the natural amenities of the existing landscape as well as
providing for landscape buffering as to adjacent properties shall be
incorporated into all Residential Planned Unit Developments.
7-10.1(m). ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN. The architectural design of all
structures in a Residential Planned Unit Development shall be compatible
with one another and with structures located on adjacent properties.
7-10.1(n). NO VARIANCES. Not withstanding the provisions of Section 8-
6 (Variances), no variances shall be granted to the site plan and building
plan designs of an approved Planned Unit Development.
7-10.2. PROCEDURE.
54
7-10.2(a). Residential Planned Unit Developments shall be processed in
accordance with the application, review and performance requirements of
Section 9-4 (Conditional Use Permit Procedure) and the provisions of
Ordinance No. 15 (Subdivisions). Applications for Residential Planned Unit
Developments shall be accompanied by a fee established by Town
Ordinance.
(1). In addition to the requirements of Section 9-4 (Conditional Use
Permit Procedure) the application shall include ten (10) copies of the
proposed Charter, By-Laws and restrictive covenants of the
Homeowner's Association.
7-10.2(b). In addition to the requirements of Section 9-4 (Conditional Use
Permit Procedure) the Town Board may impose such conditions as deemed
necessary to the approval of any Residential Planned Unit Development,
based upon the health, safety and welfare of the Town, in order to carry out
the purpose and provisions of this section.
7-10.2(c). Upon approval of a "B-2" General Business District use in a
Residential Planned Unit Development, a business license shall be issued
for the balance of the calendar year, and renewed for periods of one year
each. All applications for business license renewal shall be processed
administratively by the Town Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee
established by Town Ordinance. Failure of a licensee to renew a business
license shall result in notice and hearing by the Town Board for revocation
of the licensee's Zoning Certificate.
7-10.2(d). If an application for a "B-2" General Business District use in a
Residential Planned unit Development is denied, no proceeding for a "B-2"
General Business District use in a Residential Planned Unit Development
involving the same property and the same business shall be initiated within
one (1) year from the date of its denial, unless authorized by the Town
Board.
7-10.2(e). The Town Board reserves the right, upon allowing any "B-2"
General Business District use in a Residential Planned Unit Development,
to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted, to
insure compliance with the provisions of this section or any conditions
additionally imposed.
7-10.2(f). Failure of a "B-2" General Business District use in a Residential
Planned Unit Development to comply with the provisions of this section or
any conditions imposed in the Zoning Certificate, shall result in the
55
revocation of such permit, after notice and hearing by the Town Board.
7-10.3. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.4. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.5. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.6. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.7. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.8. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.9. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.10. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.11. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.12. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.13. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.14. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-10.15. REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-11. HOME OCCUPATIONS. The intent of the HOME OCCUPATIONS section
of this Ordinance is to provide opportunities for home based work with other uses
permitted in the residential districts and to assure peace, quiet and domestic tranquility
within residential neighborhoods.
7-11.1. STANDARDS. All home occupations are subject to the following
standards.
7-11.1(a). No equipment or machinery shall be used in the home
occupation which will create electrical interference to surrounding
properties.
7-11.1(b). Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary
to the residential use of the premises, should not change the residential
character thereof, and shall be compatible with the surrounding residential
56
uses.
7-11.1(c). No home occupation shall require internal or external structural
alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in
dwellings except where required to comply with local and state fire and
police recommendations.
7-11.1(d). There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials
used in the home occupation, except personal vehicles. Outside storage of
vehicles shall comply with Section 7-6.2 of this Ordinance.
7-11.1(e). The home occupation shall comply with the provisions of
Ordinance No. 8 (Building Code), and Ordinance No. 46 (Uniform Fire
Code).
7-11.1(f). There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation other
than signs which are in conformance with Ordinance No. 33 (Sign
Ordinance).
7-11.1(g). All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of
Ordinance No. 16 (Public Nuisances).
7-11.1(h). No home occupations shall be conducted between the hours of
9:00 p.m. to 6:30 a.m., Monday through Friday, after 6:00 p.m. on Saturday
or at any time on Sunday, except as provided in Section 7-11.1(m) or
unless said occupation is contained entirely within the principal dwelling and
will not require any on-site parking facilities.
7-11.1(i). No home occupation shall generate traffic in volumes greater
than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.
7-11.1(j). Sewer and water use and refuse generation shall not exceed
normal residential use.
7-11.1(k). Any construction, alteration, or electrical or mechanical
equipment shall not change the fire rating of the structure.
7-11.1(l). The maximum number of business visitors shall not exceed eight
vehicle trips per 60 minute periods or 20 vehicle trips per day. One vehicle
trip shall include both arriving and departing.
7-11.1(m). Gatherings for the purpose of selling merchandise, taking
orders or providing training for sale or marketing shall not be held more than
57
twice per month and shall cease prior to 9:00 p.m. and shall not have more
than ten passenger automobiles with not more than six passenger
automobiles parked on the street with all on-street parking to occur on one
side of the street only.
7-11.1(n). GARAGE SALE. No more than two (2) per calendar year and
shall not exceed a total of six (6) days per calendar year.
7-11.1(o). IN-HOME CRAFT SALES (BOUTIQUES). An in-home craft
sale (boutique) shall be allowed as a home occupation subject to the
following requirements:
1. Sales shall be limited to no more than 8 consecutive days or a
total of 10 days per calendar year.
2. No more than one paid employee shall be permitted.
3. There shall be a minimum of 2 lighted exits.
4. Any sign used for advertising shall meet the requirements set
forth in Ordinance No. 33 (Sign Ordinance).
5. Customer parking shall be limited to one side of the street for all
streets adjacent to the residence. The Town shall post the "No
Parking" signs.
6. Sales shall be limited to no more than 10 hours per day between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
7. The Town shall be notified of the dates of the sale.
8. All State, Federal and local laws shall be complied with.
9. Any in-home craft sale (boutique) which cannot comply with these
requirements may apply for a Conditional Home Occupation Permit
as established in Section 9-4 of Ordinance No. 35 (Zoning
Ordinance).
7-11.2. PERMITTED HOME OCCUPATION STANDARDS. Home occupations
listed in Section 6-4 (Permitted Uses) shall be permitted if operated in compliance
with all of the conditions established in Section 7-11.1. and the following
conditions:
58
7-11.2(a). No person other than those who customarily reside on the
premises shall be employed.
7-11.2(b). All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely
within the principal dwelling and may not be conducted in accessory
buildings, attached or detached garages.
7-11.2(c). Permitted home occupations shall not create a parking demand
in excess of that which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, so
that no vehicle is parked closer than three (3) feet from the curb line or edge
of road surface.
7-11.2(d). REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance 35.
7-11.3. SPECIAL HOME OCCUPATION STANDARDS. Home occupations not
classified as a Permitted Home Occupation pursuant to Section 7-11.2, shall be
classified as Special Home Occupations. Special Home Occupations shall require
a Special Home Occupation Permit which may be approved or denied by the Town
Board, after recommendations by the Planning Commission. Special Home
Occupations must be in compliance with all of the standards established in Section
7-11.2, except for those superseded by the following provisions:
7-11.3(a). No person other than a resident and one employee shall conduct
the home occupation.
7-11.3(b). The home occupation may be conducted in the principal
dwelling and one accessory building or in the garage.
7-11.3(c). Special Home Occupation Permits shall not run with the land.
Such permits shall be issued to specific persons and shall not be
transferable.
7-11.3(d). For residential properties when the home is no less than 1/3
mile from any other home, more than one employee may conduct the home
occupation.
7-11.4. PROCEDURE.
7-11.4(a). Special Home Occupations shall be processed in accordance
with the application, review and performance requirements of Section 9-4
(Conditional Use Permits Procedure). Applications for Special Home
Occupations shall be accompanied by a fee established by Town
Ordinance.
59
7-11.4(b). In addition to the requirements of Section 9-4 (Conditional Use
Permit Procedure), the Town Board may impose such conditions as
deemed necessary to the approval of any Special Home Occupation
Permit, based upon the health, safety and welfare of the Town, in order to
carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section.
7-11.4(c). Upon approval of a Special Home Occupation Permit, a
business license shall be issued for the balance of the calendar year, and
renewed for periods of one year each. All applications for business license
renewal shall be processed administratively by the Town Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a fee established by Town Ordinance. Failure of a
licensee to renew a business license shall result in notice and hearing by
the Town Board for revocation of the licensee's Zoning Certificate.
7-11.4(d). If an application for a Special Home Occupation Permit is
denied, no proceeding for a Special Home Occupation Permit involving the
same property and the same business shall be initiated within one (1) year
from the date of its denial, unless authorized by the Town Board.
7-11.4(e). The Town Board reserves the right, upon issuing any Special
Home Occupation Permit, to inspect the premises in which the occupation
is being conducted, to insure compliance with the provisions of this section
or any conditions additionally imposed.
7-11.4(f). Failure of a Special Home Occupation permittee to comply with
the provisions of this section or any conditions imposed in the Zoning
Certificate, shall result in the revocation of such permit, after notice and
hearing by the Town Board.
7-12. AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS. Agricultural operations meeting the
following criteria may be allowed in an "R-1" Suburban Residential District in the Town:
7-12.1. Agricultural operations may occur on tracts of two (2) acres or more, not
including the minimum lot area required in the "R-1" Suburban Residential District.
7-12.2. Agricultural operations may include the production and storage of farm
crops, as well as the keeping of domestic farm animals.
7-12.3. The raising or keeping of livestock is permitted only if there are a minimum
of two (2) acres fenced property available. The ratio of livestock shall not exceed
four (4) animal units per each two (2) acres. No slaughter operations are
permitted.
60
7-12.4. Agricultural operation shall not produce light glare, noise, odor or vibration
that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property.
7-12.5. Equipment or machinery shall not be used in the agricultural operation
which will create electrical interference to surrounding properties.
7-12.6. Agricultural operations may include accessory uses necessary to treat,
store, or produce retail farm market products provided, however, that such
accessory uses shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the agricultural
operation.
7-12.7. Agricultural operations shall not include commercial livestock pen feeding
(feed lots).
7-12.8. All agricultural operations shall maintain pasture areas so as to have a
grass covered surface.
7-12.9. All corral and paddock areas shall be graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of drainage and storm water run-off.
7-12.10. All stable, corral and paddock areas shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary manner so as to prevent the breeding of insects.
7-12.11. The agricultural operation shall comply with the provisions of Ordinance
No. 8 (Building Code) and Ordinance No. 46 (Uniform Fire Code).
7-12.12. All agricultural operations shall comply with the provisions of Ordinance
No. 16 (Public Nuisance).
7-12.13. All agricultural operations keeping livestock, shall comply with the
provisions of Ordinance No. 5 (Animal Control).
7-13. NON-CONFORMING USES.
7-13.1. STANDARDS. The following provisions shall apply to all Non-Conforming
Uses.
7-13.1(a). A Non-Conforming Use may be continued, but may not be
extended, expanded, or changed unless to a conforming use, except as
permitted by the Town Board in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
61
7-13.1(b). A Non-Conforming Use Permit shall be obtained by the owner of
any non-conforming use, except single family residential homes and related
garages and accessory buildings, as evidence that the use lawfully existed
prior to the adoption of the provision which made the use non-conforming.
7-13.1(c). A Non-Conforming Use Permit shall not be issued for a period of
more than five (5) years. Such permit may be renewed only upon reapplication
for a Non-Conforming Use Permit, pursuant to the procedures
and requirements established in this section.
7-13.1(d). Any non-conforming use damaged by fire, flood, explosion or
other casualty may be re-established and used as previously permitted if
such re-establishment is approved by the Town Board. Such nonconforming
use shall be re-established within twelve (12) months of the
casualty to having no greater size or intensity than before the casualty.
7-13.1(e). In the event that any non-conforming use ceases or is
abandoned voluntarily, for a period of one (1) year, such non-conforming
use shall not be resumed.
7-13.2. PROCEDURE.
7-13.2(a). Non-Conforming Use Permits shall be applied for in accordance
with the application, review and performance requirements of Section 9-4
(Conditional Use Permit Procedure). Applications for Non-Conforming Use
Permits shall be accompanied by a fee established by Town Ordinance.
7-13.2(b). In addition to the requirements of Section 9-4 (Conditional Use
Permit Procedure) the Town Board may impose such conditions as deemed
necessary to the approval of any Non-Conforming Use Permit, based upon
the health, safety and welfare of the Town, in order to carry out the purpose
and provisions of this section.
7-13.2(c). Upon approval of a Non-Conforming Use Permit, a business or
contractor's license shall be issued for the balance of the calendar year and
renewed for periods of one year each. All applications for business
licensee renewal shall be processed by the Town Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a fee established by Town Ordinance. Failure of a
licensee to renew a business or contractor's license shall result in notice
and hearing by the Town Board for revocation of the licensee's Non-
Conforming Use Permit.
7-13.2(d). In the event the Town administratively renews a business or
62
contractor's license after the expiration of a Non-Conforming Use permit,
such Non-Conforming Use Permit shall be extended for a period concurrent
with the renewed business or contractor's license, or until the Town initiates
proceedings for the revocation of such Non-Conforming Use Permit.
7-13.2(e). If an application for a Non-Conforming Use Permit is denied, no
proceeding for a Non-Conforming Use Permit involving the same property
and the same business shall be initiated within one (1) year from the date of
its denial, unless authorized by the Town Board.
7-13.2(f). The Town Board reserves the right, upon issuing any Non-
Conforming Use Permit, to inspect the premises in which the occupation is
being conducted, to insure compliance with the provisions of this section or
any conditions additionally imposed.
7-13.2(g). Failure of a non-conforming use permittee to comply with the
provisions of this section or any conditions imposed in the Non-Conforming
Use Permit, shall result in the revocation of such permit, after notice and
hearing by the Town Board.
7-14. DWELLING UNITS PROHIBITED. No cellar, garage, tent, travel trailer,
basement with unfinished structure above, or accessory building, shall at any time be
used as a dwelling unit.
7-15. ZONING COORDINATION. Any proposed amendment to land use on land
that borders another town or city shall be referred to such town or city for review and
comment prior to action by the Town Board. A period of no more than forty-five (45) days
shall be provided for receipt of such comments. Any comments received by the Town
Board shall be regarded as advisory only.
7-16. MODEL HOMES. Model homes may be permitted in any "R" Residential
District.
7-16.1. STANDARDS. The following provisions apply to all model homes.
7-16.1(a). A model home shall be limited to operating between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and between 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.
7-16.1(b). Parking related to the use of a model home shall be limited to a
total of not more than ten (10) automobiles, with no more than six (6)
automobiles parked on the street. All on-street parking shall be limited to
one (1) side of the street only.
63
7-16.1(c). A model home shall not be used to promote the sale of
properties or buildings outside of the subdivision in which the model home
is located.
7-16.1(d). Exterior lighting of a model home shall be limited to the site and
the building and shall comply with the provisions of Ordinance No. 16
(Public Nuisance). In no event shall exterior lighting be illuminated beyond
the hours of operation.
7-16.2. PROCEDURE.
7-16.2(a). Model homes shall require a Model Home Permit which may be
approved and issued by the Town Clerk. Model Home Permits shall be
applied for in accordance with provisions of this section.
(1). If the Town Clerk recommends that a Model Home Permit be
denied, then it shall be applied for in accordance with the application,
review and performance requirements of Section 9-3 (Permitted Use
Standards Procedure).
7-16.2(b). An application fee in an amount established by Town Ordinance
shall accompany the application.
7-16.2(c). The applicant shall provide five (5) copies of the site plan and
building plans together with all supporting data. This information shall be
submitted in the following manner.
(1). The site plan shall contain the following data:
(i). A scale no greater than one inch equal to twenty feet (1" =
20"), and no less than one-quarter inch equals one foot (1/4"
= 1").
(ii). The location of the site and the use within the
subdivision.
(iii). Site grading and drainage plan having a contour interval
of no greater than two (2) feet.
(iv). Delineation of all lot and yard setbacks.
(v). Location of all buildings, open spaces, recreation areas,
64
utility areas, service areas, access drives, parking areas,
storage areas, proposed utility lines, existing utility lines and
easements.
(vi). Location and description of all other site improvements
including driveways, fences, walls, signs, lighting, walkways,
patios, decks and barriers.
(vii). Delineation of all areas to be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used,
and location and function of all yards.
(viii). Narrative description of hours of operation, illumination
of site and a parking plan for visitors to site.
(2). Building site plans shall indicate the size,
location and intended use of all structures, and preliminary
architectural plans for all proposed structures including exterior
finishes, floor plans and elevations.
(3). The application shall include a time schedule for the proposed
construction and development of the use.
(4). The Town may require the applicant to provide additional
information where such information is deemed necessary for review
of the application. The Town may waive any of the requirements of
Section 9-3.2(b), where such information is deemed not necessary
for review of the application.
7-16.2(d). In addition to the requirements of Section 9-3 (Permitted Use
Standards Procedure) the Town may impose such standards as deemed
necessary to the approval of any Model Home Permit, based upon the
health, safety and welfare of the Town, in order to carry out the purpose
and provisions of this section.
7-16.2(e). Upon approval of a Model Home Permit, a business or
contractor's license shall be issued for the balance of the calendar year and
renewed for periods of one year each. All applications for business license
renewal shall be processed by the Town Clerk and shall be accompanied
by a fee established by Town Ordinance. Failure of a licensee to review a
business or contractor's license shall result in notice and hearing by the
Town Board for revocation of the licensee's Model Home Permit.
65
7-16.2(f). In the event the Town administratively renews a business or
contractor's license after the expiration of a Model Home Permit, such
Model Home Permit shall be extended for a period concurrent with the
renewed business or contractor's license, or until the Town initiates
proceedings for the revocation of such Model Home Permit.
7-16.2(g). If an application for a Model Home Permit is denied, no
proceeding for a Model Home Permit involving the same property and the
same business shall be initiated within one (1) year from the date of its
denial, unless authorized by the Town Board.
7-16.2(h). The Town reserves the right, upon issuing any Model Home
Permit, to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted,
to insure compliance with the provisions of this section or standards
additional imposed.
7-16.2(i). Failure of a model home permittee to comply with the provisions
of this section or any standards imposed in the Model Home Permit, shall
result in the revocation of such permit, after notice and hearing by the Town
Board.
7-17. VACATED STREETS. When any street, alley, easement or public way is
vacated by official action, the zoning district abutting the center line of the said vacated
area shall not be affected by such proceeding.
7-18. ADVERTISING SIGN OVERLAY AREA. An advertising sign overlay area is
created consisting of all industrially zoned lots adjacent to I-35/694 where no suburban or
urban residential or open space zoning district is located directly across the freeway, and
the adjacent land is generally higher than the freeway, allowing construction without the
requirement of a variance for height, and readability for the lower profile monument style
required by the Town’s sign ordinance, Ordinance No. 33. A map is attached which
identifies the overlay area.
7-19. ADULT USES AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
7-19.1. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES. The purpose of this section is to control,
through licensing and zoning regulations, certain land uses that have a direct
and detrimental effect on the character of the Town’s residential and commercial
neighborhoods.
7-19.2. The Town Board makes the following findings about the effect adult uses
and sexually oriented businesses have on the character of the Town’s
neighborhoods. In making the findings, the Board accepts the recommendation
66
of its commission that has studied the experiences of other urban areas about
such businesses. Based on studies and findings, the Town Board concludes:
7-19.2(a). Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can contribute to
an increase in crime in the area where such businesses are located. This
can be a burden to the Town/County crime prevention programs and law
enforcement services.
7-19.2(b). Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can significantly
contribute to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods and can
increase neighborhood blight. These businesses also can impair the
character and quality of the residential housing in the area where such
businesses are located. This situation could lessen the amount of
desirable housing for residents.
7-19.2(c). The concentration of adult uses and sexually oriented
businesses in one area can greatly affect the area where such businesses
are concentrated and on the quality of urban life. A cycle of decay can
result from the influx and concentration of adult uses and sexually
oriented businesses. Others may perceive the presence of such
businesses as an indication that the area is deteriorating, and the result
can be devastating. That is, other businesses move out of the vicinity and
residents flee from the area. Lower property values that can result from
the concentration of such businesses erode the Town tax base and
contribute to urban blight.
7-19.2(d). Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses have adverse
secondary impacts of the types discussed in subsections 7-19.2(a-c) of
this section.
7-19.2(e). It is necessary to provide for the special and express regulation
of businesses, establishments or commercial enterprises that operate as
adult body painting studios, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult
carwashes, adult companionship establishments, adult hotels or motels,
adult massage parlors or health clubs, adult mini-motion-picture theaters,
adult modeling studios, adult motion picture arcades or theaters, adult
novelty businesses, adult saunas, and similar adult-oriented services
operating under different names to protect the public health, safety and
welfare and to guard against the inception and transmission of disease.
7-19.2(f). The commercial enterprises such as the types described in
Section 7-19.2(e) of this Section and all other similar establishments
whose services include sessions offered to adults conducted in private by
67
members of the same or opposite sex and employing personnel with no
specialized training are susceptible to operations contravening,
subverting, or endangering the morals of the Town by being the site of
acts of prostitution, illicit sex, and occasions of violent crimes and thus,
requiring close inspection, licensing and regulation.
7-19.2(g). Control and regulation of commercial establishments of these
types, in view of the abuses often perpetrated, require intensive efforts by
the sheriff’s department and other departments of the Town. It is
necessary for the Town to provide services to all of the Town without
concentrating the public services in one area. The concentrated use of
Town services detracts from and reduces the level of service available to
the rest of the Town. Thus, these types of establishments can diminish
the ability of the Town to protect and promote the general health, welfare,
morals and safety of the Town.
7-19.2(h). The Board adopts the land-use and licensing regulations in this
section, recognizing that it has an interest in the present and future
character of the Town’s residential and commercial neighborhoods. These
regulations are to lessen the detrimental and adverse effects adult uses
and sexually oriented businesses have on adjacent land uses and to
protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Town.
7-19.3. It is not the intent of the Town Board to prohibit adult uses or sexually
oriented businesses or establishments from having an opportunity to locate in
the Town. It also is not the intent of the Board to regulate these businesses on
the basis of content, but only on the basis of likely adverse secondary effects.
7-19.4. LICENSE.
7-19.4(a). REQUIRED. No person shall own or operate an adult use or
sexually oriented business in the Town without having first secured a
license as provided in this Section. Licenses shall be one or two types:
(1). Adult use principal.
(2). Adult use accessory.
7-19.4(b). APPLICATION. The Town shall prepare an application for an
adult use principal or sexually oriented business license. This application
shall include the following:
68
(1). The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the
applicant, if an individual, and if a corporation, the names,
residences, phone numbers and birth dates of those owners
holding more than five percent of the issued and outstanding stock
of the corporation.
(2). The name, address, phone number and birth date of the
operator and manager of such operation, if different from the
owner.
(3). The address and legal description of the building,
establishment or premises where the adult use or sexually oriented
business is to be located.
(4). A statement detailing each gross misdemeanor or felony
relating to a sex offence and/or the operation of adult uses and
related activities of which the applicant or, for a corporation, the
owners of more than five percent of the outstanding stock of the
corporation have been convicted, and whether the applicant has
ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of
business in other communities.
(5). The activities and types of business to be conducted.
(6). The hours of operation.
(7). The provisions made to restrict access by minors.
(8). A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations
and activities.
(9). A description or building plan that details all proposed interior
and exterior changes to an existing building or structure.
7-19.4(c). FEES: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
(1). Each application for a license required under this division shall
be accompanied by a receipt from the Town for payment in full of
the required application and investigative fee for the license
established by the Town Board. All fees shall be paid into the
general fund of the Town.
(2). All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. The
69
Town shall issue each license for one year. However, if part of the
license year has elapsed when the application is made, the Town
may issue a license for the remainder of the year for a prorated
fee. In computing such fee, the Town shall count any unexpired
fraction of a month as one month.
(3). The annual fee for an adult use or sexually oriented business
shall be as set for in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
(4). No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this section
shall be refunded except for events listed in this section upon
application to the Town Clerk within thirty (30) days from the
happening of the event. The Town shall refund a prorated portion
of the fee for the unexpired period of the license, computed
monthly, when operation of the licensed business ceases not less
than one month before expiration of the license because of the
following:
(i). Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or
other catastrophe.
(ii). The licensee’s illness.
(iii). The licensee’s death.
(iv). A change in the legal status making it unlawful for the
licensed business to continue.
(5). Each application shall contain a provision on the application in
bold print stating that any withholding of information or the
providing of false or misleading information will be grounds for the
denial or revocation of a license. Any changes in the information
provided on the application or provided during the investigation
shall be reported to the Town Board by the applicant or licensee. If
such changes take place during the investigation, the data shall be
provided to the Ramsey County Sheriff or Town Clerk in writing,
and he shall report the changes to the Town Board. Failure to
report such changes by the applicant or the licensee may result in
a denial or revocation of a license.
7-19.4(d). INVESTIGATION; HEARING; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL;
TRANSFERABILITY.
70
(1). The Town shall investigate all facts set out in the application for
the license required under this section. After the Town finishes its
investigation, the Town shall hold a public hearing and shall give
everyone a chance to be heard for or against the granting of the
license. After the investigation and public hearing, the Town Board
shall grant or refuse the application.
(2). The Town shall only issue the license to the applicant. The
license shall not be transferred to another holder. The Town shall
only issue each license for the premises or location described in
the application. No license may be transferred to another place
without the approval of the Town Board.
7-19.4(e). INELIGIBLE PERSONS.
(1). Is under 21 years of age.
(2). Has been convicted of a felony or of violating any state law.
(3). Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license
is issued.
(4). He has not paid the license and investigative fees required by
this ordinance.
(5). Is not a citizen of the United States or a lawful resident alien.
(6). Has had an adult use or similar license or permit revoked under
a chapter or statute similar to this article.
7-19.4(f). INELIGIBLE PLACES.
(1). No license shall be granted for adult uses or sexually oriented
business on any premises where a licensee has been convicted of
a violation of this ordinance or where any license issued under this
section has been revoked for cause until one year has elapsed
after such conviction or revocation.
(2). Except users lawfully existing on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section derives, no license shall be
granted for any adult use or sexually oriented business that does
not meet all requirements of this Ordinance, all building and fire
code requirements and all provisions of state and federal law.
71
7-19.4(g). NON-CONFORMING USES. Any adult use or sexually oriented
business existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this
section derives may be continued subject to the following:
(1). No such adult use or sexually oriented business shall be
expanded or enlarged except in conformity with this section.
(2). A non-conforming adult use or sexually oriented business shall
be required to apply for and receive an adult use license from the
Town. The Town requires a public hearing before issuing a license
for the non-conforming adult use or sexually oriented business.
7-19.4(h). CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE GENERALLY.
(1). Every license required under this section shall be granted
subject to the conditions in this section and all other sections of this
ordinance or state and federal law.
(2). All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a
conspicuous place.
(3). No minor shall be allowed in or on the premises of an adult use
or sexually oriented business.
(4). Any designated inspection officer or law enforcement officer of
the Town shall have the right to enter, inspect, and search the
premises of a licensee during business hours.
(5). Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his place
of business and shall maintain conditions of this ordinance.
(6). No adult goods, materials or services shall be offered, sold,
transferred, conveyed, given, displayed, or bartered to any minor.
7-19.4(e). CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE FOR ADULT USE PRINCIPAL.
The Town permits adult use principal and sexually oriented businesses
only in the I-2 – Industrial Zoning District subject to the following:
(1). No adult use principal or sexually oriented business shall be
located closer than 1,000 feet from any other adult use principal or
sexually oriented business in any community. Measurements shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to community boundaries,
72
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the
actual business premises of the adult use principal or sexually
oriented business to the nearest point of the actual business
premises of any other adult use principal or sexually oriented
business.
(2). No adult use principal or sexually oriented business shall be
located closer than 500 feet from any residential lot line, place of
worship, school, public park, open space, licensed family day care
home, licensed group family day care home, public library, or
licensed child care or day care center in any community.
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
community boundaries, intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest point of the actual business premises of the adult use
principal or sexually oriented business to the nearest property lien
of the premises or building used as a dwelling or residence, place
of worship, school, public park, open space, licensed family day
care home, licensed group family day care home, public library, or
licensed child care or day care center.
(3). No adult use principal or sexually oriented business shall be
located closer than 500- feet from any residential lot line, any
residential zoning district or any residential planned unit
development (PUD) in any community. Measurements shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to community boundaries,
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the
actual business premises of the adult use or sexually oriented
business to the nearest residential lot line, boundary of the
residential zoning district or planned unit development (PUD).
(4). All adult uses and sexually oriented businesses must follow all
of the sections of this Ordinance.
(5). The Town prohibits any building owner or operator from having
more than one of the following uses, tenants or activities in the
same building or structure:
(i). Adult body painting studio.
(ii). Adult bookstore.
(iii). Adult cabaret.
73
(iv). Adult carwash.
(v). Adult companionship establishment.
(vi). Adult entertainment facility.
(vii). Adult hotel or motel.
(viii). Adult modeling studio.
(ix). Adult sauna/steam room/bathhouse.
(x). Adult motion picture theater.
(xi). Adult mini-motion-picture theater.
(xii). Adult massage parlor.
(xiii). Adult health/sports club.
(xiv). Adult novelty business.
(xv). Adult novelty business
(xvi). Any business or establishment in which there is an
emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or
description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas that the public could see.
(6). An adult use principal or sexually oriented businesses shall not
sell or dispense non-intoxicating or intoxicating liquors, nor shall it
be located in a building that contains a business that sells or
dispenses non-intoxicating or intoxicating liquors.
(7). No adult use principal or sexually oriented business
entertainment shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any
other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the
adult use establishment that is prohibited by any section of this
Ordinance or the laws of the State or the United States. Nothing in
this ordinance shall be constructed as authorizing or permitting
conduct that is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or
ordinances, including not but limited to statutes or ordinances
prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material
74
generally or the exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials
to minors.
(8). No adult use principal or sexually oriented business shall be
conducted in any manner that permits the perception or
observation from any property not approved as an adult use of any
materials depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas by any visual or auditory
media, including display, decoration, sign, show window, sound
transmission or other means.
(9). All adult use principal and sexually oriented businesses shall
prominently display a sign at the entrance and located within two
feet of the door-opening device of the adult use establishment or
section of the establishment devoted too adult books or materials
which states: “This business sells or displays material containing
adult themes. Persons under age 18 years of age shall not enter.”
(10). No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted on or in the
premises of any adult use or sexually oriented business
establishment. No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted
access to material displayed, offered for sale, given, transferred,
conveyed or rented by an adult use or sexually oriented business.
(11). Adult use principal and sexually oriented businesses shall not
be opened between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the
days of Monday through Saturday, nor between 1:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon on Sunday.
7-19.4(f). CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE FOR ADULT USE ACCESSORY.
The Town may issue adult use accessory licenses to businesses or
establishments located in the I-2 zoning district subject to the following
requirements:
(1). The adult use accessory shall comprise no more than 20
percent of the floor area or up to 500 square feet, whichever is
smaller, of the establishment, space, structure or building in which
it is located.
(2). Display areas for adult movie or videotape, or C/D rentals or
other products shall be restricted from general view and shall be
located within a separate room, for which the access is in clear
view and in the control of the person responsible for the operation.
75
(3). Magazines and publications or other similar products classified
or qualified as adult uses shall not be accessible to minors and
shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display
of any materials other than the publication title.
(4). Adult use accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and
external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.
7-19.4(g). REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR NON-RENEWAL.
(1). The Town Board may revoke, suspend, or not renew a license
issued under this section upon recommendation of the Town Clerk
that shows the licensee, its owners, managers, employees, agents
or any other interested parties have engaged in any of the following
conduct:
(i). Fraud, deception or misrepresentation about securing
the license.
(ii). Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in the use of
drugs, including but not limited to the use of drugs defined in
Minnesota Statutes.
(iii). Engaging in conduct involving moral turpitude or
permitted or allowing others within their employ or agency to
engage in conduct involving moral turpitude or failing to
prevent agents, officers, or employees from engaging in
conduct involving moral turpitude.
(iv). Failure to follow any requirements of sections of this
Ordinance or other Town ordinances about sanitary and
safety conditions, zoning requirements, building code
requirements or ordinances, the violation of which involves
moral turpitude, or failure to follow the requirements of this
ordinance.
(v). Conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude.
(vi). The certificate holder may appeal such suspension,
revocation or nonrenewal to the Town Board. The Board
shall consider the appeal at a regularly scheduled public
hearing on or after ten days from service of the notice of
76
appeal to the Town Clerk. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the Board may order:
(a). The revocation, suspension or non-renewal be
affirmed.
(b). The revocation, suspension or non-renewal be
lifted and the certificate be returned to the certificate
holder.
(c). The imposition, at its discretion, of any additional
terms, conditions or stipulations for the suspension or
issuance of the certificate.
SECTION 8. MANAGEMENT OF SHORELAND AREAS.
8-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND POLICY.
8-1.1. Statutory Authorization. This shoreland overlay district is adopted
pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes.
8-1.2. Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of White Bear Township,
Minnesota, affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by
contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base.
Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to
provide for the wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public
waters. The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to local
governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of the
shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface
waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands,
and provide for the use of waters and related land resources. This responsibility is
hereby recognized by White Bear Township.
8-2. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
8-2.1. Jurisdiction. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the shorelands
of the public water bodies as classified in Section 8-4. of this ordinance.
8-2.2. Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public water; the size and shape
of lots; the use, size, type and location of structures on lots; the installation and
maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems, the grading and filling
of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of
land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other
77
applicable regulations.
8-2.3. Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any violation of the provisions
of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of
variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by law. Violations of this ordinance can occur regardless of whether or
not a permit is required for a regulated activity pursuant to Section 8-10.1 of this
Ordinance.
8-2.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this Ordinance
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances
inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of this
inconsistency only.
8-3. DEFINITIONS. Defined in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
8-4. SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.
8-4.1. Shoreland Classification System. The public waters of White Bear
Township have been classified below consistent with the criteria found in
Minnesota Regulations and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Ramsey
County, Minnesota.
8-4.2. The shoreland area for the water bodies listed in this section shall be as
defined in Section 3-66.G and as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
Lakes.
Protected Waters
A. Natural Environment Lakes Common Name Inventory I.D.#
Ox Lake Ox Lake 62-25
(Unnamed) Oak Ridge Pond 62-23
Rice Lake Rice Lake 62-32
Tamarack Lake Tamarack Lake 62-21W
Unnamed Fish Lake 62-22W
Poplar Lake Poplar Lake 62-44
Protected Waters
B. Recreational Development Lakes Inventory I.D.#
Goose Lake 62-33
78
Otter Lake 2-3
Protected Waters
C. General Development Lakes Inventory I.D.#
Bald Eagle Lake 62-2
White Bear Lake 82-167P
D. Tributary Streams
County Ditch #14 connecting Goose Lake to Rice Lake. The Tributary connecting
Bald Eagle Lake with Otter Lake.
*All protected watercourses in White Bear Township shown on the Protected
Waters Inventory Map for Ramsey County, a copy of which is hereby adopted by
reference shall be considered "Tributary".
8-5. LAND USE DISTRICTS. Land use districts are provided in this ordinance.
8-6. ZONING PROVISIONS.
8-6.1. Purpose. To manage the effects of shoreland and water surface crowding,
to prevent pollution of surface and ground waters of the state, to provide ample
space on lots for sewage treatment system, to minimize flood damages, to
maintain property values, to maintain historic values of significant historic sites,
and to maintain natural characteristics of shorelands and adjacent water areas,
shoreland controls must regulate lot sizes, placement of structures, and alterations
of shoreland areas.
8-6.2. Lots of record in the office of the county recorder on the date of enactment
of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of Section 8-6.3. may
be allowed as building sites without variances from lot size requirements provided
the use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership
from abutting lands at all times since it became substandard, was created
compliant with official controls in effect at the time, and sewage treatment and
setback requirements of the shoreland controls are met. Necessary variances
from setback requirements must be obtained before any use, sewage treatment
system, or building permits are issued for the lots. In evaluating all the variances,
boards of adjustment shall consider sewage treatment and water supply
capabilities or constraints of the lots and shall deny the variances if adequate
facilities cannot be provided. If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under
the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of Section
8-6.3, the lots must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the
purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one or more
contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the
79
requirements of Section 8-6.3. as much as possible.
8-6.3. Lot area and width standards for single and duplex residential development;
lake classes. The lot area and width standards for single and duplex residential
developments for the lake classes are:
8-6.3(a). Natural Environment, no sewer:
Lot area (square feet)
Riparian Nonriparian
lots lots
Single 80,000 80,000
Duplex Not allowed Not allowed
Lot width (feet
Single 200 200
8-6.3(b). Recreational Development, no sewer:
Lot area (square feet)
Riparian Nonriparian
lots lots
Single 40,000 40,000
Duplex Not allowed Not allowed
Lot width (feet)
Single 150 150
8-6.3(c). General Development, no sewer:
Lot area (square feet)
Riparian Nonriparian
lots lots
Single 22,000 40,000
Duplex Not allowed Not allowed
Lot width (feet)
Single 100 150
80
8-6.3(d). Natural Environment, sewer:
Lot area (square feet)
Riparian Nonriparian
lots lots
Single 12,000 12,000
Duplex 15,000 15,000
Duplex in R-1 District 18,000 18,000
Lot width (feet)
Single 80 80
Duplex 100 100
8-6.3(e). Recreational Development, sewer:
Lot area (square feet)
Riparian Nonriparian
lots lots
Single 12,000 12,000
Duplex 15,000 15,000
Duplex in R-1 District 18,000 18,000
Lot width (feet)
Single 80 80
Duplex 100 100
8-6.4. Placement and Height of Structures and Facilities on Lots. When more
than one setback requirement applies to a site, structures and facilities must be
located to meet all setbacks. The placement of structures and other facilities on all
lots must be managed by shoreland controls as follows:
8-6.4(a). Structure Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks presented
in the following table for each class of public waters apply to all structures,
except water-oriented accessory structures and facilities that are managed
according to Section 8-6.5:
Structure setback standards (in feet) from 100-year 1% Storm Elevation
Level:
81
100-year 1% Storm Setback from top
Elevation level of bluff (feet)
setback (feet)
Class Unsewered Sewered
Natural environment 75 50 30
Recreational development 75 50 30
General development 75 50 30
Tributary Stream 75 50 30
8-6.4(b). Additional Structure Setbacks. The following additional
structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the water body:
Setback From: Setback (In feet)
Unplatted cemetery 50
Right-of-way line of
federal or state highway; 50
and
Right-of-way line of county 35
highway, town road, public
street, or other roads or
streets not classified.
8-6.4(c). Height of Structures. All structures in residential shoreland
management districts must not exceed 25 feet in height for riparian lots, 35
feet in height for nonriparian lots.
8-6.4(d). High Water Elevations. In addition to the setback requirements
of Section 8-6.4(a), local shoreland controls must regulate placement of
structures in relation to high water elevation. Where state-approved, local
flood plain management controls exist, structures must be placed at an
elevation consistent with the controls. Where these controls do not exist,
the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or
flood-proofed must be determined as follows:
8-6.4(d)(1). For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least
three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above
the 100-year 1% storm elevation level, whichever is higher.
8-6.4(d)(2). Water-oriented accessory structures may have the
82
lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this
section if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to
the elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above
the elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the
structure is built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and
debris.
8-6.4(d)(3). Bluff Impact Zones. Structures and accessory
facilities, except stairways and landings, must not be placed within
bluff impact zones.
8-6.4(d)(4). Uses Without Water-oriented Needs. Uses without
water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without
public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public
waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary
high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from
the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions.
8-6.4(d)(5). Steep Slopes. The Town Code Enforcement Officer
shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development
visibility from public water before issuing a permit for construction of
sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures or other
improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary,
conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and
to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and
other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming
summer, leaf-on vegetation.
8-6.4(d)(6). Accessory Structures and Facilities. Each residential
lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure or facility
located closer to public waters than the structure setback if all of the
following standards are met:
(1). The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in
height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area
greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks must not
exceed eight feet above grade at any point.
(2). The setback of the structure or facility from the critical
storm event level must be at least ten feet.
(3). The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility
83
as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions.
(4). The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but
must not be enclosed or used as a storage area.
(5). The structure or facility must not be designed or used for
human habitation and must not contain water supply or
sewage treatment facilities.
(6). As an alternative for general development and
recreational development water bodies, water-oriented
accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage, and
including storage of related boating and water-oriented
sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square
feet provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as
measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
(7). Any accessory structures or facilities not meeting the
above criteria, or any additional accessory structures or
facilities must meet or exceed structure setback standards.
8-6.4(d)(7). Stairways, Lifts, and Landings. Stairways and lifts are
the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for
achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore
areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design
requirements:
(1). Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial
properties, public open-space recreational properties, and
planned unit developments.
(2). Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must
not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32
square feet may be used for commercial properties, public
open-space recreational properties, and planned unit
developments.
(3). Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or
landings.
84
(4). Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed
above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the
ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that
ensures control of soil erosion.
(5). Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the
surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, whenever practical.
(6). Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for
physically handicapped persons are also allowed for
achieving access to shore areas, provided that the
dimensional and performance standards of sub items (1) to
(5) are complied with in addition to the requirements or
Minnesota Statutes.
8-6.4(d)(8). Decks. Except as provided in Section 8-6.4(d)(5),
decks must meet the structure setback standards. Decks that do not
meet setback requirements from public waters may be allowed
without a variance to be added to structures existing on the date the
shoreland structure setbacks were established by ordinance, if all of
the following criteria and standards are met:
(1). A thorough evaluation of the property and structure
reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or
exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the
structure.
(2). The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water
level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing shoreline
setback off the structure from the ordinary high water level or
does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(3). The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not
roofed or screened.
8-6.5. Shoreland Alterations. Vegetative alterations and excavations or grading
and filling necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment
systems under validly issued permits for these facilities are exempt from the
vegetative alteration standards in this subdivision and separate permit
requirements for grading and filling. However, the grading and filling conditions of
85
this subdivision must be met for issuance of permits for structures and sewage
treatment systems. Public roads and parking areas, as regulated by Section 8-6.6,
are exempt from the provisions of this part.
8-6.5(a). Removal or alterations of vegetation is allowed according to the
following standards:
(1). Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact
zones and on steep slopes is not allowed.
(2). Limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, picnic areas, access paths, beach and watercraft access
areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities,
as well as providing a view to the water from the principal dwelling
site, in shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is allowed,
provided that:
(i). The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions,
is not substantially reduced;
(ii). The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
vegetation that is dead, diseased, hazardous or storm
damaged;
Must be removed to prevent the spread of diseases or insect
pests, as diagnosed and recommended by a licenses arborist;
Removal of invasive non-native species;
Restoration and erosion control activities consistent with a
plan approved by the Town Board and Rice Creek Watershed
District or VLAWMO.
(iii). Tree removal in the Shore Impact Zone is limited to 10%
of the existing significant trees.
(iv.) Legacy trees shall not be removed unless they are dead,
diseased, dying, hazardous, or storm damaged as defined by
Town Staff or a licensed arborist.
(v). The Town may approve removal of existing significant
trees on a lot exceed 10% of the Shore Impact Zone limitation
when a re-landscaping plan is approved by the Town Board.
86
(3). Use of fertilizer and pesticides in the shoreland management
district must be done in such a way as to minimize runoff into the
shore impact zone or public water by the use of earthy, vegetation,
or both.
8-6.5(b). Before grading and filling on steep slopes or within shore or bluff
impact zones involving the movement of more than ten cubic yards of
material or anywhere else in a shoreland area involving movement of more
than 50 cubic yards of material. The following conditions must also be
considered during subdivision, variance, building permit, and other
conditional use permit reviews.
(1). Before authorizing any grading or filling activity in any type 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 wetland, the Town Board shall consider how
extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional
qualities of the wetland:
(i). sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
(ii). storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood
damage.
(iii). fish and wildlife habitat;
(iv). recreational use;
(v). shoreline or bank stabilization; or
(iv). noteworthiness, including special qualities such as
historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and
animals, or others.
This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the
wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or
approvals by other local, state, or federal agencies such as a
watershed district, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources,
or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
(2). Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the
shortest time possible.
87
(3). Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for
temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover
must be established as soon as possible.
(4). Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before
they reach any surface water feature must be used.
(5). Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local
soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil
Conservation Service.
(6). Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope.
(7). Plans to place fill or excavate material on steep slopes must be
reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and
must not create finished slopes of 30 percent or greater.
(8). Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact
zones.
(9). Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public
waters must first be authorized by the commissioner under
Minnesota Statutes.
(10). Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely
affect adjacent or nearby properties.
(11). Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading
of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the
finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the
ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the
ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet.
8-6.5(c). Connections to Public Waters. Excavations where the intended
purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons,
and harbors shall meet the requirements set forth in Section 9-5.5(b).
Permission may be given only after the commissioner has approved the
proposed connection to public waters.
88
8-6.6. Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and
parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to
public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and
water conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.
8-6.6(a). Placement and Design of Roads, Driveways, and Parking
Areas. Public and private roads, driveways, and parking areas must be
designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to
achieve maximum screening from view from public waters.
8-6.6(b). Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure
setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when
other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no
alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and must be
designed to minimize adverse impacts.
8-6.6(c). Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones
provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this
subpart are met. For private ramps Section 8-6.5(b) must also be met.
8-6.7. Standards for Commercial, Industrial, Public and Semi-Public Uses.
8-6.7(a). Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or
semi-public uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public
waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters.
Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards:
(1). In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and
other zoning standards in this ordinance, the uses must be designed
to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas
and structures;
(2). Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must
centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of
navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need;
and
(3). Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use
signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject
to the following general standards:
(i). No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may
89
be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying
information or safety messages may be placed in or on public
waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the
county sheriff;
(ii). No signs shall be placed on the lakeside portion of a
property.
(iii). Other outside lighting may be located within the shore
impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to
illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or
otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across
public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational
lights.
8-6.7(b). Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or
parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with
public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary
high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the
water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
8-6.8. Storm water Management.
8-6.8(a). The following are general standards:
(1). When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and
retain storm water runoff before discharge to public waters.
(2). Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that
will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas
must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or
methods used to retain sediment on the site.
(3). When development density, topographic features, and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm
water runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of
constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming
devises, dikes, waterways, ponds may be used. Preference must be
given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration
rather than buried pipes and man-made materials and facilities.
90
8-6.8(b). The following are specific standards:
(1). Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25 percent
of the lot area.
(2). When constructed facilities are used for storm water
management, they must be designed and installed consistent with
the field office technical guide of the local soil and water
conservation districts.
(3). New constructed storm water outfalls to public waters must
provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of
surface debris before discharge.
SECTION 8-7. CONTROLLED ACCESS TO PUBLIC WATERS.
8-7.1. Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as recreation
areas for use by owners of nonriparian lots within subdivisions are permissible and
must meet or exceed the following standards:
(1). They must meet the width and size requirements for residential
lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access lots.
(2). If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than six (6)
watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width
of the lot (keeping the same lot depth), must be increased by the
percent of the requirements for riparian residential lots for each
watercraft beyond six, consistent with the following table:
Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements
Ratio of lake size Required increase
to shore length in frontage
(acres/mile) (percent)
Less than 100 25
100-200 20
201-300 15
301-400 10
Greater than 400 5
(3). They must be controlled or owned by the Town or be jointly
owned by all purchasers of lots in the subdivision or by all
purchasers of nonriparian lots in the subdivision who are provided
91
riparian access rights to the access lot; and
(4). Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments must be
developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the
access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may include
watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or
docking. They must also include other outdoor recreational activities
that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public
water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent
property owners. Examples of the nonsignificant conflict activities
include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The covenants must
limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total
number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or
stored over water, and must require centralization of all common
facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to
minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also
require all parking areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be
screened by vegetation or topography as much as practical from
view from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
SECTION 8-8. WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE TREATMENT.
8-8.1. Water Supply. Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes
must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of
Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
8-8.2. Sewage Treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:
8-8.2(a). Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where available.
8-8.2(b). All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's standards for individual sewage
treatment systems contained in the document titled, "Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems Standards, Chapter 7080", a copy of which is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance and
Ordinance No. 70 (Individual Sewage Treatment System).
8-8.2(c). On-site sewage treatments systems must be set back from the
ordinary high water level in accordance with the following table:
Sewage Treatment System Setback Standards
92
Class Setback from ordinary
high water level (feet)
Natural environment 150
Recreational development 75
General developments 50
Tributary Streams 75
8-8.2(d). All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems shall
be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in sub items (1)-(4). If the
determination of a site's suitability cannot be made with publicly available,
existing information, it shall then be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide sufficient soil borings and percolation tests from on-site field
investigations.
Evaluation criteria:
(1). Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table or
bedrock;
(2). Soil conditions, properties, and permeability;
(3). Slope;
(4). The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock
outcrops;
8-8.2(e). Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and
upgraded in accordance with Section 8-8.3 of this Ordinance.
8-8.3. Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems.
8-8.3(a). A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of
Section 8-8 of this Ordinance must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time
a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use
of, the property. For the purposes of these provisions, a sewage treatment
system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the
sewage treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water
level.
8-8.3(b). The governing body of White Bear Township has, by formal
resolution, notified the commissioner of its program to identify
nonconforming sewage treatment systems. White Bear Township will
require upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming system identified
by this program within a reasonable period of time which will not exceed two
(2) years. Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local
shoreland management standards adopted under Minnesota Statutes in
93
effect at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless
they are determined to be failing, except that system , cesspools, leaching
pits, seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil
treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Chapter 7080 for design of on-site
sewage treatment systems, shall be considered non-conforming.
SECTION 8-9. SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS: Subdivision regulations are provided in
Ordinance No. 15 (Subdivision) of the Township code.
8-9.1. Land Suitability. Each lot created through subdivision must be suitable in
its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by
the local unit or government shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of
wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe
erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment
capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation,
important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other
feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of
future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
8-9.2. Platting. All subdivisions that create five or more lots or parcels that are 2
1/2 acres or less in size are processed as plats in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes.
8-9.3. Consistency with other controls.
8-9.4. Information Requirements. Provided in Ordinance No. 15 (Subdivision) of
the Township.
8-9.4(a). Topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less from United
States Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting
site characteristics;
8-9.4(b). All surface water features required by Minnesota Statutes, shall
be shown on plats, obtained from United States Geological Survey
quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;
8-9.4(c). Adequate soil information to determine suitability for building on
on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current
existing sources or from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation
tests, or other methods.
8-9.4(d). Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent
94
of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic
conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic
vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling storm water runoff and
erosion, both during and after construction activities; and
8-9.4(e). Location of 100-year flood plain areas from existing maps or data.
8-9.4(f). A line or contour representing the critical storm event level and
elevation, the "toe" and the "top" of bluffs, and the minimum building
setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.
8-9.5. Dedications. If local governments require land or easement dedications,
they must provide easements over natural drainage or ponding areas for
management of storm water and significant wetlands.
8-10. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD'S)
8-10.1. Types of PUD's Permissible. Planned unit developments (PUD's) are
allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built
sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land.
8-10-2. Processing of PUD's. Planned unit developments must be processed as
a conditional use. Approval cannot occur until the environmental review process
(EAW/EIS) is complete.
8-10-3. Applicant for PUD. The applicant for a PUD shall be processed in
accordance with the application review and performance of Section 8-4,
(Conditional Use Permit Procedure) of this ordinance and Ordinance No. 15
(Subdivision). The following shall also be provided:
8-10.3.(a). Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other
instruments that: 1) properly address future vegetative and topographic
alterations, construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft, and
construction of commercial buildings in residential PUD's; and 2) ensure the
long-term preservation and maintenance of open space in accordance with
the criteria and analysis specified in Section 8-10.6 of this ordinance.
8-10.3(b). When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the project
and the floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied.
8-10.3(c). Those additional documents as requested by the Town Board
that are necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed and will
function.
95
8-10.4. Site "Suitable Area" Evaluation. Proposed new or expansions to
existing planned unit developments must be evaluated using the following
procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling
unit/dwelling site density evaluation in Section 8-10.5.
8-10.4(a). The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating one or
more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high
water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:
Shoreland Tier Dimensions
Unsewered Sewered
(feet) (feet)
General development lakesfirst
tier 200 200
General development lakessecond
and additional tiers 267 200
Recreational development lakes 267 267
Natural environment lakes 400 320
All river classes 300 300
8-10.4(b). The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding
from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water
level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project are then
subjected to either the residential or commercial planned unit development
density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units
or sites.
8-10.5. Residential and Commercial PUD "Base" Density Evaluation: The
procedures for determining the "base" density of a PUD and density increase
multipliers are as follows: Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to
any other tier further from the water body, but must not be transferred to any other
tier closer.
8-10.5(a). Residential PUD "Base Density Evaluation".
(1). The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single
residential lot size standard for lakes, or for rivers, the single
residential lot width standard times the tier depth. Proposed
locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the residential
planned unit developments are then compared with the tier, density,
and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in Section 8-
96
10.6. The density of any residential PUD shall not exceed 6 units
per acre.
8-10.5(b). Commercial PUD "Base" Density Evaluation.
(1). Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling units or
sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and
sites. Computation of inside living area sizes need not include
decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages, or porches and basements,
unless they are habitable space.
(2). Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table:
Commercial Planned Unit Development
Floor Area Ratios*
Public Waters Classes
Sewered general
development lakes; Second and
first tier on Additional tiers
unsewered general on unsewered Natural
*Average development lakes general development environ
unit floor urban tributary lakes; recreational ment
area (sq ft) river segments development lakes lakes
200 .040 .020 .010
300 .048 .024 .012
400 .056 .028 .014
500 .065 .032 .016
600 .072 .038 .019
700 .082 .042 .021
800 .091 .046 .023
900 .099 .050 .025
1000 .108 .054 .027
1100 .116 .058 .029
1200 .125 .064 .032
1300 .133 .068 .034
1400 .142 .072 .036
1500 .150 .075 .038
* For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios listed for
200 square feet. For areas greater than shown, use the ratios listed for 1500
square feet. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at 400 square
97
feet.
(3). Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area ratio
to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling
units or sites.
(4). Divide the total floor area by tier computed in Item (3) above by
the average inside living area size determined in Item (1) above.
This yields a base number of dwelling units and site for each tier.
(5). Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for
the commercial planned unit development are then compared with
the tier, density and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria
in Section 8-10.6.
8-10.5(c). Density Increase Multipliers:
(1). Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base densities
previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in
Section 8-6 are met or exceeded and the design criteria in Section 8-
10.6 are satisfied. The allowable density increase in Item 2 below
will only be allowed in structure setbacks from the ordinary high
water level which are increased to at least 50 percent greater than
the minimum setback, or the impact on the water body is reduced an
equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography, or
additional means acceptable to the local unit of government and the
setback is at least 25 percent greater than the minimum setback.
(2). Allowable Dwelling Unit or Dwelling Site Density Increases for
Residential or Commercial Planned Unit Developments:
Density evaluation Maximum density increase
tiers within each tier (percent)
First 50
Second 100
Third 200
Fourth 200
Fifth 200
8-10.6. Maintenance and Design Criteria.
8-10.6(a). Maintenance and Administration Requirements.
98
(1). Before final approval of a planned unit development, adequate
provisions must be developed for preservation and maintenance in
perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and
functioning of the development.
(2). Open Space Preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants,
permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other
equally effective and permanent means must be provided to ensure
long-term preservation and maintenance of open space. The
instruments must include all of the following protections:
(i). Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUD's);
(ii). Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine
maintenance prohibited;
(iii). Construction of additional buildings or storage of
vehicles and other materials prohibited; and
(iv). Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited.
(3). Development Organization and Functioning. Unless an
equally effective alternative community framework is established,
when applicable, all residential planned unit developments must use
an owners association with the following features:
(i). Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or
site purchaser and any successive purchasers;
(ii). Each member must pay pro rata share of the
association's expenses, and unpaid assessments can
become liens on units or sites;
(iii). Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate
changing conditions; and
(iv). The association must be responsible for insurance,
taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and
facilities.
8-10.6(b). Open Space Requirements. Planned unit developments must
contain open space meeting all of the following criteria:
99
(1). At least 50 percent of the total project area must be preserved
as open space;
(2). Dwelling units or sites, road right-of-way, or land covered by
road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water-oriented
accessory structures of facilities, are developed areas and shall not
be included in the computation of minimum space;
(3). Open space must include areas with physical characteristics
unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas
containing significant historic sites and unplatted cemeteries;
(4). Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use
by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial
dwelling units or sites, and by the general public;
(5). Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems
if the use of the space is restricted to void adverse impacts on the
systems;
(6). Open space must not include commercial facilities or uses, but
may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities;
(7). The appearance of open space areas, including topography,
vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of
restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication
and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means;
and
(8). The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks,
must be included as open space. For residential PUD's at least 50
percent of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or at
least 70 percent of the shore impact zone area of the new
developments must be preserved in its natural or existing state. For
commercial PUD's, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone
must be preserved in its natural state.
8-10.6(c). Erosion Control and Storm water Management. Erosion
control and storm water management plans must be developed and the
PUD must:
(1). Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the
likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after
100
construction. This must be accomplished by limiting the amount and
length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers,
sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other
appropriate techniques must be used to minimize erosion impacts on
surface water features. Erosion control plans approved by a soil and
water conservation district may be required if project size and site
physical characteristics warrant; and
(2). Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably
expected quantities and qualities of storm water runoff. Impervious
surface coverage within any tier must not exceed 25 percent of the
tier area, except that for commercial PUD's 35 percent impervious
surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of general
development lakes with an approved storm water management plan
and consistency with Section 6-5.
8-10.6(d). Centralization and Design of Facilities. Centralization and
design of facilities and structures must be done according to the following
standards:
(1). Planned unit developments must be connected to publicly
owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water
supply and sewage treatment systems must be centralized and
designed and installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or
rules of the Minnesota Department of Health and Sections 6-4 and 8
of this Ordinance. On-site sewage treatment systems must be
located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient
lawn area free of limiting factors must be provided for a replacement
or treatment system for each sewage system;
(2). Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one or more
groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They
must be designed and located to meet or exceed the following
dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification;
setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the
surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the
ordinary high water level must be increased in accordance with
Section 8-10.5 of this Ordinance for developments with density
increases;
(3). Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming
areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps,
must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them.
101
Evaluation of suitability must include consideration of land slope,
water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or
other relevant factors. The number of spaces provided for
continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft must not
exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier
(notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing commercial
used harbor). Launching ramp facilities including a small dock for
loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by
occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers;
(4). Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent
shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or
other means acceptable to the local unit of government, assuming
summer leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening
must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided;
(5). Accessory structures and facilities, except water oriented
accessory structures, must meet the required principal structure
setback and must be centralized; and
(6). Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be
allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in
Section 8-6.4 of this ordinance and are centralized.
8-10.7. Conversions. Existing land uses and facilities may be converted to
residential planned unit developments if all of the following standards are met:
8-10.7(a). Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the same
procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all new
construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the development
and these standards must be identified.
8-10.7(b). Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment,
structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore recreation
facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the
conditional use permit.
8-10.7(c). Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated and
reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These
improvements must include, where applicable, the following:
(1). Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities that
102
no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones;
(2). Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve
vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as
viewed from the water, and
(3). If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff impact
zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that
preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial
alterations. The conditions must also provide for future relocation of
dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback
and elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced.
8-10.7(d). Existing dwelling units or dwelling site densities that exceed
standards in Section 8-10.5 may be allowed to continue but must not be
allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the future.
Efforts must be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high
densities by requiring seasonal use, improvement vegetative screening,
centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatments
systems, or other means.
SECTION 8-11. ADMINISTRATION.
8-11.1. Permits Required. A permit is required for the construction of buildings
or building additions (and including such related activities as construction of decks
and signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, and
those grading and filling activities not exempted by Section 8-6.5 of this ordinance.
Application for a permit shall be made to the building official. The application shall
include the necessary information so that the building official can determine the
site's suitability for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment
system will be provided.
8-11.1(a). A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall
stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system, as
defined by the Ordinance No. 70 (Individual Sewage Treatment Systems),
shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
8-11.2. Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The building official shall issue a
certificate of zoning compliance for each activity requiring a permit as specified in
Section 8-11.1 of this Ordinance. This certificate will specify that the use of land
conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a violation
103
of this ordinance and shall be punishable as provided in Section 8-2.3 of this
Ordinance.
8-11.3. Variances. Variances may only be granted in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes, as applicable. They may not circumvent the general purposes and intent
of the official controls. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that
is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
Conditions may be imposed in the granting of variances to ensure compliance and
to protect adjacent properties and the public interest. In considering variance
requests, boards of adjustment must also consider whether property owners have
reasonable use of the lands without the variances, whether existing sewage
treatment systems on the properties need upgrading before additional
development is approved, whether the variances are being requested solely on the
basis of economic considerations, and the characteristics of development on
adjacent property.
8-11.4. Conditional Uses. The following standards along with the requirements
of Section 9-4, are incorporated into local controls and used for reviewing
conditional uses located in shoreland area:
8-11.4(a). A thorough evaluation of the topographic, vegetation, and soil
conditions on the site to ensure:
(1). Prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public
waters, both before and after construction;
(2). Limiting visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from
public waters; and
(3). Adequacy of the site for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment; and
8-11.4(b). An assessment of the types, uses, numbers of watercraft that
the project will generate in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely
accommodate these watercraft.
8-11.5. Non-conformities.
8-11.5(a). On-site sewage treatment systems identified as nonconforming
under Minnesota Statutes in effect at the time of installation, may be
considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except
that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep
disposal methods, or systems with less soil treatment area separation
104
above groundwater than required by Ordinance No. 70 (Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems) , shall be considered nonconforming.
8-11.5(b). All non-conformities other than on-site sewage treatment
systems must be managed according to applicable state statutes and local
government official controls.
8-11.6. Notification Procedures.
8-11.6(a). Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider
variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the
commissioner's designated representative and postmarked at least ten
days before the hearings. Notice of hearings to consider proposed plats
must include copies of the plats.
8-11.6(b). A copy of approved amendments and plats, and final decisions
granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management
controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's
designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action.
SECTION 9. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
9-1. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Code Enforcement officer shall be
appointed by the Town Board and shall:
9-1.1. Administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with
it's literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any use or change of use
which does not conform to this Ordinance.
9-1.2. Issue Zoning Certificates, building permits, and Certificates of Occupancy.
9-1.3. Maintain a permanent file of all permits, Zoning Certificates and Certificates
of Occupancy.
9-2. ZONING CERTIFICATE. The issuance of a Zoning Certificate by the Town
Clerk certifies that a person has complied with all administrative requirements to proceed
with a use. The Town Clerk may revoke a Zoning Certificate that has been issued in
error.
9-2.1. A Zoning Certificate shall be obtained before any person may act pursuant
to a:
105
9-2.1(a). Residential Planned Unit Development
9-2.1(b). Special Home Occupation Permit
9-2.1(c). Non-conforming Use Permit
9-2.1(d). Permitted Use Standards
9-2.1(e). Conditional use Permit
9-2.1(f). Wetlands Permit
9-2.1(g). Variance
9-2.2. Applications for a Zoning Certificate and related permit shall be
accompanied by a plot plan showing clearly and completely the location,
dimensions and nature of any structure involved and for such other information as
the Town Clerk may require for administration of this Ordinance, together with a
filing fee required in accordance with a schedule adopted by Town Ordinance.
9-2.3. Activities authorized by a Zoning Certificate shall be initiated within six (6)
months after issuance of the Zoning Certificate, or the Zoning Certificate shall
lapse and be of no further force and effect. The Town Board may grant one (1)
extension of six (6) months, pursuant to Section 9-2.3(a) of this Ordinance.
9-2.3(a). Extensions. The Town Board may grant one extension of time to
commence activities authorized by a Zoning Certificate. The permittee shall
file with the Town Clerk a written report prior to the date established for
commencement of activities. The written request shall set forth the reasons
for the requested extensions.
9-2.3(b). Abandonment. A project that has been authorized by a Zoning
Certificate but has been abandoned for a period of six (6) months, will
cause that Zoning Certificate to lapse and be of no further force and effect.
An abandoned project will not be granted any extension under 9-2.3(a) of
this Ordinance.
9-3. PERMITTED USE STANDARDS PROCEDURE.
9-3.1. GENERAL. All permitted uses as specified in Section 6-4 (Permitted Uses)
shall comply with the Permitted Use Standards approved by the Town Board, after
recommendations by the Planning Commission, in accordance with the following
provisions:
106
9-3.1(a). The requirements of this section shall not apply to permitted
single family dwellings, garages and accessory buildings auxiliary to single
family dwellings, and permitted home occupations.
9-3.1(b). All Special Use Permits issued pursuant to this Ordinance, as
amended on September 18, 1978, and all Design Standards Permits issued
pursuant to this Ordinance, as amended on January 9, 1984, shall be
adopted by reference as Permitted Use Standards and controlled by the
provisions of this section.
9-3.2. APPLICATIONS. Applications for Permitted Use Standards shall be filed
with the Town Clerk together with the review and approval of all governmental
agencies having such authority.
9-3.2(a). An application fee in an amount established by Town Ordinance
shall accompany the application.
9-3.2(b). The applicant shall provide ten (10) copies of the site plan and
building plans together with all supporting data. This information shall be
submitted in the following manner:
(1). The site plan shall contain the following data:
(i). A scale no greater than one inch equal to one hundred
feet (1" = 100'), and no less than one-quarter inch equals one
foot (1/4" = 1').
(ii). The location of the site and the use of adjacent land.
(iii). Existing topography having a contour interval of no
greater than two (2) feet.
(iv). Site grading and drainage plan having a contour interval
of no greater than two (2) feet.
(v). Delineation of all streams, water bodies and wetlands
including the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
classification, water depth and one hundred (100) year/one
(1%) percent storm elevation.
(vi). Location of all buildings, open spaces, recreation areas,
utility areas, service areas, access drives, parking areas,
storage areas, proposed utility lines, existing utility lines and
107
easements.
(vii). Location and description of all other site improvements
including fences, walls, signs, lighting, walkways, patios,
decks and barriers.
(viii). Delineation of all areas to be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used,
and location and function of all yards.
(ix). A proposed landscaping plan, showing all existing trees
over six (6) inches in diameter, and large shrub massings.
(2). Building plans shall indicate the size, location and intended use
of all structures, and preliminary architectural plans for all proposed
structures including exterior finishes, floor plans and elevations.
(3). The application shall include a time schedule for the proposed
construction and development of the use.
(4). The Town Board may require the applicant to provide additional
information where such information is deemed necessary for review
of the application. The Town Board may waive any of the
requirements of Section 9-3.2(b) where such information is deemed
not necessary for review of the application.
9-3.3. REVIEW
9-3.3(a). The Town Clerk shall forward the copies of the application to
appropriate staff and consultants for review and comment.
9-3.3(b). The application, together with staff, consultant and agency
reviews, shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for its review and
recommendation.
9-3.3(c). The Town Clerk shall forward all comments and
recommendations to the Town Board for a decision following the Planning
Commission meeting.
9-3.3(d). The Town Board shall approve the Permitted Use Standards,
consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. All affected permitted uses
shall be entitled to the issuance of Permitted Use Standards.
108
9-3.3(e). The Town Board may attach such standards as deemed
necessary to the approval of any Permitted Use Standards, based upon the
health, safety and welfare of the Town. All development, construction and
use shall be in accordance with the approved plans, unless an amended
application is submitted and approved. Any development or use contrary to
the approved plan and Permitted Use Standards shall constitute a violation
of this Ordinance.
9-3.4. STANDARDS. A Permitted Use Standards application shall be approved if
it is found to meet all standards set forth in this section.
9-3.4(a). The use shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained
to avoid:
(1). Unnecessary detraction from the appearance of adjacent
properties or from the Town as a whole.
(2). Aesthetic incompatibility.
(3). Aural Incompatibility.
(4). Damage to vegetation.
(5). Traffic pattern incompatibility.
(6). Erosion of soil.
(7). Unnecessary loss of existing natural features (vegetation, steep
slopes, wetlands, water bodies).
(8). Increased flood potential.
9-3.4(b). No development shall be allowed which will result in unusual
maintenance or repair costs of road, parking areas or utility lines.
9-3.4(c). Development shall be permitted only in such a manner that the
maximum number of trees shall be preserved. It shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate that there are no feasible alternatives to the
cutting of trees on the site.
9-3.4(d). The types and density of land use proposed for the site shall be
suited to the site conditions and shall adequately correct problems due to
soil limitations, including but not limited to, bearing strength, shrink-swell
109
potential, slope stability, high groundwater, or wetness.
9-3.4(e). The proposed use shall be sited, designed, oriented and
landscaped to produce a harmonious relationship of building and grounds
to buildings and properties in the neighborhood.
9-3.4(f). The proposed use shall show sufficient landscaping to screen
undesirable features and to enhance the development.
9-3.4(g). The proposed use shall preserve the objectives of this Ordinance
and shall be consistent with the policy and recommendations of the
Comprehensive Plan.
9-3.4(h). Fire prevention and fighting equipment acceptable to the Board of
Fire Underwriters and Town Board shall be readily available when any
activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials
is carried on.
9-3.5. PERFORMANCE.
9-3.5(a). In order to determine whether a proposed permitted use will
conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Town Board may obtain
the services of qualified professional consultants, the costs of which shall
be borne by the applicant, to review the Permitted Use Standards
application.
9-3.5(b). Activities authorized by the Permitted Use Standards shall be
initiated within six (6) months after approval by the Town Board. If such
activity is not initiated within such time period, the approval shall be void,
unless an extension is approved by the Town Board pursuant to Section 9-
2.3 of this Ordinance.
9-3.5(c). Upon approval of Permitted Use Standards for a business or
industrial use, a business license shall be issued for the balance of the
calendar year, and renewed for periods of one (1) year each. All
applications for business license renewals shall be processed
administratively by the Town Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee
established by Town Ordinance. Failure of a licensee to renew a business
license shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
9-3.5(d). The Town Board reserves the right, upon issuing Permitted Use
Standards, to inspect the premises in which the use is being conducted to
insure compliance with the provisions of this section and any standards
110
additionally imposed.
9-3.5(e). Failure of a permitted use standards grantee to comply with the
provisions of this section or any standards additionally imposed in the
Permitted Use Standards shall result in the revocation of such permit, after
notice and hearing by the Town Board.
9-4. CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCEDURE.
9-4.1. GENERAL. A conditional use as specified in Section 6-5 (Conditional
Uses) may be approved or denied by the Town Board, after recommendations by
the Planning Commission, in accordance with the following provisions.
9-4.2. APPLICATIONS. Applications for Conditional Use Permits shall be filed
with the Town Clerk together with the review and approval of all governmental
agencies having such authority.
9-4.2(a). An application fee in an amount established by Town Ordinance
shall accompany the application.
9-4.2(b). The applicant shall provide ten (10) copies of the site plan and
building plans together with all supporting data. This information shall be
submitted in the following manner:
(1). The site plan shall contain the following data:
(i). A scale no greater than one inch equals one hundred fee
(1" = 100'), and no less than one-quarter inch equals one foot
(1/4" = 1').
(ii). The location of the site and the use of adjacent land.
(iii). Existing topography having a contour interval of no
greater than two (2) feet.
(iv). Site grading and drainage plan having a contour interval
of no greater than two (2) feet.
(v). Delineation of all streams, water bodies and wetlands
including the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
classification, water depth and one hundred (1) year/one (1%)
percent storm elevation.
111
(vi). Location of all buildings, open spaces, recreation areas,
utility areas, service areas, access drives, parking areas,
storage areas, proposed utility lines, existing utility lines and
easements.
(vii). Location and description of all other site improvements
including fences, walls, signs, lighting, walkways, patios,
decks and barriers.
(viii). Delineation of all areas to be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used,
and location and function of all yards.
(ix). A proposed landscaping plan, showing all existing trees
over six (6) inches in diameter, and large shrub massings.
(2). Building plans shall indicate the size, location and intended use
of all structures, and preliminary architectural plans for all proposed
structures including exterior finishes, floor plans and elevations.
(3). The application shall include a time schedule for the proposed
construction and development of the use.
(4). The Town Board may require the applicant to provide additional
information where such information is deemed necessary for review
of the application. The Town Board may waive any of the
requirements of Section 9-4.2(b), where such information is deemed
not necessary for review of the application.
9-4.3. REVIEW.
9-4.3(a). The Town Clerk shall forward the copies of the application to
appropriate staff and consultants for review and comment.
9-4.3(b). The application, together with staff, consultant and agency
reviews, shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for its review and
recommendation.
9-4.3(c). The Town Clerk shall forward all comments and
recommendations to the Town Board for a decision following the Planning
Commission meeting.
9-4.3(d). An optional public hearing by the Planning Commission may be
112
held before it has made a recommendation to the Town Board, and so long
as the Town Board has not approved or denied a Conditional Use Permit.
The optional public hearing may be initiated by the Planning Commission or
by an application of not less than five (5) Town residents who are
freeholders. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper of the Town, at least ten (10) days prior
to the day of the hearing.
9-4.3(e). The Town Board shall conduct a public hearing to determine
whether a Conditional Use Permit shall be approved or denied. A notice of
the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Town, at least ten (10) days prior to the day of the
hearing.
9-4.3(f). The Town Board may attach such conditions as deemed
necessary to the approval of any Conditional Use Permit, based upon the
health, safety and welfare of the Town. All development, construction and
use shall be in accordance with the approved plans, unless an amended
application is submitted and approved. Any development or use contrary to
the approved plan and Conditional Use Permit shall constitute a violation of
this Ordinance.
9-4.4. STANDARDS. A Conditional Use Permit application shall be approved if it
is found to meet all standards set forth in the following provisions.
9-4.4(a). The proposed use shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to avoid:
(1). Unnecessary detraction from the appearance of adjacent
properties or from the Town as a whole.
(2). Aesthetic incompatibility.
(3). Aural Incompatibility.
(4). Damage to vegetation.
(5). Traffic pattern incompatibility.
(6). Erosion of soil.
(7). Unnecessary loss of existing natural features (vegetation, steep
slopes, wetlands, water bodies).
(8). Increased flood potential.
9-4.4(b). The proposed use shall meet all reasonable requirements, as set
forth by the Town Board, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the Town. Uses proposed for "O-S" Open Space districts shall provide for a
level of police protection and civilian supervision as set forth by the Town
113
Board to ensure supervision and maintenance of said districts.
9-4.4(c). Fire prevention and fighting equipment acceptable to the Board of
Fire Underwriters and Town Board shall be readily available when any
activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials
is carried on.
9-4.4(d). The proposed use shall bear the cost of all additional water
availability (W.A.C.) charges, pursuant to Ordinance No. 12 (Regulating
Use of Water), and sewer availability (S.A.C.) charges, pursuant to
Ordinance No. 36 (Sewer Service Availability and Charges), where the
proposed use expands upon a pre-existing use.
9-4.4(e). The proposed use shall not result in the destruction, loss or
damage of a natural, scenic, environmental or historic feature of the Town.
9-4.4(f). The proposed use shall not depreciate the value of adjacent
properties.
9-4.4(g). The proposed use shall be sited, oriented, designed, landscaped
and maintained to produce a harmonious relationship of buildings and
grounds to adjacent buildings and properties.
9-4.4(h). The proposed use shall organize vehicular access and parking to
minimize traffic congestion to adjacent properties.
9-4.4(i). The proposed use shall preserve and incorporate the site's natural
and scenic features into the development design.
9-4.4(j). The proposed use shall have no negative impact of noise, glare or
odor effects on adjacent properties.
9-4.4(k). The proposed use shall preserve the objectives of this Ordinance
and shall be consistent with the policy and plan recommendations of the
Comprehensive Plan.
9-4.5. PERFORMANCE.
9-4.5(a). In order to determine whether a proposed conditional use will
conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Town Board may obtain
the services of qualified professional consultants, the costs of which shall
be borne by the applicant, to review the Conditional Use Permit application.
114
9-4.5(b). Activities authorized by a Conditional Use Permit shall be initiated
within six (6) months after approval of the Town Board. If such activity is
not initiated within such period, the Conditional Use Permit shall be void,
unless an extension is approved by the Town Board pursuant to Section 9-
2.3 of this Ordinance.
9-4.5(c). Upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit for a business or
industrial use, a business license shall be issued to such use for the
balance of the calendar year, and renewed for periods of one (1) year each.
All applications for business license renewals shall be processed
administratively by the Town Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee
established by Town Ordinance. Failure of a licensee to renew a business
license shall result in notice and hearing by the Town Board for revocation
of the licensee's Conditional Use Permit.
9-4.5(d). If an application for a Conditional Use permit is denied, no
proceeding for a Conditional Use permit involving the same property and
the same conditional use shall be initiated within one (1) year from the date
of its denial, unless authorized by the Town Board.
9-4.5(e). The Town Board reserves the right, upon issuing any Conditional
Use Permit, to inspect the premises in which the use is being conducted to
insure compliance with the provisions of this section and any conditions
additionally imposed.
9-4.5(f). Failure of a conditional use permittee to comply with the provisions
of this section or any conditions imposed in the Conditional Use Permit shall
result in the revocation of such permit, after notice and hearing by the Town
Board.
9-5. WETLANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT PERMIT PROCEDURE.
9-5.1. OVERLAY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. This section shall apply to the
wetland areas which are specifically delineated on the official Zoning Map of the
Town of White Bear, as well as such other land areas having a predominance of
hydric soils that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
do support, a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions. For purposes of determining the application of this
section to any particular parcel of land or water, an on-site field investigation will be
required prior to all development. The above referenced map shall be on file in the
office of the Town Clerk and shall be available for inspection and copying.
115
9-5.1(a). STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. This Ordinance
hereby adopts by reference Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420, Sections
8420.0100, 8420.0102, 8420.0103, 8420.0105, 8420.0110, 8420.0112,
8420.0115, 8420.0120, 8420.0122, 8420.0200, 8420.0210, 8420.0220,
8420.0225, 8420.0230, 8420.0235, 8420.0240, 8420.0245, 8420.0250,
8420.0260, 8420.0268, 8420.0270, 8420.0280, 8420.0290, 8420.0300,
8420.0350, 8420.0400, 8420.0500, 8420.0505, 8420.0510, 8420.0520,
8420.0530, 8420.0540, 8420.0550, 8420.0600, 8420.0610, 8420.0620,
8420.0630, 8420.0650, 8420.0700, 8420.0710, 8420.0720, 8420.0730,
8420.0740, 8420.0750, 8420.0760, 8420.1010, 8420.1020, 8420.1030,
8420.1040, 8420.1050, 8420.1060, and 8420.1070, as amended, being
the sections containing the wetland permit procedures.
9-5.2. GENERAL. Except as hereinafter provided in this section, no development,
filling, grading, draining, excavation, burning of vegetation, hardcover, temporary or
permanent structure, obstructions, septic systems, wells or other alterations shall
be allowed within a wetland overlay district without first having obtained a Wetland
Permit from the Town.
9-5.2(a). Exceptions. The permit requirements established by this section
shall not apply to:
(1). Emergencies. Emergency work may be performed when
necessary to preserve life or property. Prior to the commencement
of emergency work, a person shall first report the pertinent facts
relating to the need for such work to the Town. The Town shall
review such pertinent facts and determine whether an emergency
exists. Upon finding that an emergency exists, the Town shall, by
written memorandum, authorize the commencement of this
emergency exception. A person performing emergency work shall,
within ten (10) days following the commencement of such work,
apply for the issuance of a Wetland Permit. Upon the issuance
thereof, the permittee shall be required to perform such work as is
determined to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment to
the wetland occasioned by such emergency work.
(2). Activities necessary to repair and maintain existing public or
private drainage systems as long as wetlands that have been in
existence for more than 20 years are not drained.
(3). Activities in a wetland restored for conservation purposes under
a contract or easement providing the landowner with the right to
drain the restored wetland.
116
(4). Activities in a wetland created solely as a result of beaver dam
construction; blockage or culverts through roadways maintained by a
public or private entity; actions by public entities that were taken for a
purpose other than creating the wetland; or any combination thereof.
(5). Activities associated with routine maintenance of utility and
pipeline rights-of-way, provided the activities do not result in
additional intrusion into the wetland.
(6). Activities associated with emergency repair and normal
maintenance or existing public utilities, highways, roads, streets, and
bridges, provided that the activities do not result in the draining or
filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland.
(7). Normal maintenance and minor repair of structures causing no
additional intrusion of an existing structure into the wetland, and
maintenance and repair of private crossings that do not result in the
drainage or filling, wholly or partially, of a wetland.
9-5.2(b). Although a Wetland Permit may not be required for the exempted
activities listed in Section 9-5.2(a), a certification of exception must be
obtained from the Town for each activity prior to the commencement of any
work in a wetland overlay district.
9-5.3. APPLICATIONS. Applications for Wetlands Permits shall be filed with the
Town Clerk together with the review and approval of all governmental agencies
having such authority.
9-5.3(a). An application fee in an amount established by Town Ordinance
shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
9-5.3(b). The applicant shall provide ten (10) copies of the site plan
together with all supporting data. This information shall be submitted in the
following manner:
(1) The site plan shall contain the following data:
(i). A scale no greater than one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" - 100'), and no less than one-quarter inch equals one foot
(1/4" = 1').
(ii). The location of the site and the use of adjacent land.
117
(iii). Existing topography having a contour interval of no
greater than (2) feet.
(iv). Site grading and drainage plan having a contour interval
of no greater than two (2) feet.
(v). Delineation of all public waters and wetlands in
accordance with the laws of Minnesota including existing
water depth, and the flood elevation resulting from the runoff
of the critical storm event based upon pre- and postdevelopment
conditions.
(vi). Location of all buildings, open spaces, recreation areas,
utility areas, service areas, access drives, parking areas,
storage areas, proposed utility lines, existing utility lines and
easements.
(vii). Location and description of all other site improvements
including fences, walls, signs, lighting walkways, patios, decks
and barriers.
(viii). Delineation of all areas to be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used,
and location and function of all yards.
(ix.) A proposed landscaping plan, showing all existing trees
over six (6) inches in diameter, and large shrub massings.
(2). The application shall include a time schedule for the proposed
construction and/or specific use of the site.
(3). The Town Board may require the applicant to provide additional
information where such information is deemed necessary for review
of the application. The Town Board may waive any of the
requirements of Section 9-5.3(b), where such information is deemed
not necessary for review of the application.
9-5.4. REVIEW. Applications for Wetlands Permits shall be filed and reviewed in
accordance with Section 9-9 (Amendments (Rezoning)). Prior to such review by
the Planning Commission and Town Board, the application shall be processed in
the following manner.
118
9-5.4(a). If the application is approved by all governmental agencies having
such authority, the Town Clerk shall forward the copies of the application to
appropriate staff and consultants for review and comment.
9-5.4(b). REPEALED. By Amendment to Ordinance No. 35.
9-5.4(c). The application, together with staff, consultant and agency
reviews, shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendations.
9-5.4(d). The application shall, thereupon, be reviewed in accordance with
Section 9-9 (Amendments (Rezoning)).
9-5.5. STANDARDS. No Wetlands permit shall be issued unless the Town Board
finds and determines that the proposed development complies with the following
standards:
9-5.5(a). Filling. A minimum amount of filling may be allowed for the
reasonable use of property but only when it will not have a substantial or
significant adverse effect, upon the ecological and hydrological
characteristics of the water or wetland, as determined by the Town Board.
However, in no case shall the restrictions set out below on total amount of
filling, be exceeded.
(1) AVOIDANCE. The applicant must demonstrate that the
proposed filling is the least environmentally damaging practical
alternative.
(i). In evaluating a filling proposal, it shall be determined
whether the proposed development requires or is dependent
upon proximity to water or wetlands. If the development
activity does not require proximity to water or wetlands, it is
presumed that other alternatives to filling are available.
(ii). Any reasonable alternative which does not involve filling
is presumed to have a less adverse impact upon the aquatic
system to filling.
(iii). In evaluating filling, avoidance of a proposal for
compensatory wetland replacement can not be considered.
(2). MINIMIZATION. All reasonable steps of project modification
must be taken to decrease the adverse impact to a wetland to the
119
least possible degree.
(3). REPLACEMENT. Total wetland replacement shall be required
for adverse impacts which remain after all avoidance and
minimization actions have been taken. Wetland replacement shall
be provided on an areal basis of 2 to 1 within the boundary limits of
the Town, or at a minimum replacement on an areal basis of 1 to 1
within the site of development or specific use. Wetland replacement
will include the following actions in descending order of acceptance.
(i). Restoration of existing wetlands which have been
degraded by filling or draining. Wetland restoration shall
occur within the same watershed as the development site or
specific use.
(ii). Creation of on-site man-made wetlands within or
contiguous to the development site or specific use.
(4). Any filling shall not cause the total flood storage capacity of the
wetland to fall below the projected volume it would hold following the
critical rainfall event over the developed drainage area.
(5). Only fill which is free of chemical pollutants and organic wastes,
as determined by the Town Board, may be used.
(6). DEMINIMUS. For projects proposing wetland fill and meeting
the avoidance and minimization criteria, a wetland replacement
plan shall not be required for draining or filing up to 400 square feet
of wetland in a shoreland management zone or up to 2,000 square
feet outside of a shoreland management zone, regardless of the
total amount of wetland filled as part of a project. The deminimis
exception shall be permitted only one time for any project and/or
property.
9-5.5(b). Excavation. Excavation may be allowed only when it will not
have a substantial or significant adverse effect upon the ecological and
hydrologic characteristics of the water or wetland. Excavation, when
allowed, shall be limited as follows:
(1). Excavation shall be located so as to maximize the activity in the
areas of lowest vegetation density.
(2). Disposal of the excavated material shall not result in a
120
significant change in the current flow, or in substantial destruction of
vegetation, fish spawning areas, or water pollution.
(3). Work in the wetland will not be performed during the breeding
season of waterfowl or fish spawning season.
(4). Excavation of only one (1) boat channel or marina shall be
allowed per large-scale development.
(5). In other residential developments, excavating shall be located
so as to provide for the use of boat channels and marinas by two (2)
or more adjacent property owners.
(6). The width of the boat channel to be excavated shall be no more
than the minimum required for the safe operation of boats at
minimum operating speed.
9-5.5(c). Storm Water Run-Off. Storm water run-off from a development
or construction site may be directed to a water or wetland only after pretreatment
within a wet detention pond facility designed and constructed in
accordance with the Town's Local Water Management Plan and the
requirements of Ordinance No. 87 relating to stormwater management. A
minimum increase in volume of storm water run-off to wetlands from a
development over the natural volume of run-off may be allowed when
necessary for use of property but only when it will not have a substantially
or significantly, as determined by the Town Board, adverse effect upon the
ecological and hydrological characteristics of the wetlands; however, in no
case shall the restrictions on run-off set out below be exceeded. Since the
total increase in run-off which can be permitted is limited, the Town Board
when considering permit applications shall consider the equal
apportionment of run-off increase opportunity to wetland property within the
same wetland zoning district.
(1). Storm water detention ponds shall be designed in accordance
with the criteria contained in the Town's Local Water Management
Plan and requirements of the Town’s Ordinance No. 87 relating to
stormwater management. Storm water detention ponds will normally
be constructed within upland areas. However, detention pond
construction in wetland areas may be considered by the Town Board
if no other practical alternative exists allowing a reasonable use of
the property.
(2). The proposed action shall not cause storm water run-off from
121
the wetland to take place at a rate which will exceed the natural rate
of run-off.
(3). The quality of water infiltrated to the water table or aquifer shall
remain substantially, as determined by the Town Board, unchanged
by the development of the site.
(4). The allowed total increase in run-off, in combination with total fill
allowed, shall not cause the total natural flood storage capacity of the
wetland to fall below the projected volume of run-off from the whole
developed wetland watershed generated by the critical rainfall event
in 24 hours.
9-5.5(d). Building Constraints.
(1). The lowest floor elevation of buildings, if used for living quarters
or work area, shall be at least three (3) feet above the critical storm
event level of the wetland.
(2). Development which will result in unusual road maintenance
costs or utility line breakage’s due to soil limitations, including high
frost action, shall not be permitted.
9-5.5(e). Vegetation. Removal of vegetation within a wetland shall be
permitted only when such activities have been approved by the Town in
accordance with this Ordinance, and only when reasonably required for the
placement of structures and use of property.
9-5.5(f). Additional Requirements. Wetlands Permit conditions may,
among other requirements, limit the size, kind, or character of the proposed
work; require the construction of protective structures; require the
replacement of vegetation; require that monitoring procedures and
maintenance activities be performed; require that work be performed in
intervals; and require the alteration of the site design to insure buffering
from other wetlands.
9-5.5(g). The following actions are eligible for replacement credit or wetland
banking credit.
(1). Reestablishment of permanent vegetative cover on a wetland that was
planted with annually seeded crops, was in a crop rotation seeded to
pasture grasses or lagoons, or was required to be set aside to receive price
supports or other payments under United States Code, Title 7, Sections
122
1421 to 1469, in six of the last ten years prior to January 1, 1991.
Replacement credit may not exceed 50 percent of the total wetland area
vegetatively restored;
(2). Buffer areas of permanent vegetative cover established on upland
adjacent to replacement wetlands, provided that the upland buffer must be
established at the time of wetland replacement and replacement credit or
the buffer may not exceed 75 percent of the replacement wetland area and
may only be used as public value credits for replacement above 1:1 ratio;
(3). Wetlands restored for conservation purposes under terminated
easements or contracts, provided that up to 75 percent of the restored
wetland area is eligible for new wetland credit and adjacent upland buffer
areas reestablished to permanent vegetative cover are eligible for public
value credit above a 1:1 ratio in an amount not to exceed 25 percent of the
restored wetland area;
(4). Water quality treatment ponds constructed to pretreat storm water
runoff prior to discharge to wetlands, public waters, or other water bodies,
provided that the water quality treatment ponds must be associated with an
ongoing or proposed project that will impact a wetland and replacement
credit for the treatment ponds may not exceed 75 percent of the treatment
pond area and may only be used for public value credit above a1:1 ratio.
9-5.6. PERFORMANCE. A financial surety shall be required of the permittee to
insure compliance with the standards specified in this section and the Wetlands
Permit. The Town Board may require the conveyance of certain lands, or an
interest therein, to the Town of White Bear for public proposes.
9-5.6(a). In order to determine whether a proposal for development in a
wetland will conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Town Board
may obtain the services of qualified professional consultants, the costs of
which shall be borne by the applicant, to review the Application for
Wetlands Permit.
9-5.6(b). Permit Time. Activities authorized by a Wetlands Permit shall be
initiated within the time period provided in Section 9-2.3 (Zoning Certificate)
after approval by the Town Board, or by such different date granted in an
Extension. The Permitee shall complete the activities within eighteen (18)
months, or by such different date granted in a Renewal. If such activities
are not initiated or completed within such time periods, the Wetlands Permit
shall be void.
123
(1). Extensions. The Town Board may grant an extension of time
to commence activities. The permittee shall file with the Town Clerk
a written request prior to the date established for commencement of
activities in the Wetlands Permit. The written request shall set forth
the reasons for the requested extension.
(2). Renewals. The Town Board may grant a renewal of a
Wetlands Permit which has exceeded the specified time limits. The
permittee shall file with the Town Clerk a written request together
with a renewal fee in an amount established by Ordinance No. 54
(Fees & Charges). The written request shall set forth the reasons for
the requested renewal.
9-5.6(c). The permittee shall notify the Town at least twenty-four (24) hours
prior to the commencement of activities authorized by a Wetlands Permit.
The Town Board reserves the right, upon issuing any Wetlands Permit, to
inspect the premises at which development is being conducted to insure
compliance with the provisions of this section and any standards
additionally imposed.
9-5.6(d). The permittee shall notify the Town in writing when the activities
authorized by the Wetlands Permit has been completed. The Town shall
conduct a final inspection to validate compliance with the provisions of this
section and the Wetlands Permit.
9-5.6(e). Failure of a permittee to comply with the provisions of this
Section, or any standards imposed in the Wetland Permit, shall result in a
finding of non-compliance by the Town Board and shall require further
proceedings pursuant to Section 9-9.3(c) of this Ordinance.
9-5.6(f). Responsibility. Neither the issuance of a Wetlands Permit nor
compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this
Ordinance, shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise
imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance
of any Wetlands Permit hereunder serve to impose any liability on the Town
of White Bear, its officers or employees for injury or damage to persons or
property. A Wetlands Permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall not
relieve the permittee of the responsibility of complying with any other
requirements established by law, regulation or ordinance.
9-6. VARIANCES.
9-6.1. GENERAL. The Town Board shall have the exclusive power to order the
124
issuance of variances from the terms of this Ordinance including restrictions
placed on non-conformities. Variances from the literal provisions of this
Ordinance shall only be permitted when they are in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this Ordinance, and when the terms of the variance are
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Variances may be granted when the
applicant for the variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in
complying with the provisions of this Ordinance. “Practical Difficulties”, as used in
connection with the granting of a variance, means that the property owner
proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by this
Ordinance; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the
property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter
the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not
constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. Variances shall be
granted for earth sheltered construction as defined in Minnesota Statutes, when
in harmony with this Ordinance. No variance may be granted that would allow
any use that is not allowed in the zoning district in which the subject property is
located. The Town Board may impose conditions in granting a variance that are
directly related to and in rough proportion to an impact created by the variance.
9-6.2. APPLICATIONS. Applicants for variances shall be filed with the Town
Clerk together with the review and approval of all governmental agencies having
such authority.
9-6.2(a). An application fee in an amount established by Town Ordinance
shall accompany the application.
9-6.2(b). The applicant shall provide ten (10) copies of the site plan and
building plans together with all supporting data. This information shall be
submitted in the following manner:
(1). The site plan shall contain the following data:
(i). A scale no greater than one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100'), and no less than one-quarter inch equals one foot
(1/4" = 1').
(ii). The location of the site and the use of adjacent land.
(iii). Existing topography having a contour interval of no
greater than two (2) feet.
(iv). Site grading and drainage plan having a contour interval
of no greater than two (2) feet.
125
(v). Delineation of all streams, water bodies and wetlands
including the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
classification, water depth and one hundred (100) year/one
(1%) percent storm elevation.
(vi). Location of all buildings, open spaces, recreation areas,
utility areas, service areas, access drives, parking areas,
storage areas, proposed utility lines, existing utility lines and
easements.
(vii). Location and description of all other site improvements
including fences, walls, signs, lighting walkways, patios, decks
and barriers.
(viii). Delineation of all areas to be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used,
and location and function of all yards.
(ix). A proposed landscaping plan, showing all existing trees
over six (6) inches in diameter, and large shrub massings.
(2). Building plans shall indicate the size, location and intended use
of all structures, and preliminary architectural plans for all proposed
structures including exterior finishes, floor plans and elevations.
(3). The application shall include a time schedule for the proposed
construction and development of the use.
(4). The application shall include a Certificate of Survey prepared by
a registered land surveyor.
(5). The Town Board may require the applicant to provide additional
information where such information is deemed necessary for review
of the application. The Town Board may waive any of the
requirements of Section 9-6.2(d), where such information is deemed
not necessary for review of the application.
9-6.2(c). Repealed by amendment to Ordinance No. 35.
9-6.3. REVIEW.
9-6.3(a). The Town Clerk shall forward the copies of the application to
126
appropriate staff and consultants for review and comment.
9-6.3(b). The application, together with staff, consultant and agency
reviews, shall be forwarded to the Variance Board for its review and
recommendation.
9-6.3(c). The applicant, together with staff, consultant, agency and
Variance Board reviews, shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for
its review and recommendation.
9-6.3(d). The Town Clerk shall forward all comments and
recommendations to the Town Board for a decision following the Planning
Commission meeting.
9-6.3(e). No variance shall be adopted until a public hearing, public
information meeting, or administrative review has been conducted.
(1). Public Hearing. The Town Board shall conduct a public
hearing to determine whether a variance shall be approved or denied
for requests of setbacks that are less than twenty (20) feet from a
public right-of-way, twenty (20) feet from the front lot line, six (6) feet
from a side lot line, ten (10) feet from a rear lot line, or fifty (50) feet
from the one hundred (100) year/one (1%) percent storm elevation
adjacent to a lake or requirements for variances from Section 7-
1.3(a) of this Ordinance. A notice of the time, place and purpose of
the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the
Town, at least ten (10) days prior to the day of the hearing, and
mailed notice to property owners lying within 350 feet of the affected
property.
(2). Public Information Meeting. The Town Board shall conduct a
public information meeting to determine whether a variance shall be
approved or denied for variance requests to Table 7-1, Lot, Yard and
Density Regulations where such requests are less than the minimum
setback requirements, but greater than twenty (20) feet from a public
right-of-way, twenty (20) feet from a front lot line, six (6) feet from a
side lot line, ten (10) feet from a rear lot line, or, on property not
served by sanitary sewer, fifty (50) feet from the one hundred (100)
year/one (1%) percent storm elevation adjacent to a lake. The
applicant shall provide a statement signed by affected property
owners recording their comments relative to the requested action.
Affected property owners are defined as those having a recorded
legal or equitable ownership interest in property adjacent to the
127
property to which the action relates.
(3). Administrative. The Town Board hereby delegates to the
Town Clerk the authority to approve or deny variances for the
replacement or resurfacing of existing paved driveways in “R-1”
Suburban Residential and “R-2” Urban Residential zones. The
driveway shall have a legal non-conforming side yard setback
existing at the effective date of this Ordinance or have previously
been granted a variance by the Town Board. The applicant shall
provide a statement signed by affected property owners recording
their approval of the requested action. Affected property owners are
defined as those having a recorded legal or equitable ownership
interest in property adjacent to the property to which the action
relates. All variances shall be ratified by the Town Board. Upon a
denial by the Town Clerk, the applicant may proceed with review of
their variance request pursuant to the public hearing or public
information meeting process.
9-6.3(f). For a variance to be finally approved, the applicant must execute
an access agreement with the Town. Such access agreement shall
authorize entry by the Town onto the subject property to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance and any conditions additionally imposed.
9-6.3(g). All development, construction and use shall be in accordance with
the approved plans, unless an amended application is submitted and
approved. Any development contrary to the variance shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance.
9-6.4. STANDARDS. In considering all requests for variance and in taking
subsequent action, the Town Board shall approve the variance only if the following
facts are established:
(1). Without issuance of a variance, the provisions of this Ordinance
would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of property under
the terms of this Ordinance.
(2). That the special conditions and circumstances do not result
from the actions of the applicant.
(3). That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to
other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
128
(4). That the proposed action will not unreasonably increase the
congestion on public streets.
(5). That the proposed action will not increase the danger of fire or
endanger the public safety.
(6). That the proposed action will not unreasonably diminish or
impair established property values within the neighborhood or in any
other way be contrary to the intent of this Ordinance.
9-6.5. PERFORMANCE.
9-6.5(a). In order to determine whether a proposed variance will conform to
the requirements of this Ordinance, the Town Board may obtain the
services of qualified professional consultants, the costs of which shall be
borne by the applicant, to review the variance application.
9-6.5(b). Activities authorized by a Variance shall be initiated within six (6)
months after approval of the Town Board. If such activity is not initiated
within such period, the variance shall be void, unless an extension is
approved by the Town Board pursuant to Section 9-2.3 of this Ordinance.
9-6.5(c). Failure of a variance grantee to comply with the provisions of this
section or any conditions imposed in the variance shall result in the
revocation of such variance, after notice and hearing by the Town Board.
9-6.5(d). Upon revocation of a variance, the grantee shall be given a
reasonable amount of time to restore the subject property to a condition
consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. If the grantee fails to
comply with the terms of the revocation, the Town shall enter onto and so
restore the subject property to a condition consistent with the provisions of
this Ordinance. The cost of such restoration shall be levied against the
subject property.
9-7. BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS. The Town Board, sitting as
the Board of Appeals and Adjustments for the Town shall be established. The Town
Board may act as the Board of Appeals and Adjustments or, in the alternative, the Town
Board may appoint a Board of Appeals and Adjustments. The Board shall elect a chair
and shall appoint a recording secretary. It shall hold meetings, keep minutes and,
pursuant to notice, shall conduct hearings, take testimony and render decisions
consistent with the provisions of Section 9-8 (Appeals and Adjustments).
9-8. APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS.
129
9-8.1. GENERAL. Appeals and adjustments to any reasonable condition imposed
by this Ordinance may be granted where there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer, by
any other officer of the Town, or by the Town Board in the enforcement of this
Ordinance.
9-8.2. APPLICATION. Applications for Appeals and Adjustments shall be filed
with the Town Clerk together with the review and approval of all governmental
agencies having such authority.
9-8.2(a). An application fee in an amount established by Town Ordinance
shall accompany the application.
9-8.2(b). The applicant shall provide ten (10) copies of the site plan and
building plans together with all supporting data. This information shall be
submitted in the following manner:
(1). The site plan data required shall be that of the applicable
section which is the subject matter of the appeal and adjustment.
(2). Building plans shall indicate the size, location and use of all
structures, and preliminary architectural plans for all structures
including exterior finishes, floor plans and elevations.
(3). The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may require the
applicant to provide additional information where such information is
deemed necessary for review of the application. The Board of
Appeals and Adjustments may waive any of the requirements of
Section 9-8.2(b), where such information is deemed not necessary
for review of the application.
9-8.3. REVIEW.
9-8.3(a). An application for appeals and adjustment shall be transmitted by
the Town Clerk to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments within sixty (60)
days after filing. In the interim, the Town Clerk shall forward the copies of
the application to the appropriate staff and consultants for review and
comment.
9-8.3(b). If the application is denied by any governmental agency having
such authority, the Town Clerk shall terminate the review process and
return the application to the applicant.
130
9-8.3(c). If the application is approved by all governmental agencies having
such authority, the application, together with staff, consultant and agency
reviews, shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for its review and
recommendation.
9-8.3(d). The Town Clerk shall forward all comments and
recommendations to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments following the
Planning Commission meeting.
9-8.3(e). The Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall schedule a public
hearing. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall
be given by mail to the applicant and shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Town, at least ten (10) days prior to the day of the
hearing.
9-8.3(f). The Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall thereafter consider
the application, the Planning Commission recommendation together with
the staff, consultant and agency reviews, and thereupon render a decision
in writing within forty-five (45) days after the proceedings have been closed.
Such decision shall be consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.
9-8.4. STANDARDS. The standards applied shall be those of the applicable
section which is the subject matter of the appeal and adjustment.
9-9. AMENDMENTS (REZONING). An amendment to this Ordinance may be
initiated by the Town Board, the Planning Commission or by a petition of affected
property owners residing in or owning property within the Town. An amendment not
initiated by the Planning Commission shall be referred to the Planning Commission for
study and may not be acted upon by the Town Board until it has received the
recommendation of the Planning Commission on the proposed amendment, or until sixty
(60) days have elapsed from the date of reference of the amendment without a report by
the Planning Commission.
9-9.1. AFFECTED PROPERTY OWNERS. Affected property owners are defined
as those having a recorded legal or equitable ownership of property to which the
amendment relates, as well as those having legal or equitable ownership or
property within the Town situated wholly or partially within three hundred fifty (350')
feet of the property to which the amendment relates.
9-9.2. PETITION FOR AMENDMENT. A petition for an amendment, not initiated
by the Planning Commission or the Town Board, shall be signed by at least fifty
(50%) percent, by number, of the affected property owners and shall be
131
accompanied by an abstractor's certificate identifying the affected property owners.
Such petition shall be filed with the Town Clerk, together with the fee established
by the Town Ordinance. When an amendment involves changes in district
boundaries affecting an area of five (5) acres or less, the abstractor's certificate
shall include each owner of property situated wholly or partly within three hundred
fifty (350') feet of the property to which the amendment relates.
9-9.3. NOTICE AND HEARING. No amendment to this Ordinance shall be
adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon by the Town Board. A notice
of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Town, at least ten (10) days prior to the day of hearing. When
an amendment involves changes in district boundaries affecting an area of five (5)
acres or less, a similar notice shall be mailed, at least ten (10) days before the day
of the hearing, to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or
partly within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the property to which the amendment
relates. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the Town Clerk may use any
appropriate records to determine the names and addressees of owners. A copy of
the notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent,
shall be attested to by the Town Clerk and shall be made a part of the records of
the proceedings.
9-9.3(a). Wetlands. A hearing for an amendment involving changes to the
district boundaries (Rezoning) of the "C-W" Conservation Wetlands Overlay
District shall be separated into two (2) proceedings.
(1). The first proceeding shall be a public hearing, held pursuant to
the provisions of this section, to determine whether a Wetlands
Permit shall be approved or denied. If a Wetlands Permit is
approved, a second proceeding shall be conducted.
(2). The second proceeding shall be for the purpose of considering
granting a rezoning. The rezoning proceeding shall be a
continuation of the public hearing, held pursuant to the provisions of
this section, to determine whether a rezoning shall be approved.
The continued public hearing shall determine compliance with the
provisions of Section 9-5 (Wetlands Permit Procedure) and any
standards imposed by the Wetlands Permit. It shall be scheduled by
the Town Board at the time of the conclusion of the Wetland Permit
proceeding. In no event shall the rezoning proceeding be conducted
before the work authorized by the Wetlands Permit has been
completed by the permittee.
9-9.3(b). Upon a finding of compliance with the provisions of Section 9-5
132
(Wetlands Permit Procedure) and any standards imposed by the Wetland
Permit, the Town Board shall approve the amendment to the district
boundaries (Rezoning).
9-9.3(c). Upon a finding of non-compliance with the provisions of Section 9-
5 (Wetlands Permit Procedure) and any standards imposed by the
Wetlands Permit, the Town Board shall not approve the amendment to the
district boundaries (Rezoning) and proceed in the following manner:
(1). Continue the public hearing and, pursuant to Section 9-5.6(b)(2)
(Renewals), grant a renewal of the Wetlands Permit to secure
compliance with the standards specified in Section 9-5 (Wetlands
Permit Procedure) and the Wetlands Permit; or
(2). Continue the public hearing and, pursuant to Section 9-5.6
(Performance), levy execution upon the financial surety and secure
compliance with the standards specified in Section 9-5 (Wetlands
Permit Procedure) and the Wetlands Permit; or
(3). Deny the amendment and, pursuant to Section 9-5.6
(Performance), levy execution upon the financial surety and restore
the wetlands to its condition prior to the activities conducted pursuant
to the Wetlands Permit.
9-9.4. AMENDMENT DENIAL. If a petition for an amendment involving changes
in district boundaries (Rezoning) is denied, no proceeding for an amendment
involving changes for the same area may be initiated within one (1) year from the
date of the Town Board's order of denial, unless authorized by the Town Board.
9-10. ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES. In case any building, structure or land is or is
proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of this Ordinance, the Town Board may institute in the name of the
Town, any appropriate actions or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such
building, structure or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct,
business or use constituting a violation.
SECTION 10. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
Ordinance shall be punished as provided by Ordinance No. 26 (Maximum Fines). Each
three (3) days that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 11. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part
133
hereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 12. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 21st day of September, 1998.
APPROVED:
________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
_____________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Town Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
LINDA J. FORD, Supervisor
Synopsis published in the White Bear Press on October 14, 1998.



ORDINANCE NO. 37
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO AND REGULATING AND CONTROLLING
TRANSIENT DEALERS IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY,
MINNESOTA, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. The
Ordinance relating to the regulating and controlling of transient dealers passed and
approved August 27, 1973, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows, and all
other Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. In
all other respects all other Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by
context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose
of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
2-1. PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type place-to-place, for the purpose
of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and
delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise or other
personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term
peddler shall mean the same as the term hawker.
2-2. PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, partner,
associate, agent or employee.
2-3. REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the Township is
normally open for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by State
law shall not be counted as regular business days.
2-4. SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be carrying or
transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for
which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or
catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose
of the person’s activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.
2
2-5. TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out
of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front for the
purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering
goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property and who does not
remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than 14 consecutive days.
2-6. COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. Any activity of an organization or individual
having profit as the purpose for conducting that activity.
2-7. NON-COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. An activity by an organization or
individual where the purpose is not the sale of a good or service or for the purpose of
making a profit.
SECTION 3. EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
3-1. For the purpose of the requirements of this ordinance, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any noncommercial
activities, including but not limited to, canvassing or soliciting for a
charitable, religious, political or educational organization if such organization is
registered with the Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes,
Section 309.52 as a charitable organization nor to solicitations of orders for commercial
activities involving future door-to-door delivery of perishable food, dairy products or
newspapers.
3-2. In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in
an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be exempt from the definitions of
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone
conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any officer of the court
conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this
ordinance shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable
statutory provision or local ordinance.
SECTION 4. LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
4-1. COUNTY LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the Town limits without first having
obtained the appropriate license from the County.
4-2. TOWN LICENSE REQUIRED. Except as otherwise provided for by this
ordinance, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler, solicitor or a transient
merchant without first having obtained a license from the Town.
4-3. APPLICATION. Application for a Town license to conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall be made at least three (3) weeks prior to
the next Town Board Meeting before the applicant desires to begin conducting
business. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the Town
Board and available from the office of the Town Clerk. All applications shall be signed
by the applicant. All applications shall include the following information:
4-3.1. Applicant’s full legal name.
4-3.2. All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which
the applicant officially answers.
4-3.3. A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height,
weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
4-3.4. Full address of applicant’s permanent residence.
4-3.5. Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence.
4-3.6. Full legal name of any other individuals to be covered by the license or all
individuals accompanying the applicant while conducting the business.
4-3.7. Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or
operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
4-3.8. Full address of applicant’s regular place of business (if any).
4-3.9. Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant.
4-3.10. The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license.
4-3.11. Repealed by amendment.
4-3.12. The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and
the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the Township.
4-3.13. Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can
be reached while conducting business within the Township, including the location
where a transient merchant intends to set up business.
4-3.14. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within
the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than traffic
offenses.
4-3.15. A list of three most recent locations where the applicant has conducted
business as a peddler or transient merchant.
4-3.16. Proof of any requested County license (transient merchants only).
3
4-3.17. Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s agent
for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
4-3.18. A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided.
4-3.19. All additional information deemed necessary by the Town Board.
4-3.20. The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form of
identification.
4-3.21. The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed
business and a description of the vehicle.
4-4. FEES.
4-4.1. INITIAL APPLICATION FEE. All applications for a license under
this Ordinance shall be accompanied by the fee established in Ordinance
No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
4-4.2. SUPPLEMENTAL FEE. Any supplemental application submitted
which would amend/alter the original license requirements and is required
to be approved by the Town Board shall be accompanied by the
Supplemental Fee established in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
4-5. PROCEDURE. Upon receipt of the complete application and payment of
the license fee, the Town Clerk shall order any investigation, including background
checks of any or all of the individuals listed on the application, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application. Within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete
application as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 15.99, as amended, the Town
Board must issue the license unless there exist grounds for denying the license, in
which case the Town Board must deny the license. If the Town Board denies the
license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for the denial
and of the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of
receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the Town Board. The Town Board
shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request. The decision of the
Town Board following the public hearing can be appealed by petition to the Minnesota
Court of Appeals for Write of Mandamus.
4-6. DURATION. A license granted under this Ordinance shall be valid for thirty
(30) days. The thirty (30) day period shall begin running the day of issuance of the
license by the Town Clerk to the applicant. Any supplemental amendments or
alterations to the original license shall not affect the license period.
4-7. LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
4
4-7.1. No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to
take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated or
raised on any farm.
4-7.2. No license shall be required for any person going from house-to-house,
door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, other type of place-to-place
when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person’s State or Federal
Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press, religion and the like.
4-7.3. Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person
or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5. LICENSE INELIGIBILITY. The following shall be grounds for denying a
license under this Ordinance.
5-1. The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained a
required County license (transient merchants only).
5-2. The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information
requested by the Township as part of the application, or the failure to sign the
application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of application.
5-3. The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the date of
application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulations, or of any local
ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s ability to conduct the business for
which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner. Those violations shall
include, but are not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful
business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another
person.
5-4. The revocation within the past 5 years of any license issued to the applicant
for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant.
5-5. The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad
business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than three
complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney
General’s Office, or other similar organization, within the preceding 12 months, or three
complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
SECTION 6. SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
6-1. GENERALLY. Any license issued under this ordinance may be suspended
or revoked at the discretion of the Town Board for violation of any of the following.
6-1.1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made on the application
5
form.
6.1.2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of
the licensed activity.
6-1.3. Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been
denied.
6-1.4. Violation of any provision of this Ordinance.
6-2. MULTIPLE PERSONS UNDER ONE LICENSE. The suspension or
revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to
conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is
suspended or revoked.
6-3. NOTICE. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
Ordinance, the Town shall provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged
violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation.
Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent residential address
listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business
address provided on the license application.
6-4. The revocation within the past 5 years of any license issued to the applicant
for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant.
6-5. The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad
business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than three
complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney
General’s Office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency, within
the preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed against the applicant within the
preceding five years.
6-6. PUBLIC HEARING. Upon receiving the notice provided in section 6-3 of
this Ordinance, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no
request for a hearing is received by the Town Clerk within ten regular business days
following the service of the notice, the Town may proceed with the suspension or
revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as
of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within the
stated time-frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the
request. Within three regular business days of the hearing, the Town Board shall notify
the licensee of its decision.
6-7. EMERGENCY. If, in the discretion of the Town Board, imminent harm to the
health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient
6
merchant licensed under this Ordinance, the Town Board may immediately suspend the
person’s license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as
prescribed in Section 6-3 of this Ordinance.
6-8. APPEALS. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
Ordinance shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
SECTION 7. TRANSFERABILITY. No license issued under this Ordinance shall be
transferred to any person other than the person to whom the license was issued.
SECTION 8. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant
shall conduct business or otherwise behave in any of the following manners:
8-1. Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means of
blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to
be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
8-2. Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
8-3. Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and
welfare of any individual or the general public.
8-4. Conducting business before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
8-5. Conducting business on Sunday.
8-6. Failing to provide proof of license and identification, when requested; or
using the license or registration of another person.
8-7. Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler or transient
merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the Town solely based on the Town
having issued a license to that person.
8-8. Remaining on the property or another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
SECTION 9. PROHIBITED SALES BY TRANSIENT MERCHANTS. No transient
merchant shall set up and conduct its business on any property zoned by the Town as
Residential (R1, R2, R3) or property designated as any of the following: roadways,
streets, highways, bicycle lanes, pedestrian paths, sidewalks, rights-of-way, lakes,
rivers, waterways, any property owned or leased by the Town of White Bear.
SECTION 10. EXCLUSION BY PLACARD. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant,
7
unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property or
another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long
and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors
or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited”
or other comparable statement. No person other than the property owner or tenant shall
remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this Ordinance.
SECTION 11. GENERAL PENALTY.
11-1. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Ordinance
shall be punished as provided by Ordinance No. 26 (Maximum Fines).
11-2. The failure of any officer or employee of the Town to perform any official
duty imposed by this Ordinance shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty
imposed for a violation.
SECTION 12. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any part
thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 13. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force
from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County,
Minnesota, this 21st day of June, 2004.
APPROVED:
_________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press on June 30, 2004.
8
9
Historical Notes
2012
Section 4-1, 403.16, 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 5-1, and 8 passed December 17, 2012, and effective
December 26, 2012, by Mample, Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2004
Section 4-3.11 and 4-3.12 passed November 1, 2004, and effective November 10, 2004, by
Weisenburger, (Chair), Sand, Mample; Short (Clerk).
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 passed June 21, 2004, and effective June 30,
2004 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand, Mample; Short (Clerk).
1973
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 originally passed August 27, 1973, and effective
September 6, 1973 by King (Chair), Rooney and Perron; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).



ORDINANCE NO. 39
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO AND REGULATING THE USE OF
HIGHWAYS, STREETS AND ALLEYS WITHIN THE TOWN OF
WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA, INCORPORATING
PROVISIONS OF THE MINNESOTA HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION
ACT, THE MINNESOTA DRIVERS LICENSE LAW AND MINNESOTA
CHAUFFEURS LICENSE PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE AND IMPOSING
PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF, AND REPEALING
ORDINANCE NO. 17
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
Ordinance No. 39 being an Ordinance relating to and regulating the use of
highways, streets and alleys within the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County,
Minnesota, approved December 6, 1973, as amended, is hereby amended to
read as follows, and all other Ordinances and parts of Ordinances inconsistent
herewith are hereby revoked. In all other respects all other Ordinances shall
remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 2. HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT. The regulatory
provisions and definitions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169, as amended up
through and including 2006 are hereby adopted as a Traffic Ordinance regulating
the use of highways, streets and alleys within the Town of White Bear,
Minnesota, and are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this Ordinance as
completely as if set out herein in full.
SECTION 2-1. WEIGHT, LOAD LIMITS.
(A) WEIGHT LIMITS. No vehicle shall be operated upon Town Roads in
violation of Minn. Stat. §§ 169.80 through 169.88. These sections of the
Minnesota Statute including any subsequent amendments to said statutes are
hereby incorporated and adopted as part of the White Bear Township
Ordinances by this reference as if said statutes and/or amendments were fully
set out herein.
(1) Seasonal Restrictions. The Town Clerk-Treasurer or
designee may prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any road or highway
or impose restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated thereon
whenever any such road or highway by reason of deterioration, rain, snow
or other climatic conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless
the use of such vehicles thereon is prohibited or the permissible weights
thereof reduced. The Town Clerk-Treasurer or designee shall follow the
Minnesota Department of Transportation Spring Load Restrictions (SLR's)
2
for purposes of establishing the annual Spring weight restrictions on Town
roads. The Town Board may alleviate or extend the period of these
seasonal restrictions if, in its opinion, the same is necessary for the
protection of the Town roads, by resolution setting therein the period of
such extension or alleviation.
(2) New Roads. No vehicle having a gross weight in excess of 75
percent of the limitations provided for in Section 2-1-A, shall operate upon
any Town road which has been surfaced with bituminous materials, until
one year after such surfacing has been completed.
(3) Town Road Designation. For weight limitation purposes, all roads
within the Town are designated as seven (7) ton. However, the following
roads shall be designated nine (9) ton roads for limitation purposes and are
excepted from the seven ton limitation:
a. Hammond Road between Otter Lake Road and Polar Lakes Park.
b. Township Parkway between Hammond Road and White Bear
Parkway.
c. White Bear Parkway between Bibeau Road and Otter Lake Road.
d. Meadowlands Drive between Centerville Road and Allendale Drive.
e. Birch Bend Lane between Highway 96 and Meadowlands Drive.
f. Constellation Drive east of Centerville Road.
g. Whitaker Street between Otter Lake Road and Margaret Street.
h. Leibel Street between County Road J and Highway 61.
(4) Other Jurisdiction Roadway Designations. All County and
State roads within the Township boundaries shall be designated by their
respective authorities on weight limitations.
(B) LUGS PROHIBITED. No person shall drive or operate any vehicle
equipped with steel or metal lugs upon any Town road.
(C) NOTICE OF RESTRICTIONS. The Town shall erect or cause to be
erected and maintained on main streets of entry into the Town, signs plainly
indicating the prohibitions of restrictions of this section.
(D) LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES. The owner or driver of any vehicle driven
upon any road in the Town in violation of the provisions of this section, shall be
liable to the Town for all damages sustained as the result of such illegal
operation.
SECTION 3. DRIVERS LICENSE LAW. The regulatory provisions and
definitions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 171, as amended up to and including
1992, are hereby adopted as a Drivers License Ordinance regulating the driving
of motor vehicles on highways, streets, and alleys within the Town of White Bear,
3
Minnesota, and are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this Ordinance as
completely as if set out herein in full.
SECTION 4. DEPOSITING SNOW ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
4-1. To facilitate the orderly removal of snow from publicly dedicated
rights-of-way in order to protect public safety and provide for the efficient delivery
of public services, no person, by whatever means, shall:
(A). Deposit snow on the improved portion of a publicly dedicated
street, alley, sidewalk, bike path, trail way or parking area.
4-2. The use of untraveled right-of-way for snow storage is allowed,
subject to the Town’s authority to require removal at the expense of the person
who deposited the snow, if the storage constitutes a traffic hazard or if it in
anyway interferes with the Town’s use of the right-of-way.
4-3. PENALTY. After the first observed violation, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a warning notice to the appropriate person and/or property
owner. The Notice shall include a statement of the date and time of the observed
violation and shall include a copy of this regulation. After the second violation or
subsequent observed violations, the offender shall be issued an appropriate
citation. The penalty imposed for a violation of this Ordinance shall be as set
forth in Ordinance No. 26 (Maximum Fines).
SECTION 5. UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION. No person shall start or
accelerate any motor vehicle with any unnecessary exhibition of speed on any
public or private way within the Town. Prima Facie evidence of such unnecessary
exhibition of speed shall be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires
or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of said vehicle or both.
SECTION 6. AUTHORITY TO OPERATE MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS ON
TOWN ROADS.
6-1. Persons may operate motorized golf carts on Town roads only after a
Permit has been issued to them by the Town.
6-2. The Permit form may be obtained from the Town offices and shall
show compliance with the following requirements:
(A). Evidence of insurance showing that the applicant complies with the
insurance requirements of the State of Minnesota.
(B). The permit will be issued for a period of one (1) year and there shall
be a fee required for administrative services as established in Ordinance
No. 54 (Fees and Charges), and this permit may be renewed annually.
4
The Permit may be revoked at any time if there is evidence that the
permittee cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart, after notice and
hearing by the Town Board.
(C). A motorized golf cart may only be operated on Town roadways
from sunrise to sunset.
(D). Motorized golf carts shall not be operated in inclement weather or
when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions.
(E). Motorized golf carts shall not be operated at anytime when there is
insufficient light to see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance
of 500 feet.
(F). All motorized golf carts shall display the slow moving vehicle
emblem provided for by State Law.
(G). Every motorized golf cart shall be equipped with a mirror so located
as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least
200 feet to the rear of such vehicle.
(H). The applicant must submit a certificate signed by a physician that
the applicant is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart on the Town
roadways.
6-3. CROSSING INTERSECTING HIGHWAYS. The operator of a
motorized golf cart may cross any street or highway intersecting a designated
roadway.
SECTION 7. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided in Ordinance No. 26.
SECTION 8. PRIVATELY AND PUBLICLY OWNED PARKING LOTS, AREAS
AND RAMPS.
8-1. MAXIMUM SPEED AND MANNER OF OPERATING MOTOR
VEHICLES GENERALLY.
(A). No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any privately owned or
publicly owned parking lot, area or ramp, within the Town at a speed
greater than is safe and reasonable in the condition of traffic then existing
therein, and in no event shall such vehicle be operated in excess of a
speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
5
(B). All operation and driving of motor vehicles on such parking lots or
ramps shall be done in a careful manner so that no erratic movement of
said vehicles is engaged in by the driver.
(C). It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle
upon such lot or ramp in any manner that would constitute careless driving
if done upon a public street or highway.
(D). No person shall engage in any drag racing, exhibition driving or
unreasonable acceleration of a motor vehicle on any such parking lot,
area or ramp.
8-2. PARKING. Parking of vehicles on privately or publicly owned parking
lots, areas or ramps in the Town shall conform to the markings of stalls or
positions for parking which are designated on the surface of the parking area,
and no vehicles shall be parking or allowed to stand in any area of such parking
lot or ramp which has been designated or is used as a lane for moving traffic so
that such parking will interfere with the movement of traffic.
8-3. TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS.
(A). The Town may post signs in the Town at any entrance to a privately
or publicly owned parking lot or ramp from a public street which shall
designate one-way traffic for entrance and exits, and the driver of any
vehicle entering or leaving such lot shall comply with any signs so posted.
(B). Where a privately owned parking lot or ramp in the Town has
traffic-control signs within said lot or ramp indicating traffic direction,
speed, yield or stop, the driver of any vehicle upon such lot or ramp shall
comply with any such signs.
8-4. INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED IN THE EVENT OF A
COLLISION; NOTICE OF COLLISION.
In the event any person, who drives a motor vehicle upon a privately or
publicly owned parking lot, area or ramp in the Town becomes involved in
a collision between the vehicle he is driving and any other vehicle, or with
any person or personal property, such driver shall leave a notice upon any
unattended vehicle or personal property with which he has collided, giving
his name, address and license number, and in the event he has collided
with a person or motor vehicle which is attended, shall stop and give his
name, address and license number to the driver of the other vehicle or the
person with whom he has collided. Failure on the part of any person to
comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this section.
8-5. Anyone driving on private property must be properly licensed by the
State of Minnesota.
6
8-6. “OPEN BOTTLE” ORDINANCE.
(A). No person shall drink or consume intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating
malt liquor in any motor vehicle when such vehicle is on a
privately owned or publicly owned parking lot or ramp in the Town.
(B). No person shall have in his possession, on his person, while in a
private motor vehicle upon a privately owned or publicly owned parking lot
or ramp in the Town any bottle or receptacle containing intoxicating liquor
or non-intoxicating malt liquor which has been opened or the seal broken
or the contents of which has been partially removed.
(C). It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private motor vehicle or the
driver, if the owner be not then present in the motor vehicle, to keep or
allow to be kept in a motor vehicle, when such vehicle is upon a privately
owned or publicly owned parking lot or ramp in the Town, any bottle or
receptacle containing intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor
which has been partially removed, except when such bottle or receptacle
shall be kept in the trunk of the motor vehicle, when such vehicle is
equipped with a trunk, or kept in such other area of the vehicle not
normally occupied by the driver or passengers if the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment shall
be deemed within the area occupied by the driver and passengers.
SECTION 9. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole
or any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 10. EFFECTIVE DATE. The Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey
County, Minnesota, this 26th day of November, 1973.
APPROVED:
________________________________
KENNETH L. KING, Chairman
ATTEST:
_________________________
MARIE ROLPH, Clerk
Board of Supervisors:
KENNETH L. KING, Chairman
7
TERRENCE ROONEY, Supervisor
JEROME L. PERRON, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press on December 6, 1973.
Historical Notes
2017
Section 2-1(a)(3) passed March 6, 2017, and effective March 8, 2017 by Kermes (Chair),
Prudhon, Ruzek; Clerk-Treasurer (Short).
2012
Section 2, 2-1 passed February 6, 2012, and effective February 8, 2012 by Mample
(Chair), Kermes and Prudhon; Short (Clerk).
1993
Section 4 passed February 8, 1993, and effective February 24, 1993 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk).
Section 6 and 7 passed May 17, 1993, and effective May 26, 1993 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk).
Section 8 passed October 4, 1993, and effective October 20, 1993 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk).
1992
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 passed August 3, 1992, and effective August 12, 1992 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand Ford; Short (Clerk).
1990
Section 5-5 passed December 3, 1990, and effective December 19, 1990 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Acting Clerk).
1983
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 passed December 20, 1982, and effective
January 5, 1983 by Sand (Chair), Jungkunz and Weisenburger; Webber (Clerk).
1979
Section 2, 3, 4 and 7 passed September 4, 1979, and effective September 14, 1979 by
Perron (Chair), Sand and Jungkunz; Rolph (Clerk).
1973
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 originally passed November
26, 1973, and effective December 6, 1973 by King (Chair), Rooney and Perron; Rolph (Clerk).

ORDINANCE NO. 41
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO AND REGULATING AND
CONTROLLING THE GROWTH, CUTTING DOWN,
OTHERWISE DESTROYING OR ERADICATING AND
REMOVAL OF WEEDS, GRASS, BRUSH AND OTHER RANK,
POISONOUS OR HARMFUL VEGETATION IN THE TOWN OF
WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA; PROVIDING
FOR THE REMOVAL THEREOF; AND PROVIDING PENALTIES
FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. DESTRUCTION OF WEEDS, GRASS, BRUSH AND OTHER
RANK, POISONOUS OR HARMFUL VEGETATION. It shall be unlawful for any
owner, lessee or occupant, or agent, servant, representative or employee of any
such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot
or parcel of land or any part thereof in the Town of White Bear to permit or
maintain on such parcel of land any growth of weeds, grass, brush or other rank
vegetation to a greater height than an average height of 8 inches, or any
accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. It shall also be unlawful for any
such person or persons to cause, suffer or allow noxious weeds or plants
deemed by the Commissioner of Agriculture to be injurious to public health,
public roads, crops, livestock and other property to grow on any such parcel of
land.
SECTION 2. DUTY TO DESTROY. It shall be the duty of every occupant of
land, or if the land is unoccupied, the owner thereof, or his agent, to cut down,
otherwise destroy or eradicate all such weeds, grass, brush and other rank,
poisonous or harmful vegetation standing, being or growing upon such land in
such manner and at such times as may be directed or ordered by the
Commissioner of Agriculture or the Town Weed Inspector.
SECTION 3. ASSISTANT WEED INSPECTOR. The Town Board shall appoint
a person to act as Assistant Weed Inspector who shall be designated “Town
Weed Inspector” and who shall have all the powers and authority of the Town
Board members in the capacity of Weed Inspectors. The compensation for such
Town Weed Inspector shall be as provided for by statute. The Town Weed
Inspector shall have the duties prescribed for local weed inspectors by statute.
SECTION 4. NOTICES TO ERADICATE. General notices for control and
eradication of weeds, grass, brush, etc., shall be published as prescribed by
statute. Whenever the Town Weed Inspector finds it necessary to secure more
prompt or definite control or eradication in certain special or individual instances,
involving one or more limited number of persons than is accomplished by the
general published notice, he shall cause to be served individual notices in writing
upon the owner or occupant in the manner prescribed by statute, giving specific
instructions and methods where and how certain named weeds are to be
controlled or eradicated.
SECTION 5. DESTRUCTION BY INSPECTOR. When any person, in
compliance with a notice served on him, or with the provisions of this Ordinance
or the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 18, fails to cut down, otherwise
destroy or eradicate any noxious weeds or any crop in which such weeds are
intermingled or growing, within the time and in such manner as the Town Weed
Inspector may designate, or as otherwise provided herein or by statute, the Town
Weed Inspector shall cause the same to be cut down, otherwise destroyed or
eradicated.
SECTION 6. COST AND EXPENSES. Notice in writing of the work done and
the costs and expenses involved shall be served on the owner or occupant of the
property in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in the District Court
or by certified mail. Service on persons living temporarily or permanently
outside the jurisdiction of the Town Weed Inspector whose property is vacant or
unoccupied may be made by serving the notice by certified mail to the last known
address of such person, to be ascertained, if necessary, from the last tax list in
the County Treasurer’s Office. Such notice shall indicate a tabulation of the total
costs and expenses involved and shall indicate that if the total amount is not paid
to the Town within 30 days or before the following October 1st, whichever is later,
the costs and expenses shall become a lien in favor of the Town and a penalty of
eight percent will be added to the amount due as of that date, with the total costs,
expenses, and penalty thereupon to be certified to the County auditor and
entered by him on his tax books as a tax upon such land. The Town Clerk shall
certify such costs, expenses and penalty to the County Auditor after October 1st,
and before October 10th.
SECTION 7. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided in Ordinance No. 26
(Maximum Fines).
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
2
3
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey
County, Minnesota, this 1st day of July, 1974.
APPROVED:
_____________________________
TERRANCE M. ROONEY, Chairman
ATTEST:
____________________________
MARIE ROLPH, Clerk
Board of Supervisors:
KENNETH L. KING, Chairman
TERRENCE ROONEY, Supervisor
RICHARD SAND, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press on July 18, 1974.
Historical Notes
2008
Section 1 and 7 passed July 7, 2008, and effective July 23, 2008 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1974
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 originally passed July 1, 1974,
and effective July 18, 1974 by King (Chair), Rooney and Sand; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).






ORDINANCE NO. 45
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 45 OF THE TOWN
OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA, ADOPTED AUGUST
11, 1975, BEING AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE USE OF
PARKS, OPEN SPACE, RECREATIONAL AREAS AND OTHER
PUBLIC LANDS IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY,
MINNESOTA, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE
VIOLATION THEREOF.
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
The Park Ordinance of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota,
adopted August 11, 1975, as amended, is hereby amended to be as follows, and
all other Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed. In all other respects all other Ordinances shall remain in full force and
effect.
SECTION 2. TITLE AND PURPOSE. This Ordinance may be cited as the
“PARK ORDINANCE FOR THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY,
MINNESOTA”. This Ordinance is enacted for the purpose of regulating the use,
operation and protection of public parks, public bathing beaches, public docks,
and other public recreation areas, open space and other public lands in the Town
of White Bear.
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Ordinance, terms defined
herein shall have the following meaning ascribed to them.
3-1. BATHING BEACHES AND PUBLIC DOCKS. Bathing beaches
and public docks shall mean those areas which are so designated by proper
posting of signs.
3-2. BEACH AREA. Beach area shall refer to any land within 100 lineal
feet measured from the water of White Bear Lake.
3-3. BELLAIRE BEACH PARK. Bellaire Beach Park shall mean the
park located at Bellaire Avenue and South Shore Boulevard and including the
beach and water areas.
3-4. BOARD. Board shall mean and refer to the Board of Supervisors
of White Bear Township.
2
3-5. DESIGNATED SWIMMING AREA. Designated swimming area
shall mean an area which is identified by buoys and rope used for swimming and
wading.
3-6. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Law Enforcement Officer shall
mean and refer to any person duly deputized or commissioned by the Board of
Supervisors, the State of Minnesota or the Board of Ramsey County
Commissioners.
3-7. NEGATIVE SIGN. Negative sign shall mean and refer to any sign
or posted notice installed by the Town which prohibits a general or specific
activity, function or use.
3-8. PERSON. Person shall mean and refer to any individual, firm,
partnership, corporation and association of persons. Person shall include an
individual, partnership, corporation, the state or its agencies and subdivisions,
and any persons whether incorporated or not.
3-9. POSITIVE SIGN. Positive sign shall mean and refer to any sign or
posted notice installed by the Town which authorizes a general or specific
activity, function or use.
3-10. RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Recreational motor vehicle
shall mean any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a
self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes, including but not limited to
trail bike or other all terrain vehicle, hovercraft or motor vehicle licensed for
highway operation which is being used for off-road recreational purposes,
specifically excluding snowmobiles.
3-11. SNOWMOBILE. Snowmobile shall mean a self-propelled vehicle
designated for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or
runners.
3.11(a). SUMMIT LANE PARK. Summit Lane Park shall mean the
16 foot wide area to the water line located at Summit Lane and South
Shore Boulevard, and including the beach and dock areas.
3-12. TOWN. Town shall mean White Bear Township or any authorized
agents or employees.
3-13. WATERS. Waters shall mean and refer to waters lying within 300
feet and immediately abutting the shoreline of Bellaire Beach.
3-14. WATERCRAFT. Any licensed watercraft used or designed for
navigation on water.
3
SECTION 4. PARK REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITED USES. It shall be
unlawful to commit or do any of the following within any park, public dock,
recreational area, or parking area in conjunction therewith in the Town of White
Bear:
4-1. Discharge any firearm or fireworks without having first obtained a
permit from the Town Board.
4-2. Climb any tree or pick any flowers or fruit, or break, cut down,
trample upon, remove or in any manner injure or deface any statue, ornament,
tree, plant, shrub, flower, turf or any of the buildings, fences, bridges or other
construction.
4-3. Post or affix any printed or written bill, plaque, notice or other paper
or sign upon any tree or structure.
4-4. Be present at any park, picnic or recreational areas, unless
otherwise posted during the period of time 30 minutes after sunset and 30
minutes before sunrise.
4-5. Launch, dock or beach any boat or other water craft except at those
specific areas set aside and designated for such use by the Town Board and
posted properly therefor.
4-6. Discard, throw away or otherwise dispose of any bottles, paper, food
or other debris except into a designated container.
4-7. Make use thereof to the exclusion of the general public or charge
admission for entry therein without having first obtained a permit from the Town
Board.
4-8. Conduct private lessons such as tennis, swimming, etc., without
having first obtained a permit from the Town Board.
4-9. Exceed the speed of 15 miles per hour on any roadway.
4-10. Allow house trailer, mobile homes, campers, tent trailers, other such
vehicles, or tents, unless otherwise posted, between the hours of 10:00 o’clock
p.m. and 6:00 o’clock a.m., without having first obtained a permit from the Town
Board.
4-11. Use, operate or enter any recreational vehicle, snowmobile, or other
motorized vehicle except as those specific areas or trails set aside and
designated for such use by the Town Board and properly posted therefor.
4
4-12. No person shall golf, drive, putt or in any other manner play or
practice golf in a Town Park except in a designated area.
4-13. Bicycling.
4-13.1. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle except on designated
bikeways or surfaces normally provided for vehicular traffic.
4-13.2. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle in violation of Minnesota
Statutes. Persons riding a bicycle shall observe and obey all traffic and
directional signs.
4-13.3. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle except in a prudent and
careful manner, and unless such person shall be capable of effective
control and operation of said vehicle. Pedestrians and motorized vehicles
shall have the right-of-way where a bikeway intersects pedestrian trails or
roadways.
4-13.4. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle faster than is reasonable
and safe, with regard to the safety of the operator and other persons in the
immediate area.
4-13.5. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle 30 minutes after sunset
and 30 minutes before sunrise.
4-13.6. Bicycles shall be parked in locations set aside specifically for their
storage.
4-14. Winter Activities. No person shall snowmobile, skate, or ski
except at such times and in such areas specifically designated for such use.
4-15. Motorized Recreation Vehicle. No person shall operate a
motorized off-road or all-terrain recreation vehicle within a park.
4-16. Horses. No person shall ride or drive a horse in a park.
4-17. Camping. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other
temporary lodging or sleeping place in a park.
4-18. Defacement, Destruction of Property and Resources.
4-18.1. No person shall tamper with, climb on, injure, deface, destroy,
disturb, damage or remove any part of any building, structure, sign, light
pole, drinking fountain, hydrant, table, grill, equipment, statue or other
property found therein.
5
4-18.2. No person shall deface, disturb or remove in any manner any soil,
artifact, fossil, rock or other mineral resource.
4-18.3. No person shall excavate any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole on the
site.
4-18.4. No person shall saw, cut, gather or remove any deadfall tree litter
or standing tree remnants from the site except with written permission of
the Town Board.
4-19. Preservation of Vegetation.
4-19.1. No person shall injure, cut, destroy, mutilate, uproot, disturb, or
remove any flower, tree, shrub, or any plant whether wild or cultivated, or
any part thereof.
4-19.2. No person shall plant or cause to be planted any wild cultivated or
exotic tree, shrub or plant except in specifically designated areas with the
written permission of the Town Board.
4-19.3. No person shall fell or climb any tree, pick any flowers, fruit,
trample any flowers, tree seedlings, flower beds or new turf seedlings.
4-19.4. No person shall hitch any animal or fasten, anchor or otherwise
attach any wire, rope cable, signs, posters or other articles to any tree,
shrub or plant.
4-19.5. No person shall make any unauthorized use of which is
detrimental to the turf and soil conditions.
4-19.6. No person shall remove any device, apparatus or material
installed for the protection, support, or preservation of any tree, shrub or
plant.
4-20. Animals.
4-20.1. No person owning, being in custody, or having control of any
animal, whether wild, pet or domestic, shall cause or allow such animal to
roam or be at large in any park.
4-20.2. No person in custody of any pet or animal shall allow said animal
to disturb, harass or interfere with other users or their property.
4-20.3. Any unattended domestic animal or pet found roaming or running
at large as defined in Ordinance No. 5 within any site shall be impounded.
6
4-20.4. All other State and Township ordinances regulating animals and
pets shall apply to same brought into site.
4-20.5. It shall be the obligation or responsibility of the owner or custodian
of any animal in any Town Park to prevent such animal from leaving
excrement on park property.
4-21. Hunting, Fishing and Molesting Wildlife.
4-21.1. No person shall kill, hunt, trap pursue, injure, molest or
unnecessarily disturb or have in possession any species of wildlife
including birds, waterfowl, fish or other animals found within the confines
of any Town Park.
4-21.2. No person shall rob, disturb, or molest the nest, eggs or young of
any birds or other animal within the confines of any Town Park.
4-22. Fires.
4-22.1. No person shall start or maintain a fire except in grills provided for
that purpose in areas specifically designated for such use. Private grills
may be used in designated areas provided that all ashes and residue
therefrom be disposed of in containers provided for such disposal.
4-22.2. Any person who starts or maintains a fire in an authorized area
shall exercise continuous supervision from the time the fire is kindled until
it is extinguished. No fire shall cause damage or constitute a threat to site
vegetation and resources, nor shall it cause discomfort to other users.
4-22.3. The Town Board may, at its discretion, prohibit fires for limited
periods at any location for any purpose when it is necessary for the
continued protection of property and resources.
4-23. Waste and Litter.
4-23.1. No person shall throw, cast drop, pour, spill, discharge or permit
to escape in or upon any land, pond, ditch, storm sewer or drain flowing
into or through, any substance, matter of thing whether solid, liquid, or
gas, which shall result in the pollution of said waters, interfere with the
conservation management of the water resource, or endanger the health
of the public.
4-23.2. No person shall deposit, scatter, drop or abandon any paper,
bottles, cans, sewage, waste, trash or other debris except in receptacles
7
provided by the Town for such purposes. No person shall deposit in any
receptacle any accumulation of waste or trash generated outside the
boundaries of the site.
4-23.3. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise leave unattended lighted
matches, burning cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, paper or other combustible
material.
4-24. Firearms, Weapons and Fireworks.
4-24.1. No person shall possess, fire, discharge, or set off any firearm,
missile, fireworks, or explosives in any Town park.
4-24.2. No person except a law enforcement officer shall possess or carry
a firearm. No air gun, bow and arrow, knife with a blade greater than 3
inches, slingshot, dart or projectile thrower, or any other dangerous or
illegal weapon in any Town park.
4-24.3. Any unauthorized or illegal weapon shall be subject to seizure by
a law enforcement officer.
4-25. Disturbing the Peace – Conduct.
4-25.1. No person or group of persons shall disturb the peace and good
order by either work or act.
4-25.2. No person or group of persons shall use threatening, abusive,
insulting, obscene or indecent language or commit, perform, or engage in
any lewd, lascivious, obscene or indecent act.
4-25.3. No person or group of persons shall engage in fighting,
quarreling, wrangling, riotous clamor or tumult.
4-25.4. No person or group of persons shall disturb, harass or interfere
with any user or the user’s property.
4-25.5. No person shall solicit or ask anyone to commit, perform or
engage in any lewd, lascivious, obscene or indecent act of behavior.
4-26. Audio Devices. No person shall operate or play any musical
instrument, radio, television, record, compact disc or tape player, loudspeaker,
public address system or sound amplifying equipment of any kind in such a
manner that the sound emanating therefrom is audible beyond the immediate
vicinity of the set or instrument, and subsequently interferes with the use of the
park by other users or disturbs the residents of adjacent property.
8
4-27. Loitering.
4-27.1. No person over the age of six (6) shall enter any restroom,
washroom, or toilet set apart or designated for the opposite sex unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
4-27.2. No person shall lurk or loiter in or around the toilet except to use
such facility for the purpose for which it is intended.
4-28. No person shall use, possess, consume, administer, dispense, sell,
give away or be under the influence of any controlled substance listed in
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 152, as amended, except when such use,
possession, influence, and administration are authorized by Statutes.
4-29. Reserved.
4-30. Gambling.
4-30.1. No person shall play, participate in, wager on or against any game
of chance or activity defined by Minnesota Statutes.
4-30.2. No person shall operate any gambling device or conduct any
game of chance defined by Minnesota Statutes.
4-30. Parades, Entertainment, Public Meetings. No processions,
parades, pageants, ceremonies, exhibitions, celebrations, training exercises,
speeches, entertainment or other public gatherings shall be allowed to pass
through or take place in any Town park except with written permission of the
Town Board.
4-31. Games. No person shall engage in any potentially dangerous
games involving thrown or propelled objects, such as footballs, baseballs,
horseshoes, arrows, golf balls, model airplanes or similar objects, except in areas
specifically designated for such usage.
4-32. Advertising.
4-32.1. No person shall distribute or disseminate any leaflets, pamphlets,
circulars, handbills, advertisements or other written or printed material
except with the written permission of the Town Board.
4-32.2. No person shall post, display, affix or attach any sign, poster,
placard, notice, banner or advertisement to any tree, building, shelter,
fence, pole or other structure except with the written permission of the
Town Board.
9
4-32.3. No person shall use loudspeakers, sound amplifying equipment,
musical equipment or cause any noise to be made for advertisement
purposes or for the purpose of attracting attention to any exhibition,
performance, event, show or other purpose except with written permission
of the Town Board.
4-33. Unlawful Sales. No person shall sell, offer for sale, hawk, peddle,
or lease any object, merchandise or service or carry on any manner of business
or commercial enterprise except those concessions authorized or operated by
the Town Board.
4-34. Soliciting Alms. No person shall beg or solicit alms, donations or
contributions.
4-35. Photography Restriction. No person shall take any photographs,
or motion or sound pictures for commercial purposes or for use in commercial
advertising except with the written permission of the Town Board.
4-36. Utilities.
4-36.1. The location, construction, or erection of any sewer, gas pipe,
well, water pipe, hydrant, lamp post, telephone and electric power post,
conduit, pump, lift station and other utility feature proposed in any Town
park shall be subject to the approval of the Town Board.
4-36.2. No person, firm or corporation shall construct or relocate any of
these utility installations or fixtures without the written permission of the
Town Board.
4-36.3. Every person, firm or corporation who shall receive a contract or
permit to do work shall, after such work has commenced, and until the
same has been completed, insulate the construction area by security
fencing, warning lights, and signs, or other appropriate measures that will
protect the public from exposure to danger and prevent unnecessary
accidents.
4-37. Lost and Found Articles. Lost and mislaid articles or money or
personal property which are found in any Town park shall be delivered or turned
over to the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department.
4-38. Law Enforcement Officers and Employees.
4-38.1. No person shall willfully resist, refuse or fail to comply with any
order, direction or request lawfully given by any law enforcement officer or
10
Township employee acting under the authority of the Town Board and in
accordance with this Ordinance.
4-38.2. No person shall interfere with, or in any manner hinder any
Township employee or law enforcement officer during the performance of
his assigned duties; nor any employee of a contractor or other Town
department engaged in construction, repairing or caring for the park or
part thereof, or while in the discharge of duties conferred by this
Ordinance.
4-39. Posted Regulations, Directional Signs and Graphics. No
person shall disregard or fail to comply with any posted regulations, directional
signs and graphic barriers or other control devices.
4-40. Traffic Rules
4-40.1. No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle within any Town
park except upon roadways, parking areas, parkways or other areas
designated for such use. Disabled vehicles may be moved off a paved
area to allow for the continued flow of traffic but the vehicle must be
repaired or removed within two hours, unless other arrangements are
made with the Town.
4-40.2. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation of posted
regulations and directional signs per Minnesota Statutes, county or
municipal traffic ordinances, or orders or direction of law enforcement
officers or Township employees.
4-40.3. No person shall drive or operate a vehicle on or along any roads,
drives or parking lots which have been restricted, closed or posted with
appropriate signs or barricades. The Town shall have the authority to
order roads, drives or parking lots closed during the process of
construction, reconstruction, or repair or when in the Town Clerk’s opinion,
weather conditions render travel unsafe or unduly destructive.
4-40.4. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a careless or reckless
manner or without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and
drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, so as to endanger the life, limb
or property of any other person.
4-40.5. No person shall park, stop, or leave a vehicle during that period of
time 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise, unless
arrangements are made with the Town.
11
4-40.6. No person shall operate a vehicle which emits excessive or
irritating noise, noxious fumes, dense smoke or other pollutants.
4-40.7. No person shall wash, grease, change oil or service or repair any
vehicle. All disabled vehicles shall be made operational or removed within
two hours.
4-40.8. No person shall park a vehicle adjacent to any curb painted
yellow.
4-40.9. Vehicles illegally parked, disabled or abandoned may be towed
away and impounded at the owner’s expense. Said vehicle may be sold if
unclaimed after ninety (90) days to pay towing and storage charges.
4-40.10. No person shall drink, consume or have in his possession an
open bottle or container of an alcoholic or intoxicating beverage in any
motor vehicle when such vehicle is in any Town park.
4-40.11. Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way at all times to pedestrians.
4-40.12. No person shall cause any taxi, limousine or other vehicle for
hire to stand for the purpose of soliciting or taking in passengers other
than those who requested or were carried to the site by said vehicle,
unless licensed by the Town.
4-41. Exceptions may be made at the discretion of the Town Board in the
case of emergency or when special use permits have been authorized or for
other reasons the Town Board may determine necessary or desirable.
4-42. Any section of the park may be declared closed to the public by the
Town Board at any time or for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular
and stated intervals, and either entirely or for certain uses as the Town Board
shall find necessary.
4-43. No permits shall be issued for the exclusive use of any Town park
unless authorized by the Town Board.
4-44. PETS IN PARKS. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
4-44.1. Cause or allow any pet to roam or be at large in any park.
4-44.2. Permit a pet, except guide animals to assist a blind or impaired
person, to enter any picnic area, park building, park shelter, or beach area
including all of Bellaire Beach Park and Summit Lane Park.
12
4-44.3. Bring a pet into a park unless caged or on a leash not more than
six (6) feet in length.
4-44.4. Permit a pet to disturb, harass or interfere with any park visitor,
park visitor’s property or park employees.
4-44.5. Tether any animal to a tree, plant, building or park equipment.
4-44.6. Have custody or control of any pet in a park without possessing
and using an appropriate device for cleaning up pet feces and disposing of
the feces in a sanitary manner.
4-44.7. Permit any pet or domestic animal to graze or browse in any park.
4-45. The use of wheeled recreational equipment shall not be allowed on
any tennis courts.
SECTION 5. BATHING BEACH REGULATIONS.
5-1. In addition to the regulations in Section 4 of this Ordinance, this
section shall govern the conduct of members of the public during their use and
enjoyment of Bellaire Beach Park so as to further the safety, health, enjoyment
and welfare of all persons in the use thereof, and to protect public property and
resources for posterity.
5-2. Hours of Operation.
5-2.1. The park shall be open to the public during that period of time 30
minutes before sunrise and 30 minutes after sunset. No person shall
remain, stop, use or be present within the confines of the park during that
period of time 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise.
5-2.2. Exceptions may be made at the discretion of the Town Board in the
case of emergency or when special use permits have been authorized or
for other reasons the Town Board may determine necessary or desirable.
5-2.3. Any section of the park may be declared closed to the public by the
Town Board at any time or for any interval of time, either temporarily or at
regular and stated intervals, and either entirely or for certain uses as the
Town Board shall find necessary.
5-3. Permits. No permits shall be issued for the exclusive use of any
area of Bellaire Beach Park unless authorized by the Town Board.
13
5-4. Swimming.
5-4.1. No person shall bathe, wade or swim at the beach except when
dressed in bathing attire which is socially acceptable and conducive to
water safety.
5-4.2. No person shall swim outside of the marked area.
5-4.3. No person shall bring into or use at the beach, any inner tube, life
raft or other inflatable or buoyant object intended to support a person
except U.S. Coast Guard approved life jackets or vests when properly
attached.
5-4.4. No persons shall scatter any debris which could be a safety hazard.
5-4.5. No person shall use the beach area for purposes of picnicking.
5-4.6. No person being in custody of any animal shall permit said animal
to enter Bellaire Beach Park except for properly leased or harnessed
guide dogs trained to lead the disabled and accompanied by its disabled
master.
5-4.7. No person shall launch, dock or operate any watercraft in any
designated swimming area.
5-5. Fishing. No fishing shall be allowed from the shoreline of Bellaire
Beach Park.
5-6. Boating.
5-6.1. No person shall operate any watercraft in the area contrary to or in
violation of Minnesota Statutes.
5-6.2. No person shall launch or land any watercraft on or from the
shoreline except at locations specifically designated for such purposes.
5-6.3. No person shall operate a personal recreational device in the
designated swimming area unless able to handle the same with safety to
himself, other occupants thereof, or in such manner as not to annoy or
endanger other beach users.
5-6.4. No person shall leave any watercraft unattended except in areas
specifically designed for mooring, anchoring or beaching.
14
5-6.5. No person shall operate any watercraft within an area which has
been designated as a swimming area.
5-6.6. No person shall drop or throw from any watercraft garbage, litter or
other debris.
5-6.7. All watercraft launched from Bellaire Beach Park shall have a
Coast Guard approved life preserver for each occupant.
5-6.8. No person shall stand up in, rock or operate any watercraft in a
careless or reckless manner.
SECTION 6. SUMMIT LANE PARK REGULATIONS
6-1. In addition to the regulations in Section 4 of this Ordinance, this
section shall govern the conduct of members of the public during their use and
enjoyment of Summit Lane Park so as to further the safety, health, enjoyment,
and welfare of all persons in use thereof, and to protect public property and
resources for posterity.
6-1.1. Summit Lane Park is gated at the entrance. The gate shall be
locked and the park closed from November 1st to May 1st each year in
addition to being locked during the hours when the park is closed. The
Town reserves the right to appoint an individual(s) at its discretion who
shall have the authority to lock and unlock the gated entrance at certain
times of the day or year as determined by the Town Board.
6-2. Hours of Operation.
6-2.1. The park shall be open to the public during that period of time 30
minutes before sunrise and 30 minutes after sunset. No person shall
remain, stop, use or be present within the confines of the park during that
period of time 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise.
6-2.2. Exceptions may be made at the discretion of the Town Board in the
case of emergency or when special use permits have been authorized or
for other reasons the Town Board may determine necessary or desirable.
6-2.3. The park shall remain open until the completion of the
Independence Day fireworks display.
6-4. Swimming.
15
6-4.1. No person shall bathe, wade or swim at the beach except when
dressed in bathing attire which is socially acceptable and conducive to
water safety.
6-4.2. No person shall bring into or use at the beach, any inner tube, life
raft or other inflatable or buoyant object intended to support a person
except U.S. Coast Guard approved life jackets or vests when properly
attached.
6-4.3. No person shall scatter any debris which could be a safety hazard.
6-4.4. No person shall use the Summit Lane Park property for picnicking,
grilling of food or fires of any type.
6-4.5. No person being in custody of any animal shall permit said animal
to enter Summit Lane Park except for properly leashed or harnessed
guide dogs trained to lead the disabled and accompanied by its disabled
master.
6-4.6. Bicycles are prohibited on the dock.
6-4.7. Alcoholic beverages are prohibited.
6-4.8. Boats shall not be tied to the dock at any time or permanently
moored at the site.
6-4.9. Motorboats shall not operate within 50’ of the dock.
SECTION 7. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision
of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided in Ordinance No. 26 (Maximum
Fines).
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivisions, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole
or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 9. NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC. The publication of this Ordinance in
the official newspaper in which the Board proceedings are published shall
constitute notice to the general public and park users that the principle of positive
signing or use designation shall prevail. In the absence of positive signing,
negative signs need not be posted to ensure authority of this Ordinance.
SECTION 10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
16
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 11th day of August, 1975.
APPROVED:
______________________________
JEROME L. PERRON, Chair
ATTEST:
____________________________
MARIE ROLPH, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
JEROME L. PERRON, Chair
RAY RANSOM, Supervisor
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press on August 21, 1975.
Historical Notes
2012
Section 4-28 passed August 20, 2012, and effective August 29, 2012 by Mample (Chair),
Kermes, and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2011
Section 6-1.1 and 6-2.3 passed May 2, 2011, and effective March 28, 2012 by Mample
(Chair), Kermes, and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2010
Sections 3.11(a), 4-44.2, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 passed June 7, 2010, and effective June 23,
2010 by Sand (Chair), Mample, and Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2000
Section 4-45 passed October 23, 2000, and effective November 1, 2000 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 passed June 19, 2000, and effective July 5, 2000 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1991
Section 3.13 and 3.14 passed October 7, 1991, and effective October 16, 1991 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1989
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 passed July 17, 1989, and effective July 19,1989 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1979
Section 4-2 and 5 passed August 6, 1979, and effective August 17, 1979 by Perron
(Chair), Sand and Jungkunz; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
1975
Ordinance, Title and Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 originally passed August 11, 1975, and
effective August 21, 1975 by Perron (Chair), Ransom and Sand; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).















































ORDINANCE NO. 54
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO AND ESTABLISHING
FEES AND CHARGES TO BE PAID IN THE TOWN
OF WHITE BEAR (TOWNSHIP), RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. Ordinance No. 54 of the Town of White Bear (Township),
Minnesota, adopted December 16, 1985, as amended, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
SECTION 2. PERMIT FEES. For the services specified in this Section, the
following fees shall be charged and collected by the Town Clerk.
2-1. BUILDING PERMITS. The fees for each building permit and
inspection shall be based on Table 2-1. Plan review fees shall be 65% of the
building permit fee shown in Table 2-1, except when submittal documents for
similar plans are approved, plan review fees shall not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the normal building permit fee established in Table 2-1.
2-1.1. Permit fees for residential roofing, siding, window replacement,
kitchen and bathroom remodels limited to replacement of floor coverings,
cabinets and fixture replacements, shall be as follows:
2-1.1(a). $4,000.00 or less in value – fee based on valuation
plus state surcharge of .0005 x valuation, with a minimum fee of
$60.00, plus the state surcharge.
2-1.1(b). $4,001.00 or more – fixed fee of $105.00 plus state
surcharge of .0005 x valuation.
2-1.2. To insure compliance with Section 3-32 – Street Maintenance
Deposit of Ordinance No. 8 (Building Code), a fee of $300.00 shall be
charged for building construction of 1,000 square feet or less, $500.00
shall be charged for building construction in excess of 1,000 square feet,
and $800.00 shall be charged for residential new construction prior to
receiving a residential building permit; and a fee of $200.00 for each 2,000
square feet of building, including expansion or addition to existing
commercial/industrial buildings, shall be charged prior to receiving a
commercial/industrial building permit.
2-1.3. Fire suppression permit fees shall be calculated at 1% of the
valuation plus a state surcharge of (.0005 x valuation), with a minimum fee
of $45.00, plus the state surcharge.
2
2-2. GRADING PERMITS. The fees for each permit and inspection shall
be based on Table 2-2-A. Plan review fees shall be based on Table 2-2-B.
TABLE 2-1 – BUILDING PERMIT FEES
TOTAL VALUATION FEE
$1.00 to $500.00 $ 23.50
$501.00 to $2,000.00 $23.50 for the first $500.00 plus $3.05 for each
additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and
including $2,000.00
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $69.25 for the first $2,000.00 plus $14.00 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof,
to and including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $391.25 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.10 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof,
to and including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $643.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof,
to and including $100,000.00
$100,000.00 to $500,000.00 $993.75 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.60 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof,
to and including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.75
for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction
thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 and up $5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus
$3.15 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction
thereof
________________________________________________________________
Other Inspections and Fees:
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours $60.00 per hour
2. Reinspection fees $60.00 per hour
3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated $60.00 per hour
(Minimum charge – one-half hour)
4. Additional plan review required by changes, additions
or revisions to plans $60.00 per hour
3
5. For use of outside consultants for plan checking and
inspections, or both Actual costs
TABLE 2-2-A – GRADING PLAN REVIEW FEES
50 cubic yards (38.2 m3) or less No Fee
51 to 100 cubic yards (40 m3 to 76.5 m3) $23.50
101 to 1,000 cubic yards (77.2 m3 to 764.6 m3) $37.00
1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards (765.3 m3 to 7645.5 m3) $49.25
10,001 to 100,000 cubic yards (7646.3 m3 to 76 455 m3) - $49.25 for the first
10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3), plus $24.50 for each additional 10,000 yards
(7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
100,001 to 200,000 cubic yards (76 456 m3 to 152 911 m3) - $269.75 for the first
100,000 cubic yards (76 455 m3), plus $13.25 for each additional 10,000 cubic
yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
200,001 cubic yards (152 912 m3) or more - $402.25 for the first 200,000 cubic
yards (152 911 m3), plus $7.25 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5
m3) or fraction thereof.
Other Fees:
Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions
to approved plans (minimum charge – one-half hour) $60.00/hr
TABLE 2-2B – GRADING PERMIT FEES1
50 cubic yards (38.2 m3) or less $23.50
51 to 100 cubic yards (40 m3 to 76.5 m3) $37.00
101 to 1,000 cubic yards (77.2 m3 to 764.6 m3) - $37.00 for the first 100 cubic
yards (76.5 m3) plus $17.50 for each additional 100 cubic yards (76.5 m3) or
fraction thereof.
1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards (765.3 m3 to 7645.5 m3) - $194.50 fir the first 1,000
cubic yards (764.6 m3), plus $14.50 for each additional 1,000 cubic yards (764.6
m3) or fraction thereof.
10,001 to 100,000 cubic yards (7646.3 m3 to 76 455 m3) - $325.00 for the first
10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3), plus $66.00 for each additional 10,000 cubic
yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
100,001 cubic yards (76 456 m3) or more - $910.00 for the first 100,000 cubic
yards (76 455 m3), plus $36.50 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5
m3) or fraction thereof.
Other Inspections and Fees:
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours $60.00/hr
(Minimum charge – two hours)
2. Re-inspection fees assessed $60.00/hr
3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated $60.00/hr
(Minimum charge – two hours)
4
The fee for a grading permit authorizing additional work to that under a valid permit
shall be the difference between the fee paid for the original permit and the fee shown
for the entire project.
2-3. PLUMBING PERMITS. The fees for each permit, inspection and
additional plan review shall be as set forth hereinafter plus an additional
surcharge as established by the State of Minnesota for each permit:
2-3.1. Reinspection Fee $ 60.00
2-3.2. Plumbing Permit Per Fixture 15.00 per fixture
2-3.3. Outside Water Service Line 45.00
2-3.4. Outside Sewer Service Line 45.00
2-3.5. Outside Storm Sewer 45.00
2-3.6. Water or Sewer Tap 60.00
2-3.7. Open Cut 60.00
2-3.8. Repair, Alteration or Extension 45.00
2-3.9. Underground Sprinkler System 45.00 + release form
2-3.10. Concrete Curb Cuts 45.00 + engineer fee
2-3.11. Water Heater 45.00
2-3.12. RPZ (includes annual testing) 45.00
2-3.13. Water meter & ancillary devices Amount paid by Town
2-3.14. Water meter inspection fee 60.00
2-3.15. Meter Inspection Non-Compliance
Fee 300.00
2-3.16. Septic Permit 175.00
2-3.17. Annual Septic Operating Permit 60.00
2-3.18. Commercial plumbing and private sewer and water utilities
shall be calculated at 1% of the valuation, with a minimum
fee of $45.00, plus State surcharge
2-4. GAS-HEATING-VENTILATION PERMITS
2-4.1. Each Appliance 45.00
2-4.2. Fireplace 45.00
2-4.3. Geo thermal system 45.00
2-4.4. Air handler 45.00
2-4.5. Boiler 45.00
2-4.6. Water heater 45.00
2-4.7. Miscellaneous duct work 45.00
2-4.8. Gas Burner – Furnaces 45.00
2-4.9. Heating System-Steam/Air/Water 45.00
2-4.10. Air Conditioning 45.00
2-4.11. Ventilation 45.00
2-4.12. Changeover/Conversion to
Natural Gas 45.00
5
2-4.13. Commercial Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning fees
shall be calculated at 1% of the valuation, with a minimum
fee of $45.00, plus State surcharge
2-5. ELECTRICAL PERMITS. Electrical permit fees shall be established
as set by the State of Minnesota.
2-6. BORROW PITS PERMITS (One Time) 55.00 + $100 deposit
for consulting fees
2-7. SPECIAL INSPECTIONS 60.00
2-8. INVESTIGATION FEE 60.00
2-9. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
INSPECTION FEE 60.00
(inspection prior to occupancy)
2-10. CODE COMPLIANCE INSPECTION FEE 60.00
2-11. PERMIT RENEWAL FEE 60.00
2-12. ALL RE-INSPECTIONS 60.00
2-13. DRIVEWAY PERMITS (Asphalt/Concrete) 60.00
2-13.1. PATIO/IMPERVIOUS SURFACE 45.00
2-14. DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS PERMIT 70.00/bldg. min. or
$.10/sq.ft.
2-15. FENCE PERMITS 60.00
2-16. WOOD BURNING APPLIANCE PERMIT 45.00
2-17. TANK ABANDONMENT/INSTALLATION
PERMIT 60.00
2-18. LIMITED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
PERMIT 60.00
2-19. SIGN PERMITS 50.00
2-20. GRADING/EXCAVATING FOR BUILDING
2-20.1. 1st 10,000 square feet - As set forth in Table 2-2-APlan
Review Fees and Table
2-2-B-Grading Permit Fees
6
2-20.2. Each Additional 1,000
square feet - As set forth in Table 2-2-APlan
Review Fees and Table
2-2-B-Grading Permit fees
2-20.3. GRADING INSPECTION FEE 100.00
2-21. MOVING A BUILDING As set forth in Building
Valuation Data
2-22. SUB-GRADE EXPLORATION PERMIT 55.00 + 11.00 per boring
2-23. USE OF MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS
ON TOWN ROADS 1.00/annually
2-24. UTILITY PERMIT FOR WORK IN TOWN
RIGHT-OF-WAY 250.00 per request
2-25. WATER TOWER USAGE Per Town Board Resolution
2-26. TRANSIT BENCH PERMIT $25.00/year per bench +
initial $100.0 expense
deposit per request (may
include benches in multiple
locations)
SECTION 3. LICENSE FEES. For each activity specified in this Section, the
following fees shall be charged and collected by the Town Clerk.
3-1. RENTAL UNITS LICENSE (For 2 Years)
3-1.1. Single Family 100.00
3-1.2. Two-Family Units (1st unit/2nd unit) 50.00/50.00
3-1.3. Multi-Family 60.00 + 50.00/unit
3-2. DOG LICENSE
3-2.1. LICENSES (For 2 Years) 20.00
3-4.1(a). Impoundment Fees
1st Act 25.00
2nd Act 45.00 + Citation
3rd Act 60.00 + Citation and
Mandatory Court
Appearance
3-2.1(b). Boarding Fee Per Town Board Resolution
3-2.1(c). Kennel Permit 100.00
3-2.1(d). Annual Registration Fee –
Potentially Dangerous Dog 100.00
3-2.1(e). Annual Registration Fee –
7
Dangerous Dog 250.00
3-3. LIQUOR LICENSE
3-3.1. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License 2,800.00
3-3.2. On-Sale Wine License 1,400.00
3-3.3. Sunday On-Sale License 200.00
3-3.4. On-Sale 3.2% Non-Intoxicating
Malt Liquor License 150.00
3-3.5. Off-Sale 3.2% Non-Intoxicating
Malt Liquor License 75.00
3-3.6. Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License 500.00
(Annual license fee may be prorated monthly,
but may never be less than a minimum annual
license fee of $100)
3-3.7. Investigation Fee for New Intoxicating
Liquor License Applications 500.00
3-3.8. Temporary On-Sale License 250.00
(Issued to a club/charitable organization/
religious/non-profit only - 3 days maximum)
3-4. MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES – ANNUAL
3-3.1. Business License 100.00
3-3.2. Stables, Unlimited – 4+ horses 85.00
3-3.3. Stables, Limited – 3 or less 50.00
3-3.4. Special Home Occupation License 50.00
3-3.5. Peddlers License 35.00/month
3-3.5(a). Supplemental Fee 35.00
3-3.6. Roll-Off Service for Junk Cars/
Contracting Materials 60.00
3-3.7. Tobacco Sales License 100.00
3-3.8. Vacant Building Registration 1,100.00
3-3.9. Mooring Fee 165.00+Hold Harmless
(Add’/$100 after June 1st)
3-4. CONTRACTORS LICENSES. An annual license fee of $75.00 shall
be charged for each of the following types of contractors doing work in the Town
of White Bear (Township), if not licensed through the State of Minnesota.
- Commercial General - Heating/AC + Cert - Sign Erectors
Construction of Competency - Tree Removal/
- Blacktopping - General Construction Trimming
- Cement/Masonry (if not licensed by State) - Waterproofing
- Excavating - Outside Sewer & Water - Wreckers
- Fencing Installer
- Gas Installation + Cert - Peddler
of Competency - Roofing (If not licensed
8
- Automatic Underground by State)
Sprinkler System Installers
3-5. MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
CONTRACTORS LICENSES AND ROLL-OFF LICENSES. Annual fees shall be
charged for each of the following types of collection service provided to residents
or businesses in the Township.
3-5.1. Mixed Municipal Solid Waste Collection
Contractor License 200.00/year
3-7.1(a). Initial investigation deposit
to obtain commercial license 200.00/1st year only
3-5.2. Roll-Off Service 70.00
SECTION 4. MISCELLANEOUS FEES AND CHARGES. For each of the items
specified in this Section, the following charges shall be collected by the Town
Clerk.
4-1. PENDING ASSESSMENT REPORTS 20.00
4-1.1. Within 24 hours 25.00
4-2. ZONING MAP COPIES 7.50
4-3. SMALL STREET MAP 1.50
4-3.1. Mid-sized map 4.50
4-4. REPRODUCTION MACHINE COPIES .25 ea/first 3 copies
no charge-$1.00 minimum
4-5. TOPO MAPS 55.00/acre
4-6. PARK FEES Per Town Board Resolution
4-7. SAC CHARGE As established by the Metro
Council
4-8. WAC CHARGE Per Town Board Resolution
4-9. LOCAL SAC CHARGE Per Town Board Resolution
4-10. FALSE ALARM USER FEES
4-10.1. 3, 4, 5 & 6 False Alarms
in one (1) calendar year
(January 1 – Dec. 31) 50.00/per occurrence
4-10.2. 7 or more False Alarms
in one (1) calendar year
(January 1 – Dec. 31) 200.00/per occurrence
4-11. REQUEST FOR VARIANCE 225.00
4-12. PARK FACILITY USE FEE 20.00/per field/per day/
3 hour pay day maximum +
$1.00/per person for event
over 200 people
SECTION 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROCESSING FEES. For each procedure
provided for in this Section, the petitioner, applicant or beneficiary of the
proceedings shall pay the fee specified plus expenses. At the time the fee is
9
paid, there shall also be paid to the Town Clerk, the expense deposit specified.
At the conclusion of the proceedings, the Town Clerk shall collect any unpaid
balance of expense or refund any excess deposit.
Fee Expense Deposit
5-1. MINOR SUBDIVISION 35.00 150.00 + all related
costs incurred
5-2. MAJOR SUBDIVISION 110.00 100.00/per unit
3,000 maximum
5-3. SPECIAL HOME OCCUPATION 75.00 200.00/ 75.00 renewal
fee/$200.00 deposit
In the event a Special Home Occupation Permit runs for a period of less
than five (5) years, the renewal fee shall consist of publication fees only.
5-4. PERMITTED USE STANDARDS
PERMIT 75.00 200.00
5-5. CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT 75.00 200.00
5-6. PETITION FOR REZONING 110.00 + 200.00
100.00 renewal
5-7. STREET VACATIONS 110.00 250.00
5-8. APPEALS & ADJUSTMENTS 35.00 150.00
5-9. NON-CONFORMING USE 75.00 75.00/75.00 renewal
fee/$75.00 deposit
In the event a Non-Conforming Use Permit runs for a period of less
than five (5) years, the renewal fee shall consist of publication fees only.
5-10. MODEL HOMES 75.00+ 75.00 Business License
SECTION 6. FIRE CALL BILLING FOR RAILROAD AND RAMSEY COUNTY
PROPERTY. Ramsey County and the railroad’s operating in the Town of White
Bear shall be billed the actual costs incurred in extinguishing their fires. These
costs shall be the contract rate scheduled for fire calls established in the Town.
SECTION 7. UTILITY FEES.
7-1. MUNICIPAL WATER
FIXED FEE:
5/8 & 3/4 inch meter Per Town Board Resolution
1 inch meter Per Town Board Resolution
1-1/2 inch meter Per Town Board Resolution
2 inch Per Town Board Resolution
3 inch Per Town Board Resolution
10
CONSUMPTION FEE:
RESIDENTIAL:
0 - 24,000 gallons Per Town Board Resolution
24,001 - 39,000 gallons Per Town Board Resolution
39,001 - 54,000 gallons Per Town Board Resolution
>54,000 gallons Per Town Board Resolution
RESIDENTAL IRRIGATION (WHERE METERED AS IRRIGATION):
All Use Per Town Board Resolution
COMMERCIAL:
All Non-irrigation use Per Town Board Resolution
COMMERCIAL IRRIGATION:
All Use Per Town Board Resolution
NON-COMPLIANT FEE: Per Town Board Resolution
RESIDENTIAL NON-METERED
WATER FEE: Per Town Board Resolution
7-2. SANITARY SEWER
Residential Flat Rate for Sewer Per Town Board Resolution
Metered Commercial Sewer Per Town Board Resolution
7-3. STORMWATER DRAINAGE Per Town Board Resolution
7-4. HYDRANT WATER SALES
PERMIT/RENTAL FEES $50.00 Permit Fee +
$5.00 per day charge for rental
during the first 30 days and
$10.00 per day thereafter, with a
minimum rental of $25.00
7-4.1. Hydrant Meter Deposit Fee $ 750.00
7-5.1. METER TESTING FEE $250.00 5/8” meter
$300.00 ¾” to 1” meter
$350.00 1-1/2” to 2” meter
$400.00 3” meter
11
SECTION 8. ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGES. The Town shall collect an
Administrative Charge in the amount of $40.00 for each and every delinquent
account which is to be certified to the County Auditor for collection with the tax
rolls.
SECTION 9. NON-SUFFICIENT FUNDS FEE. The Town shall collect a Non-
Sufficient Fund Fee in the amount of $30.00 for each and every payment
collected for services rendered when, at the time of presentment for payment,
insufficient funds exist.
SECTION 10. REPEAL. All other Ordinances or parts of Ordinance inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed. In all other respects all other ordinances shall
remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 11. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as whole
or any part hereof other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 12. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 18th day of January, 2011.
APPROVED:
_____________________________
RICHARD A. SAND, Chairman
ATTEST:
_________________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
RICHARD A. SAND, Chair
WILLIAM J. MAMPLE, Supervisor
ROBERT J. KERMES, Supervisor
Synopsis published in the White Bear Press on January 26, 2011.
Historical Notes
2015
Section 2-1.1(a), 2-1.2, 2-3, 2-4, 2-9, 3-4, 7-3, passed January 21, 2015 by Kermes
(Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer)
12
2013
Section 7-1, 7-2, passed July 8, 2013, and effective July 17, 2013 by Mample (Chair),
Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2012
Section 2-1.3, 2-4.12, 3-3.5(a), passed December 17, 2012, and effective December 26,
2012 by Mample (Chair), Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2011
Section 7-1, passed October 17, 2011, and effective October 26, 2011 by Mample
(Chair), Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 2-3.17, 2-4.15, 3, and 4-12, passed August 1, 2011, and effective August 10,
2011 by Mample (Chair), Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 7-4, 7-4.1, and 7-5.1, passed May 16, 2011, and effective June 1, 2011 by
Mample (Chair), Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, passed January 18, 2011, and effective
January 26, 2011 by Sand (Chair), Mample, Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2010
Section 2-3, 2-4 passed July 6, 2010, and effective July 21, 2010 by Sand (Chair),
Mample, Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 3-4.1(c) passed June 21, 2010, and effective June 30, 2010 by Sand (Chair),
Mample, Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 2-17 passed February 16, 2010, and effective March 3, 2010 by Sand (Chair),
Mample, Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2009
Section 8-1 passed February 2, 2009, and effective February 11, 2009 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand, Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2008
Section 3-4.1 passed October 6, 2008, and effective October 22, 2008 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand, Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Sections 10, 11, 12, and 13 passed July 7, 2008, and effective July 23, 2008 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand, Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer)
2007
Section 8 passed March 19, 2007, and effective March 28, 2007 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2004
Section 6 repealed December 20, 2004, and effective December 29, 2004 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 5-1 passed August 2, 2004, and effective August 11, 2004 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer.
2003
Section 5-3 and 5-10 passed October 20, 2003, and effective November 5, 2003 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 6 passed April 21, 2003, and effective April 30, 2003 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 2-1, 2-2, 2-3.1, 2-13, 2-13.1, 2-13.2, and 8-3 passed April 7, 2003, and effective
April 16, 2003 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2002
Section 3-4 passed August 6, 2002, and effective August 21, 2002 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2001
Section 4-12 and 5-6 passed July 9, 2001, and effective July 18, 2001 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 2-5 passed July 16, 2001, and effective August 22, 2001 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
2000
Section 3-5 passed February 14, 2000 and effective February 23, 2000 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
13
Section 2-1, 2-2, 2-3, and 2-4 passed May 1, 2000, and effective May 10, 2000 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 2-3 passed June 5, 2000, and effective June 21, 2000 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 2-1 passed August 21, 2000, and effective August 30, 2000 by Weisenburger
Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1999
Section 3-1 and 3-4 passed December 21, 1998, and effective January 6, 1999 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 8 passed April 19, 1999, and effective June 9, 1999 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1998
Section 2-19 passed March 16, 1998, and effective March 25, 1998 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1997
Section 3-5 passed December 1, 1997, and effective December 17, 1997 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1996
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 passed February 5, 1996, and effective
February 14, 1996 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 4-1 and 5 passed November 4, 1996, and effective November 13, 1996 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1995
Section 3-5 passed December 19, 1994, and effective January 18, 1995 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 4-11 passed February 6, 1995, and effective February 15, 1995, and effective
March 8, 1995 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 passed February 27, 1995, and effective
March 8, 1995 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 3-4 passed May 1, 1995, and effective May 10, 1995 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 3-5, 3-6 and 3-7 passed June 5, 1995, and effective June 14, 1995 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 2 and 8 passed November 20, 1995, and effective December 20, 1995 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1994
Section 3-4 passed February 7, 1994, and effective February 16, 1994 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 4-7 passed March 21, 1994, and effective April 6, 1994 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
Section 3-4 passed June 20, 1994, and effective June 19, 1994 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1993
Section 2 passed on February 8, 1993, and effective February 24, 1993 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and
Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 2 & 5 passed on May 17, 1993, and effective May 2, 1993 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 4 passed on August 2, 1993, and effective August 11, 1993 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
1992
Section 4 passed on March 16, 1992, and effective April 1, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 6 & 7 passed on April 20, 1992, and effective May 6, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Section 8 passed on June 1, 1992, and effective June 17, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and
Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
14
Section 9 passed on July 20, 1992, and effective August 5, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
1991
Section 4 passed on January 7, 1991, and effective January 16, 1991 by Weisenburger (Chair),
Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 3 & 7 passed on April 15, 1991, and effective May 1, 1991 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand
and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, & 8 passed on June 17, 1991, and effective July 3, 1991 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
1989
Section 2 passed on July 17, 1989, and effective July 26, 1989 by Weisenburger (Chair), Jungkunz
and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, & 8 passed on November 13, 1989, and effective December 13, 1989 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Jungkunz and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
1987
Section 1 passed on January 5, 1987, and effective February 4, 1987 by Jungkunz (Chair),
Weisenburger and Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, & 8 passed on December 21, 1987, and effective January 13, 1988 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Jungkunz, Sand; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer);
1985
Ordinance, Title, Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, & 7 passed on December 16, 1985, and effective
December 25, 1985 by Jungkunz (Chair), Weisenburger and Hamilton; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).
1983
Ordinance, Title, Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, & 7 originally passed on January 10, 1983, and effective
February 9, 1983 by Sand (Chair), Jungkunz, Weisenburger; Webber (Clerk-Treasurer).





























ORDINANCE NO. 61
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A UTILITIES
COMMISSION IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION. A Town Utilities
Commission is hereby established. The Commission shall be the Town planning
agency as to the installation of water systems, sanitary sewer systems, storm
sewer systems and stormwater management systems and as to fees to be
charged for water service and sewer service and as to the collection and disposal
of garbage and refuse in the Town, and shall be advisory directly to the Town
Board.
SECTION 2. COMPOSITION.
2-1. Such Commission shall consist of seven (7) members who are
residents of the Town to be appointed by the Town Board. Two members shall
have their terms expire on April 30, 1990; two members shall have their terms
expire on April 30, 1991; and three members shall have their terms expire on
April 30, 1992. After the term of the original Commission members expire,
members shall be appointed for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled
by the Board for the remainder of the terms. Every appointed member shall,
before entering upon the discharge of his/her duties, take an oath that he/she will
faithfully discharge the duties of his/her office. All appointed members shall
serve without compensation. The Town Supervisor designated as the Utilities
Commissioner shall be an ex-officio member of the Commission.
2-2. The Town Board, having the power to appoint the commission
members, shall also have the authority to remove any appointed member when,
in its judgment, the public welfare will be promoted by the removal. The Town
Board shall appoint the chair of the Commission.
2-3. ALTERNATE. The Town Board may appoint an alternate member to
the Utilities Commission. Such alternate member may attend and take part in the
Commission Meetings, but shall have no vote. In the event that a regular
member is absent from any meeting, the alternate member may substitute with
all of the privileges of a member for that meeting only.
SECTION 3. ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS, ETC.
3-1. The Town Board shall name a chairperson and a secretary/vicechairperson
from the members of the Commission for the term of one year.
3-2. The Commission shall hold one regular meeting each month and
shall meet in addition thereto at the call of the Chairperson of the Commission. It
shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions and the findings, which record shall be a public record.
SECTION 4. POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION. The Utilities
Commission shall be the planning agency for extension of water and sewer
services in and to the Town of White Bear. The Commission shall also supervise
the operation and the maintenance of existing water and sewer systems in the
Town and advise the Town Board as to suggested fees for water and sewer
services.
The duties shall also include:
4-1. The preparation in cooperation with the Town Engineer of a
comprehensive water and sewer plan for the Town, coordinating its planning with
the Comprehensive Land Use, Thoroughfare and Community Facilities Plan of
the Planning Commission of the Town of White Bear.
4-2. Advising the Town Board on the maintenance and enforcement of
the zoning ordinance as affected by the water and sewer services existing and
planned.
4-3. Advising the Town Board on water and sewer services available or
planned with reference to subdivision platting.
4-4. Advising and making recommendations to the Town Board as to the
collection and disposal of garbage and refuse in the Town.
4-5. Advise the Town Board on the planning, construction and
maintenance of stormwater collection systems, including the conveyance and
storage of stormwater.
4-6. Review Wetlands Permit applications and make recommendations to
the Town Board regarding such application.
4-7. Upon request of the Town Board advising the Board as to any other
utility service or public service within the jurisdiction of the Town.
SECTION 5. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE. The Attorney for the Town Board
shall act as Attorney for the Commission, and the Town Engineer shall act as
engineer for the Commission to the extent authorized from time to time by the
Town Board.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
2
3
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 30th day of July, 1990.
APPROVED:
___________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
____________________________________
WILLIAM J. MALINEN, Town Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
DOUGLAS H. PFEFFER, SR., Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press August 15, 1990.
Historical Notes
2011
Section 2-3 passed July 5, 2011, and effective July 13, 2011 by Mample (Chair); Kermes
and Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1992
Section 2 passed May 18, 1992, and effective May 27, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair);
Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1990
Ordinance, Title and Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 passed July 30, 1990, and effective
August 15, 1990 by Weisenburger (Chair); Sand and Pfeffer; Malinen (Clerk-Treasurer).


ORDINANCE NO. 64
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A STORMWATER DRAINAGE
UTILITY IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR,
RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR DOES ORDAIN:
SECTION 1. STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY ESTABLISHED. All
properties within the Town of White Bear participate in the Township stormwater
runoff and as such contribute to the need for stormwater drainage system
operation, maintenance, repair and improvements. The purpose of this
Ordinance is to establish the operation of the stormwater drainage system as a
public utility pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 444.075 from which
revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and
Minnesota Statutes.
1-1. The Town Board shall have charge of management of the
stormwater drainage utility subject to delegation of authority to the Town
Engineer, Public Works Director and to other Town employees as the Town
Board shall provide.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.
2-1. Residential Equivalent Factor (REF). One (1) REF is defined as
the ratio of the average volume of runoff generated by one (1) acre of a given
land use to the average volume of runoff generated by one (1) acre of typical
single family residential land, during a standard one (1) year rainfall event.
SECTION 3. STORMWATER DRAINAGE FEES. Stormwater drainage fees
shall be a flat rate for all dwellings in the Township. Fees for non-residential
development shall be determined by dividing the total square footage of
impervious area (buildings, pavements, and any other impervious surfaces) by
4,000 square feet (approximate amount of impervious surface for a typical
residential dwelling) which will be used as Residential Equivalent Factor (REF).
That factor is then multiplied by the flat rate charged for a dwelling unit. Fees for
non-residential developments which do not have buildings or significant paved
areas, (i.e. cemeteries, railroad lines, etc.) shall be determined by dividing the
total developed area by 12,000 square feet (typical square foot lot) then
multiplied by 0.25 (a lesser runoff factor). Vacant, unused land is not to be billed.
The formula used to calculate stormwater drainage fees are summarized as
follows:
3-1. LAND USE CLASSIFICATION R.E.F.
1. Residential Dwellings 1
2. Non-Residential Development Including: Number of R.E.F.’s
Commercial to be determined by
Industrial dividing total
Schools impervious surface
Churches area by 4,000 sq. ft.
Parks
Airports
Governmental, etc.
3. Cemeteries, public utilities, railroads, driving Number of R.E.F.’s
range, and other developed areas without to be determined by
buildings or paved area dividing total
buildable area by
12,000 sq. ft. then
multiplying by 0.25
4. Vacant, unused land No charge
For any uses not listed above, Residential Equivalent Factors shall be calculated
individually and presented to the Town Board for approval.
3-2. All amounts due as described herein shall be set forth in Ordinance
No. 54 (Fees & Charges), and shall be payable at the office of the Town Clerk or
other designated person by the date established on the quarterly bill.
3-3. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by
the date established in Section 3-2.
SECTION 4. EXEMPTIONS. The following land uses are exempt from
stormwater drainage fees.
4-1. Public rights-of-way.
4-2. Vacant, unimproved land with ground cover, not classified above.
4-3. Lakes, ponds, ponding areas, and wetlands.
SECTION 5. COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES. Each charge
levied pursuant to this Ordinance is hereby made a lien upon the corresponding
lot, land, parcel or premises served by the drainage system of the Town. All
such charges which are on September 1st of each year more than 30 days past
due and having been properly billed to the occupant of the premises served, shall
be deemed a delinquent account against the respective property served. In
preparing the assessment roll, the Town shall collect an administrative charge for
each account as provided in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees and Charges). This
2
Assessment Roll shall be delivered to the Town Board for adoption on or before
September 15th of each year and upon approval thereof, the amount due shall be
certified by the Town Clerk to the Auditor of Ramsey County before the 15th day
of October each year, and the Town in so certifying such charges to the County
Auditor shall specify the name of the owner of the premises, the description of
the premises served and the amount thereof. The amount so certified shall be
extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls against such premises in the same
manner as other taxes. Such action may be optional or subsequent to using
legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 1st day of June, 1992.
APPROVED:
____________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
DOUGLAS H. PFEFFER, SR., Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press on June 17, 1992.
Historical Notes
2013
Section 3-2 and 303 passed August 5, 2013, and effective August 14, 2013 by Mample
(Chair), Kermes, Prudhon; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1993
Section 3 passed August 2, 1993, and effective August 11, 1993 by Weisenburger
(Chair); Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1992
Section 5 passed July 20, 1992, and effective August 5, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair);
Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
3
4
Ordinance, Title, and Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 passed June 1, 1992, and effective
June 17, 1992 by Weisenburger (Chair); Sand and Pfeffer; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).









ORDINANCE NO. 68
AN ORDINANCE GOVERNING THE CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION,
OPERATION, REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, REMOVAL AND RELOCATION
OF FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT USED FOR THE TRANSMISSION
OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS OR RELATED SERVICES IN THE
PUBLIC GROUND OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR AND
PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAIN:
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS. The terms defined in this Section have the
meanings given them.
1-1. Company. A natural or corporate person, business association or
other business entity including partnerships and sole proprietorships, political
subdivision, public or private agency of any kind, its successors and assigns,
who or which seeks to, or is required to construct, install, operate, repair,
maintain, remove or relocate facilities in the Town.
1-2. Facilities. Communication lines or equipment of any kind, including,
but not limited to, lines or equipment for the transmission of audio, video, or data,
or other similar communications services, not otherwise governed by Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 238, including all trunks, lines, cables, wires, optical fibers or
other fiber optic cables, laser equipment, circuits, physical connections, switching
equipment, wireless communication equipment of all kinds, towers, and any
necessary appurtenances owned, leased or operated by a company on, over, in,
under, across or along any public ground.
1-3. Public Ground. Highways, roads, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
skyways, public ways, utility easements and public easements in the Town.
1-4. Utility Pole Attachment Permit. A pole attachment permit is
required by the registrant in order to attach a wireless telecommunication facility
to an existing public utility structure in the public right-of-way. A pole attachment
permit is not required if a registrant has been issued a valid excavation permit for
the same project.
1-5. Utility Pole. A utility pole is a structure that is 1) owned and
operate by: (a) a public utility; (b) a communications service provider; (c) a
municipality; (d) an electric membership corporation; or (e) a rural electric
cooperative; and 2) designed and used to: (a) carry lines, cables, or wires for
telephone, cable television, telecommunications or electricity; or (b) provide
lighting.
2
SECTION 2. PERMIT PROCEDURE.
2-1. Permit Required. A company may not construct, install, repair,
remove or relocate facilities, or any part thereof, or otherwise open or disrupt any
public ground without first obtaining a permit from the Town. The Town shall
require a separate permit of a company for each location where construction,
installation, or other disturbance of the public ground is to occur. Each permit
shall state specifically the locations of any facilities, and the nature of the work
necessitating the permit, and shall contain reasonable regulations and conditions
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the populace of the Town.
2-2. Application. Application for a permit is made to the Town Clerk. A
company shall apply for a permit or renewal of a permit a minimum of two (2)
weeks before starting work and must submit detailed plans for street or sidewalk
use and pedestrian safety on major projects. This provision or portions thereof
may be waived by the Town in the event of an emergency.
2-3. Issuance of Permit. If the Town Board determines that the
applicant has satisfied the requirements of this Ordinance a permit may be
issued. An applicant may contest a permit denial or the conditions of approval by
written notice to the Clerk requesting a Town Board reconsideration within
fourteen (14) days of the denial. The Town Board shall hear any permit denial
contest within forty-five (45) days of the Clerk’s receipt of the contest notice.
Nothing in this Ordinance precludes the Town from requiring a franchise
agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to the issuance of a
permit set forth herein.
2-4. Permit Fee. The application must be accompanied by the permit fee
as established in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
2-5. Security for Completion of Work. Prior to commencement of work,
the company must deposit with the Town security in the form of certified check,
letter of credit, or construction bond, in a sufficient amount as determined by the
Town for the completion of the work. The securities will be held until the work is
completed plus a period of 2 months thereafter to guarantee that restoration work
has been satisfactorily completed. Upon application of the company, providing
such information as the Town may require, if two or more work projects are to be
constructed during a calendar year, the Town may accept, in lieu of separate
security for each project, a single security for multiple projects in such form and
amount as determined, in the discretion of the Town Board, to be sufficient to
assure completion of all projects which may be in progress at any one time
during that calendar year and to guaranty that restoration work will be
satisfactorily completed. The security will then be returned to the company with
interest if required by law and then interest at the applicable statutory rate.
3
2-6. Inspection of Work. When the work is completed, the company
must request an inspection by the Town. The Town will determine if the work
has been satisfactorily completed, and provide the company with a written report
of the inspection and approval.
2-7. Penalty. Failure to secure required permits prior to beginning
construction, excavation, installation, or work of any kind in public ground, shall
constitute a misdemeanor under this Ordinance.
SECTION 3. RESTORATION AND RELOCATION.
3-1. Restoration. Upon completion of the work contemplated by a
permit, the company must restore the general area of the work, including the
pavement and its foundations, to the same or better condition than existed prior
to commencement of the work necessitating a permit. The work must be
completed as promptly as weather permits. If the company does not promptly
perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material,
and restore the public ground to the same condition, the Town may put it in the
same condition at the expense of the company. The company must, upon
demand, pay to the Town the direct and indirect cost of the work done for or
performed by the Town, including, but not limited to, the Town’s administrative
costs.
3-1.1. To recover its costs, the Town will first drawn on the security
posted by the company and then recover the balance of the costs incurred
from the company directly by written demand. This remedy is in addition
to any other remedies available to the Town.
3-2. Company Initiated Relocation. The company must give the Town
written notice prior to a company initiated relocation of facilities. A company
initiated relocation must be at the company’s expense and must be approved by
the Town, such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
3-3. Town Required Relocation. The company must promptly, with due
regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently relocate its facilities
whenever the Town, in writing, requires such relocation.
3-4. Relocation Where Public Ground Vacated. The vacation of public
ground does not deprive the company of the right to operate and maintain its
facilities in the Town. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the Town, the
Town must pay the relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by
the company, the company must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise
agreed to by the Town, company, and other persons.
SECTION 4. COMPANY DEFAULT.
4
4-1. Notice. If the company is in default in the performance of the work
authorized by the permit, including, but not limited to, restoration requirements for
more than 30 days after receiving written notice from the Town of the default, the
Town may terminate the rights of the company under the permit, subject to the
Town’s absolute right to revoke at any time in the exercise of the Town’s police
powers. The notice of default must be in writing and specify the provisions of the
permit under which the default is claimed and state the grounds of the claim.
The notice must be served on the company by personally delivering it to an
officer thereof at its principal place of business in Minnesota or by certified mail to
that address.
4-2. Town Action on Default. If the company is in default in the
performance of the work authorized by the permit, the Town may, after the above
notice to the company, and failure of the company to cure the default, take such
action as may be reasonably necessary to abate the condition caused by the
default. The company must reimburse the Town for the Town’s reasonable costs,
including costs of collection and attorney fees incurred as a result of the
company default. The security posted under Section 2-5 will be applied by the
Town first toward payment for such reimbursement.
SECTION 5. OTHER CONDITIONS OF USE.
5-1. Use of Public Ground. Facilities must be located, constructed,
installed, maintained or relocated so as not to endanger or unnecessarily
interfere with the usual and customary traffic, travel, and use of public ground.
The facilities are subject to additional conditions of the permit as established
therein, including, but not limited to (i) the right of inspection by the Town at
reasonable times and places; (ii) the obligation to relocate the facilities pursuant
to Section 3-3 and 3-4; and (iii) compliance with all applicable regulations
imposed by the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, and other State and
Federal laws, including prompt compliance with the requirements of the Gopher
State One Call program, Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216D.
5-2. Location. The facilities must be placed in a location agreed to by
the Town. The company shall give the Town forty-five (45) days advanced
written notice of the company’s proposed location of facilities within the public
ground. No later than 45 days after the Town’s receipt of the company’s written
notice, the Town will notify the company in writing of the Town’s acceptance or
rejection of the proposed location. If the Town rejects the company’s proposed
location, the Town shall propose alternative locations. The Town does not waive
or forfeit its right to reject the location of facilities by failure to respond within 45
days.
5-3. Emergency Work. A company may open and disturb the surface of
public ground without a permit where an emergency exists requiring the
immediate repair of its facilities. In such event, the company must request a
5
permit not later than the second working day thereafter, and comply with the
applicable conditions of the permit. In no event may the company undertake
such an activity which will result in the closing of a street or alley without prior
notification to the Town.
5-4. Street Improvements, Paving or Resurfacing. The Town will give
the company written notice of plans for street improvements where permanent
paving or resurfacing is involved. The notice must contain (i) the nature and
character of the improvements; (ii) the streets upon which the improvements are
to be made; (iii) the extent of the improvements, the time when the Town will start
the work; and (iv) if more than one street is involved, the sequences in which the
work is to proceed.
5-5. Company Protection of Facilities. A company must take all
reasonable measures to prevent its facilities from causing damage to persons or
property. A company must take all reasonable measures to protect its facilities
from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities by persons, property or the
elements. The company must take all reasonable protective measures when the
Town performs work near the facilities.
5-6. Guarding of Obstructions or Dangers. If a company shall obstruct
any public ground, such company shall keep such obstruction or obstructions
properly guarded at all times. From sunset to sunrise, all obstructions must be
guarded by a sufficient number of warning lights placed in such a manner that
they will give proper warning of said obstruction. The Town may require any
other restrictions or safety regulations as may be in the public interest.
5-7. Prior Service Connections. In cases where the Town is
undertaking the paving or resurfacing of streets and the facilities are located
under such street, the company may be required to install service connections
prior to the paving or resurfacing if it is apparent that service will be required
during the five year period following the paving or resurfacing.
SECTION 6. INDEMNIFICATION.
6-1. Scope. The company will indemnify, keep, and hold the Town, its
elected officials, officers, employees, and agents free and harmless from any and
all claims and actions on account of injury or death of persons or damage to
property occasioned by the construction, installation, maintenance, repair,
removal, relocation or operation of the facilities affecting public ground, unless
such injury or damage is the result of the negligence of the Town, its elected
officials, employees, officers, or agents. The Town will notify the company of
claims or actions and provide a reasonable opportunity for the company to
accept and undertake the defense.
6
6-2. Claim Defense. If a claim or action is brought against the Town
under circumstances where indemnification applies, the company, at its sole
expense, shall defend the Town if written notice of the claim or action is given to
the company within a period wherein the company is not prejudiced in the
defense of such claim or action by lack of such notice. If the company
undertakes the defense, the company shall have complete control of such claim
or action, but it may not settle without the consent of the Town, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any
defense or immunity otherwise available to the Town. In defending any action on
behalf of the Town, the company is entitled to assert every defense or immunity
that the Town could assert in its own behalf.
SECTION 7. EFFECTIVE DATE AND APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING
FACILITIES. Companies with facilities, in, on, over, under, or along public
ground on the effective date of this Ordinance must take prompt action to comply
with this Ordinance and the permits authorized by this Ordinance. A company,
however, is not required to reapply for a permit obtained from the Town prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance. A company is not required to pay the
difference between the permit fee of a previously obtained permit and the
equivalent newly obtained permit under this Ordinance. All other provisions of
this Ordinance apply to existing facilities.
SECTION 8. ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIREMENTS. By receiving a permit
pursuant to this Ordinance, the company accepts and agrees to comply with all
of the requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 9. PUBLIC GROUND OTHER THAN RIGHT-OF-WAY. Nothing in
this Ordinance is intended to grant to the company authority beyond that given by
Minnesota Statutes, Section 222.37, for use of the public right-of-ways for
construction and operation of facilities. If the Town allows the company to use its
non-right-of-way public ground, the terms of this Ordinance apply to the extent
they are consistent with the contract, statutory, and common law rights the Town
owns in such property.
SECTION 10. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 11. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
11-1. STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES.
11-2. PURPOSE. The Township desires high quality wireless
communication services to accommodate the needs of residents and businesses.
7
At the same time, the Township strives to minimize the negative impacts that
wireless telecommunication facilities can have on aesthetics and public safety.
Due to the many services that must be delivered within its limited area, the
Township also strives to avoid unnecessary encumbrances within the public
right-of-way. The Township allows and regulates wireless telecommunication
facilities outside of the public right-of-way through performance standards and
height limits. The purpose of this Section is to regulate wireless
telecommunication facilities within the public right-of-way in a manner that
balances desire for service with aesthetic, public safety, and right-of-way
flexibility concerns.
Public rights-of-way are appropriate locations for wireless telecommunication
facilities that present minimal impacts (i.e. small pole attachments that do not
require new poles, do not require pole extensions, and do not have associated
ground mounted equipment). Wireless telecommunication facilities that require
greater heights than can be afforded by existing poles in the public right-of-way
and that require ground mounted equipment are more appropriately sited outside
the public right-of-way in accordance with adopted performance standards.
However, the Township recognizes that as wireless technology advances, some
residential areas of the Township may be hard to serve with wireless technology
due to the lack of siting alternatives in the immediate vicinity. In such areas,
where no alternative non-right-of-way locations are available, wireless
telecommunication facilities that require pole extensions and ground equipment
will be allowed in the public right-of-way subject to the requirements of this
Section which are meant to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
11-3. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES AS POLE
ATTACHMENTS. Wireless telecommunication facilities that comply with the
following requirements may be attached to existing public utility structures within
the right-of-way after issuance of a pole attachment permit:
11-3.1. The wireless telecommunication facility shall not extend above the
top of the existing public utility structure and the height of the existing
public utility structure shall not be increased to accommodate the wireless
telecommunication facility.
11-3.2. If the public utility structure must be replaced to structurally
accommodate the wireless telecommunication facility, the replacement
public utility structure height shall not exceed the existing public utility
structure height and the replacement public utility structure diameter shall
not exceed the existing public utility structure diameter by more than 50
percent.
11-3.3. The wireless telecommunication facility shall not be larger than
twenty eight (28) cubic feet and shall have no individual surface larger
than four (4) square feet.
8
11-3.4. The wireless telecommunication facility shall not extend outward
from the existing pole or tower or arm thereof by more than two and one
half (2 1/2) feet, except that an antenna one half inch in diameter or less
may extend an additional six inches.
11-3.5. The wireless telecommunication facility shall include no ground
mounted equipment.
11-3.6. The wireless telecommunication facility shall not interfere with
public safety communications.
11-3.7. Wireless telecommunication facilities in the right-of-way shall be
removed and relocated at Township request subject to the provisions of
this Section.
11-3.8. The wireless telecommunication facility shall not block light
emanating from the public utility structure and shall not otherwise interfere
with the original use of the public utility structure.
11-4. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES AS POLE
EXTENSIONS OR WITH GROUND MOUNTED EQUIPMENT. Wireless
telecommunication facilities that require increased public utility structure height or
that have ground mounted equipment may be erected in the public right-of-way
only when in compliance with the following provisions and after issuance of a
pole attachment permit or excavation permit:
11-4.1. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township
that the wireless telecommunication facility cannot be placed in a Code
complying location outside the right-of-way within one quarter (1/4) mile of
the proposed location.
11-4.2. The replacement public utility structure, including lightning rods
and all other attachments, shall not exceed the heights of the existing
public utility structure by more than fifteen (15) feet and in no event shall
the height measured from ground level exceed fifty (50) feet. Once the
height of a public utility structure has been increased under the provisions
of this Section, the height shall not be further increased.
11-4.3. The replacement public utility structure diameter shall not exceed
the existing public utility structure diameter by more than fifty (50) percent.
11-4.4. The wireless telecommunication facility shall not extend outward
from the public utility structure by more than two (2) feet.
11-4.5. If feasible and desirable, as determined by the Township, the
replacement public utility structure shall match the original and
surrounding public utility structures in materials and color.
9
11-4.6. The wireless telecommunication facility shall not interfere with
public safety communications.
11-4.7. A pole attachment or excavation permit for a wireless
telecommunication facility that has ground mounted equipment will be
issued only if the Issuing Authority finds the following:
(i) the ground mounted equipment will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian
circulation;
(ii) the ground mounted equipment will not create a safety hazard;
(iii) the location of the ground mounted equipment minimizes impacts on
adjacent property; and,
(iv) the ground mounted equipment will not adversely impact the health,
safety, or welfare of the community.
11-4.8. Ground mounted equipment associated with the wireless
telecommunication facility shall meet the following performance standards:
(i) be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of street or curb
line;
(ii) be separated from a sidewalk by a minimum of three (3) feet;
(iii) be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the nearest intersecting
right-of-way line;
(iv) be separated from the nearest ground mounted wireless
telecommunication equipment installation on the same block face by a
minimum of 330 feet unless the equipment is placed underground;
(v) if located adjacent to residential uses, ground mounted equipment shall
be limited to three (3) feet in height above grade and twenty eight (28)
cubic feet in cumulative size;
(vi) if located adjacent to non-residential uses, ground mounted equipment
shall be limited to five (5) feet in height above grade and eighty-one (81)
cubic feet in cumulative size;
(vii) ground mounted equipment located outside the public right-of-way
shall conform with the requirements of Township ordinances.
(viii) vegetative or other screening compatible with the surrounding area
shall be provided around the ground mounted equipment if deemed
necessary by the Township.
11-4.9. Wireless telecommunication facilities in the right-of-way shall be
removed and relocated at Township request subject to the provisions of
this Section.
10
11-5. NEW POLES. The erection in the right-of-way of a new pole to
support wireless telecommunication facilities is not allowed, except as a
replacement of an existing public utility structure subject to the requirements of
this Section.
11-6. CHARGES. In addition to the permit fees outlined in Township
ordinance, the Township reserves the right to charge telecommunication
providers for their use of the public right-of-way to the extent that such charges
are allowed under state law. Telecommunication providers shall be responsible
for payment of property taxes attributable to their equipment in the public right-ofway.
SECTION 12. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Minnesota,
this 5th day of September, 1995.
APPROVED:
___________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
________________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
LINDA J. FORD, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press on September 20, 1995.
Historical Notes
2017
Sections 1 and 11 passed December 18, 2017, and effective December 27, 2017 by
Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Clerk-Treasurer (Short).
1995
Ordinance, Title and Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 passed September 5,
1995, and effective September 20, 1995 by Weisenburger (chair); Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-
Treasurer).
1
ORDINANCE NO. 69
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE SALE, POSSESSION AND USE OF
TOBACCO, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES IN THE
TOWN, AND TO REDUCE THE ILLEGAL SALE, POSSESSION, AND USE OF SUCH
ITEMS TO AND BY MINORS IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY,
MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
An Ordinance relating to the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products,
and tobacco related devices in the Town and to reduce the illegal sale, possession, and
use of such items to and by minors.
SECTION 1. PURPOSE. Because the Town recognizes that many persons under the
age of 18 years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco related devices, and such sales, possession, and use are
violations of both State and Federal laws; and because studies, which the Township
hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they
have reached the age of 18 years and that those persons who reach the age of 18
years without having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and
because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems
which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this Ordinance
shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering
existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal
use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices, and to further the official
public policy of the State of Minnesota in regard to preventing young people from
starting to smoke as state in Minnesota Statutes, section 144.391.
SECTION 2. DEFINTIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS. Except as may otherwise be
provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted
definitions. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular.
The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter, and vice-versa. The term
“shall” means mandatory and the term “may” mean permissive. The following terms
shall have the definitions given to them:
2-1. TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS. “Tobacco” or “Tobacco products”
shall mean any substance or item containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or
accessory of a tobacco product, including, but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; little
cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies,
perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco;
snuff, snuff flour; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse
scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of
2
tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or
smoking. Tobacco or tobacco products excludes any tobacco product that has been
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco
cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes,
and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
2-2. TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. “Tobacco related devices” shall mean
any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, ash tray, or other device
intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing,
sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
2-3. NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCTS. “Nicotine delivery products” shall mean
a product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption
that is not tobacco or tobacco related devices as defined by sections 2-2 and 2-3 of this
ordinance. Exemption: Not including any product that has been approved or otherwise
certified for legal sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco
use cessation, harm reduction, or for another medical purposes, and is being marketed
and sold solely for that approved purpose.
2-4. SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. “Self-service merchandising” shall
mean open display of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, lobelia or
nicotine delivery products in any manner where any person shall have access to the
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, lobelia, or nicotine delivery product
without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee. The
assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco,
tobacco product, tobacco related device, lobelia, or nicotine delivery products between
the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising shall not
include vending machines.
2-5. VENDING MACHINE. “Vending Machine” shall mean any mechanical,
electric or electronic, or other types of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine delivery products upon the insertion of
money, tokens, or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person
seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or nicotine
delivery products.
2-6. INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. “Individually Packaged” shall mean the
practice of selling any tobacco, tobacco product, or nicotine delivery product wrapped
individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco, tobacco products and nicotine
delivery products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags
or cans of loose tobacco in any form, single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing
tobacco, nicotine-based electronic-cigarettes and lobelia-based electronic cigarettes.
Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as
described in this section shall not be considered individually packaged.
2-7. LOOSIES. “Loosies” shall mean the common term used to refer to a single
or individually packed cigarette, or any other tobacco product that has been removed
3
from its packaging and sold individually. The term “loosies” does not include individual
cigars with a retail price, before any sales taxes, of more than $2.00 per cigar.
2-8. MINOR. “Minor” shall mean any natural person who has not yet reached the
age of eighteen (18) years.
2-9. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. “Retail Establishment” shall mean any place of
business where tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices are available for
sale to the general public. Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to,
grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.
2-10. MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. “Movable Place of Business” shall
refer to any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile, or other type of
vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent
type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
2-11. SALE. A “Sale” shall mean any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter,
or other consideration.
2-12. COMPLIANCE CHECKS. “Compliance Checks” shall mean the system
the Town uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco related devices are following and complying with the
requirements of this Ordinance. Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as
authorized by this Ordinance. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors
who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for
educational, research and training purposes as authorized by State and Federal laws.
Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the
purpose of enforcing appropriate Federal, State, or local laws and regulations relating to
tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices.
2-13. INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded
by walls, doorways or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50 percent
of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the
area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier,
whether temporary or permanent.
SECTION 3. LICENSE. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to do so from
the Township.
Section 3A. Smoking: Smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall
smoke within the indoor area of any establishment with a retail tobacco license.
Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco and tobacco related products is
prohibited.
Section 3B. Proximity to Other Retailers: No license shall be granted
pursuant to this section to any person for any retail sales of tobacco, tobacco products,
4
tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, within two thousand feet
of any other establishment holding such license, as measured by the shortest line
between the space to be occupied by the proposed licensee and the occupied space of
the nearest existing licensee, unless that person has been in the business of selling
such products in that 3- location before the date this section was enacted into law for at
least one year.
3-1. APPLICATION. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided by the
Township. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant’s
residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business
for which the license is sought, and any additional information the Township deems
necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Town Clerk shall forward the
application to the Town Board for action at their next regularly scheduled meeting. If the
Town Clerk shall determine that an application is incomplete, he shall return the
application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the
application complete.
3-2. ACTION. The Town Board may either approve or deny the license, or it may
delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant, as it deems necessary.
3-3. TERM. All licenses issued under this Ordinance shall expire on December
31st of the year issued.
3-4. REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION. Any license issued under this Ordinance
may be revoked or suspended as provided in the Violations Penalties section of this
Ordinance.
3-5. TRANSFERS. All licenses issued under this Ordinance shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the
license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be
valid without the prior approval of the Town Board.
3-6. MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. No license shall be issued to a
moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this Ordinance.
3-7. DISPLAY. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the
general public on the licensed premise.
3-8. RENEWALS. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall
be made at least thirty (30) days, but no more than sixty (60) days before the expiration
of the current license. The issuance of a license under this Ordinance shall be
considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant, and shall not entitle the
holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
5
SECTION 4. FEES. No license shall be issued under this Ordinance until the
appropriate license fees shall be paid in full. The fees for this license are as set forth in
Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
SECTION 5. BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE. The following shall be grounds for
denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this Ordinance; however, except as
may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial
does not mean that the Township must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly
issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person
was ineligible for the license under this section.
5-1. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
5-2. The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of any
violation of a Federal, State, or local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation
relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or tobacco related devices.
5-3. The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding twelve months of the date of
application.
5-4. The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or
provides false or misleading information.
5-5. The applicant is prohibited by Federal, State or other local law, ordinance,
or other regulation, from holding such a license.
SECTION 6. PROHIBITED SALES. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any
person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or
nicotine delivery product:
6-1. To any person under the age of eighteen (18).
6-2. By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be
provided in this Ordinance.
6-3. By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to
make a verbal or written request to any employee of the licensed premise in order to
receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device and whereby that there
is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device
between the licensee or the licensee’s employee, and the customer.
6-4. By means of loosies as defined in Section 2 of this Ordinance.
6-5. Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine,
marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except
6
nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an
otherwise lawful manufacturing process.
6-6. By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form
prohibited by Federal, State or other local law, ordinance provisions, or other regulation.
SECTION 7. VENDING MACHINES. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under
this Ordinance to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices by the means of a vending machine.
SECTION 8. SELF-SERVICE SALES. It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this
Ordinance to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related devices by
any means whereby the customer may have access to such items without having to
request the item from the licensee or the licensee’s employee and whereby there is not
a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the tobacco related device
between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco related devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other
area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit nor left open
and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices at the time this Ordinance is adopted shall comply with this
Section within thirty (30) days.
SECTION 9. RESPONSIBILTY. All licensees under this Ordinance shall be responsible
for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an
employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as prohibiting the Township from also subjecting the clerk to whatever
penalties are appropriate under this Ordinance, State or Federal law, or other applicable
law or regulation.
SECTION 10. COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS. All licensed premises
shall be open to inspection by the Township or its authorized inspectors during regular
business hours. From time to time, but a least once per year, the Township shall
conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or
guardians, minors over the age of fifteen (15) years, but less than eighteen (18) years,
to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be
supervised by Township designated law enforcement officers or other designated
Township personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful
possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices when such items
are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks
shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age, and all
minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the
minor’s age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any
identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit compliance checks authorized by State or Federal laws for education, research,
or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular State of Federal law.
7
SECTION 11. OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts
shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
11-1. ILLEGAL SALE. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person to
sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or
nicotine delivery product to any minor.
11-2. ILLEGAL POSSESSION. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any
minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related
device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device not approved by the FDA This section shall
not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
11-3. ILLEGAL USE. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any minor to
smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related
device.
11-4. ILLEGAL PROCUREMENT. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for
any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco
product, or tobacco related device, and it shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any
person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor. It shall further
be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase
or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device.
This section shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
11-5. USE OF FALSE IDENTIFICATION. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance
for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of false form of
identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the
age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent and age older than
the actual age of the person.
SECTION 12. VIOLATIONS.
12-1. NOTICE. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator
shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged
violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right to be heard on the
accusation.
12-2. HEARINGS. If a person accused of violating this Ordinance so requests, a
hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and provided
to the accused violator.
12-3. HEARING OFFICER. The Town Board shall serve as the hearing officer.
12-4. DECISION. If the Town Board determines that a violation of this Ordinance
did occur, that decision, along with the Town Board’s reasons for finding a violation and
the penalty to be imposed under Section 13 of this Ordinance, shall be recorded in
writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the Town
8
Board finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty,
such finding shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
12-5. APPEALS. Appeals of any decision made by the Town Board shall be filed
at the Ramsey County District Court.
12-6. MISDEMEANOR PROSEUCTION. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit
the Town from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this
Ordinance. If the Town elects to seek misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative
penalty shall be imposed.
12-7. CONTINUED VIOLATION. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 13. PENALTIES.
13-1. LICENSEES. Any licensee found to have violated this Ordinance, or
whose employee shall have violated this Ordinance, shall be charged an administrative
fee of $200.00 for a first violation of this Ordinance; $400.00 for a second violation at
the same licensed premises within a twenty-four month period; and $600.00 for a third
or subsequent offense at the same location within a twenty-four month period. In
addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven
days.
13-2. OTHER INDIVIDUALS. Other individuals, other than minors regulated by
Section 13-3, found to be in violation of this Ordinance, shall be charged an
administrative fee of $50.
13-3. MINORS. Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully
purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices, shall be referred to the White Bear Community Counseling Center.
13-4. MISDEMEANOR. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the Town from
seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 14. EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent
the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices to a minor as
part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this Ordinance for a person to have reasonably
relied on proof of age as described by State law.
SECTION 15. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
9
SECTION 16. EFFECTIVE DATE. The Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 5th day of December, 2011.
APPROVED:
_____________________________________
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Chairman
ATTEST:
_______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Town Clerk
Board of Supervisors.
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Chair
ROBERT R. KERMES, Supervisor
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor
Synopsis Published in the White Bear Press January 11, 2012
Historical Notes
2011
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 passed on December 5, 2011, and
effective January 11, 2012 by Mample (Chair), Kermes and Prudhon; Short (Clerk).
2010
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 passed on December 20, 2010, and
effective January 26, 2011 by Sand (Chair), Mample and Kermes; Short (Clerk).
1997
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 originally
passed December 1, 1997, and effective December 17, 1997 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford;
Short (Clerk).
ORDINANCE NO. 70
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING BY REFERENCE THE MINNESOTA
POLLUTION CONTROL AGENCY WATER QUALITY DIVISION
MINIMUM STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR INDIVIDUAL
SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS, ALSO KNOWN
AS MINNESOTA RULES CHAPTER 7080
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
The Ordinance relating to the Township adopting by reference the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency Water Quality Division Minimum Standards and Criteria
for Individual Sewage Treatment Systems passed and approved December 15,
1997, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows, and all other Ordinance
or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. In all other
respects all other Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 2. PURPOSE. The purpose of the Sewage and Wastewater Treatment
section shall be to provide minimum standards for and regulation of subsurface
sewage treatment systems (SSTS) and septage disposal including the proper
location, design and construction; their necessary modification and reconstruction;
their operation, maintenance and repair to protect surface water and groundwater
from contamination by human sewage and water borne household and commercial
wastes; to provide the public’s health and safety, and eliminate or prevent the
development of public nuisances pursuant to the authority granted under
Minnesota Statutes, Chapters 115 and 145A and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080
and as amended that may pertain to sewage and wastewater treatment. All
sewage generated in unsewered areas of the Township shall be treated and
dispersed by an approved SSTS that is sited, designed, installed, operated, and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance or by a system that
has been permitted by the MPCA.
SECTION 3. PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED. The Township hereby
adopts by reference Minnesota Rulers, Chapters 7080 and 7081 in their entirety
as now constituted and from time to time amended. This adoption does not
supersede the Township’s right or ability to adopt local standards that are in
compliance with Minnesota Statute, Section 115.55.
3-1. DETERMINATION OF HYDRAULIC LOADING RATE AND SSTS
SIZING. Table IX from Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2150, Subp. 3(E) entitled
“Loading Rates for Determining Bottom Absorption Area for Trenches and
Seepage Beds for Effluent Treatment Level C and Absorption Ratios for
Determining Mound Absorption Areas Using Detail Soil Descriptions” and herein
2
adopted by reference shall be used to determine the hydraulic loading rate and
infiltration area for all SSTS permitted under this ordinance.
SECTION 4. ADMINISTRATION BY WHITE BEAR TOWNSHIP. The Township
shall regulate subsurface sewage treatment systems in White Bear Township,
pursuant to this section.
4 -1. The Township shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
4-1.1. To review all applications for subsurface sewage treatment systems;
4-1.2. To issue all permits required by this section;
4-1.3. To inspect work in progress;
4-1.4. To investigate complaints regarding subsurface sewage treatment
systems and septage disposal;
4-1.5. To perform compliance inspections;
4-1.6. To issue certificates of compliance or notices of non-compliance
where appropriate;
4-1.7. To issue Stop Work Orders and Notices of Violation, pursuant to this
section;
4-1.8. To maintain proper records for subsurface sewage treatment
systems and septage disposal including site evaluation records, design
records, including calculations, and summaries for all system component
sizing’s and as-builts;
4-1.9. To submit annual reports to the MPCA to demonstrate enforcement
of the local ordinance per Chapter 7080 through 7081.
4-1.10. Neither the issuance of permits, certificates of compliance or notices
of non-compliance as requested or issued, shall be construed to represent
a guarantee or warranty of the system’s operation or effectiveness. Such
certificates signify that the system in question is or has been designed and
installed in compliance or non-compliance, with the provisions of these
standards and regulations.
SECTION 5. PERMITTING.
5-1. PERMITS REQUIRED.
3
5-1.1. CONSTRUCTION PERMITS. A permit shall be obtained whenever
any SSTS in White Bear Township is installed, replaced, altered, repaired
or extended. Installation, replacement, alteration, repair, or extension of an
SSTS shall not begin without first making an application for a permit and
obtaining said permit from the Township for each specific installation,
replacement, alteration, repair or extension pursuant to this section. Such
permits are not transferable as to person or place. Such permits shall expire
12 months after date of issuance.
5-1.2. POSTING OF PERMIT. Permits and all supporting documents shall
be provided by permittee at the time of inspection upon request of inspector.
5-2. PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. All applications for an
ISTS permit shall include the following information:
5-2.1. Name and address of property owner;
5-2.2. Property identification number;
5-2.3. Legal description of property;
5-2.4. SSTS Designer Name, address, phone number and State SSTS
License number;
5-2.5. Site evaluation report;
5-2.6. System design with full information including applicable construction
information;
5-2.7. Any other information requested pertinent to the process;
5-2.8. A certified statement from the person who conducted the work;
5-2.9. On lots created after January 23, 1996, the system design shall
include at least one designated additional soil treatment area which can
support a standard soil treatment system.
5-3. APPLICATION REVIEW AND APPROVAL. If, after consideration of
the application for a permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be satisfied that
the work contemplated conforms to and complies with provisions of this section,
the Township shall issue a written permit granting preliminary approval authorizing
initiation of construction of the system as designed.
5-4. INCOMPLETE APPLICATION INFORMATION. If after consideration
of the application for a permit, the Township shall be satisfied that the work
contemplated will not conform to or comply with the provisions of this section, the
4
Code Enforcement Officer shall deny the application for a permit. Notice of such
denial shall be served on the applicant or permittee. The notice shall state the
reason for denial. The permit application may be revised or corrected and
resubmitted to the Township at any reasonable time for reconsideration.
5-5. OPERATING PERMIT.
5-5.1. SSTS REQUIRING AN OPERATING PERMIT. An Operating Permit
shall be required of all owners of new holding tanks or MSTS or any other
system deemed by the Code Enforcement Officer to require operational
oversight. Sewage shall not be discharged to a holding tank or MSTS until
the (Code Enforcement Officer) certifies that the MSTS or holding tank was
installed in substantial conformance with the approved plans, receives the
final record drawings of the MSTS, and a valid Operating Permit is issued
to the owner.
5-5.2. PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
5-5.2(a). Application for an Operating Permit shall be made on a
form provided by the (Code Enforcement Officer) including:
5-5.2(b). Owner name, mailing address, telephone, and email
address.
5-5.2(c). Construction Permit reference number and date of issue.
5-5.2(d). Final record drawings of the treatment system.
5-5.2(e). Owners of holding tanks must submit a copy of a valid
executed monitoring and disposal contract with a licensed
maintenance business.
5-5.3. MONITORING AND DISPOSAL CONTRACT. Owners of holding
tanks shall provide to the (Code Enforcement Officer) a copy of a valid
monitoring and disposal contract executed between the owner and a
licensed maintenance business, which guarantees the removal of the
holding tank contents in a timely manner that prevents an illegal discharge
in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0100, Subp. 3G.
5-6. APPLICATION REVIEW AND APPROVAL. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall review the record drawings, operation and maintenance manual,
management plan, maintenance and servicing contract, and any other pertinent
documents as appropriate for accuracy and completeness. If any deficiencies are
identified, the operating permit shall be denied until the deficiencies are corrected
to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer. If the submitted documents
fulfill the requirements, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue an operating
permit within fourteen (14) working days of receipt of the permit application.
5-7. OPERATING PERMIT TERMS AND CONDITIONS. The Operating
Permit shall include the following
5-7.1. System performance requirements.
5
5-7.2. System operating requirements.
5-7.3. Monitoring locations, procedures and recording requirements.
5-7.4. Maintenance requirements and schedules.
5-7.5. Compliance limits and boundaries.
5-7.6. Reporting requirements.
5-7.7. Code Enforcement Officer notification requirements for noncompliant
conditions.
5-7.8. Valid contract between the owner and a licensed maintenance
business.
5-7.9. Disclosure, location and condition of acceptable soil treatment and
dispersal system site.
5-7.10. Descriptions of acceptable and prohibited discharges.
5-8. PERMIT EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
5-8.1. Operating Permits shall be valid for the specific term stated on the
permit as determined by the Department.
5-8.2. An Operating Permit must be renewed prior to its expiration. If not
renewed, the Code Enforcement Officer may require the system to be
removed from service or operated as a holding tank until the permit is
renewed. If not renewed within in (90) calendar days of the expiration date,
the Township may require that the system be abandoned.
5-8.3. The Department shall notify the holder of an operating permit at least
(90) calendar days prior to expiration of the permit. The Owner must apply
for renewal at least (30) calendar days before the expiration date.
5-8.4. Application shall be made on a form provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer including:
5-8.4(a). Applicant name, mailing address and phone number.
5-8.4(b). Reference number of previous owner’s operating permit.
5-8.4(c). Any and all outstanding Compliance Monitoring Reports as
required by the Operating Permit.
5-8.4(d). Certified treatment system inspection signed and/or sealed
by a certified designer, maintenance contractor, or operator at the
discretion of the Township.
5-8.4(e). Any revisions made to the operation and maintenance
manual.
5-8.4(f). Payment of application review fee as determined by the
Township.
5-9. AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING PERMITS NOT ALLOWED. The
Township may not amend an existing permit to reflect changes in this Ordinance
6
until the permit term has expired and is renewed, unless an amendment is
necessary to eliminate an imminent threat to public health or safety.
5-10. TRANSFERS. The operating permit may not be transferred. A new
owner shall apply for an operating permit in accordance with this Ordinance. The
Department shall not terminate the current permit until (60) calendar days after the
date of sale unless an imminent threat to public health and safety exists. To
consider the new owner’s application, the Department may require a performance
inspection of the treatment system certified by a licensed inspector or qualified
employee.
5-11. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
5-11.1. The Code Enforcement Officer may suspend or revoke any
operating permit issued under this section for any false statements or
misrepresentations of facts on which the Operating Permit was issued.
5-11.2. Notice of suspension revocation and the reasons for revocation shall
be conveyed in writing to the owner.
5-11.3. If suspended or revoked, the Code Enforcement Officer may require
that the treatment system be removed from service, operated as a holding
tank, or abandoned in accordance with this Ordinance.
5-11.4. At the Code Enforcement Officer’s discretion, the operating permit
may be reinstated or renewed upon the owner taking appropriate corrective
actions.
5-12. COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
5-12.1. Performance monitoring of a SSTS shall be performed by a licensed
inspection business or licensed service provider hired by the holder of the
operating permit in accordance with the monitoring frequency and
parameters stipulated in the permit.
5-12.2. A monitoring report shall be prepared and certified by the licensed
inspection business or licensed service provider. The report shall be
submitted to the Department on a form provided by the Department on or
before the compliance reporting date stipulated in the operating permit. The
report shall contain a description of all maintenance and servicing activities
performed since the last compliance monitoring report as described below:
5-12.2(a). Owner name and address.
5-12.2(b). Operating Permit number.
5-12.2(c). Average daily flow since last compliance monitoring
report.
5-12.2(d). Description of type of maintenance and date performed.
5-12.2(e). Description of samples taken (if required), analytical
laboratory used, and results of analyses.
7
5-12.2(f). Problems noted with the system and actions proposed or
taken to correct them.
5-12.2(g). Name, signature, license and license number of the
licensed professional who performed the work.
SECTION 6. FEES. The Town of White Bear’s fees for permits required by this
Ordinance are as set out in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
6-1. Fees shall be due and payable at the time of permit issuance.
SECTION 7. INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
7-1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
7-1.1. COMPLIANCE INSPECTION. Compliance inspections for
construction, replacement, alteration or repair work on SSTS shall be
conducted by a qualified employee or under a licensee authorized by the
MPCA who is independent of the owner and installer.
7-1.2. ACCESS TO PREMISES AND RECORDS. Upon the request of the
Township, the applicant, permittee or any other person shall allow access
at any reasonable time to the affected premises as well as any related
records, for the purposes of regulating and enforcing this section.
7-1.3. INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED. No person shall hinder or otherwise
interfere with the Township in the performance of their duties and
responsibilities pursuant to this section. Refusal to allow reasonable access
to the Township shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense, whether
or not any other specific violations are cited.
7-2. INSPECTIONS. The permittee shall notify the Township prior to the
completion and covering of the SSTS. The installation and construction of the
SSTS shall be in accordance with the permit requirements and application design.
If any SSTS component is covered before being inspected and approved by the
Township, it shall be uncovered upon the direction of the Township. Proposals to
alter the permitted construction shall be reviewed and the proposed change
accepted by the Township prior to construction. Inspection shall be conducted at
least once during the construction of the SSTS at such time as to assure that the
system has been constructed per submitted and approved design.
7-2.1. As-builts shall be submitted to the Township within five (5) working
days of completion of the work on the SSTS.
7-3. INSPECTION REPORT. A Certificate of Compliance or Notice of Non-
Compliance shall be prepared by the Township following an inspection or review
of as-built plans. A Certification of Compliance or Notice of Non-Compliance must
8
include a signed statement by the inspector identifying the type of SSTS inspected
and whether the system is in compliance with Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080
through 7081. A copy of the Certificate of Compliance or Notice of Non-
Compliance shall be provided to the property owner within 15 days of the
compliance inspection and a copy kept on file in the Township.
7-4. RECERTIFICATION. Certificates of Compliance for new construction
and replacement remain valid for 5 years unless the Township identifies it as an
imminent threat. A Certificate of Compliance for an existing system is valid for 3
years from the date of issuance, unless the Township finds evidence of an
imminent threat.
7-5. STOP WORK ORDERS. Whenever any work is being done contrary
to the provisions of this section, the Township may order the work stopped by
verbal or written notice personally served upon the installer or owner of the land.
All installation and construction shall cease and desist until subsequent
authorization to proceed is received from the Township.
7-6. INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING SYSTEMS. Only a
qualified employee or MPCA authorized licensee independent of the owner and
the installer, shall conduct an inspection when a compliance inspection is required
for an existing SSTS. A copy of the Certificate of Compliance or Notice of Non-
Compliance resulting from a compliance inspection shall be provided to the
property owner and the Township within thirty (30) days of the inspection.
7-7. MANDATORY COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS OF EXISTING
SYSTEMS. A SSTS shall require a compliance inspection when any one of the
following conditions occur:
7-7.1. At any time the Township deems appropriate such as upon receiving
a complaint or other information of system failure.
7-7.2. Addition of a bedroom, or a variance granted in accordance with
Section 9.
7-7.2(a). If a request for an additional bedroom or variance is
received between November 1 and April 30, the Township may issue
a permit or variance immediately with the requirement that a
compliance inspection be completed by the following June 1, and the
applicant submits a certificate of compliance by the following
September 30.
7-7.2(b). If a system constructed between May 27, 1989 and
December 31, 1995, does not comply with applicable requirements,
and is not an imminent public health threat, a property owner
applying for a building permit to construct a bedroom addition has
9
two (2) years from the date of issuance of such zoning permit to bring
the system into compliance.
7-8. FAILING SEPTIC SYSTEMS. A Notice of Non-Compliance shall be
issued and a copy provided to the property owner within thirty (30) days under the
following conditions:
7-8.1. A “Failing to Protect Groundwater” SSTS shall be upgraded,
replaced or repaired in compliance with Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080
through 7081, as applicable within two (2) years of notice of failure.
7-8.2. The owner(s) shall submit to the Township an acceptable Repair or
Replacement Plan within ninety (90) days after notification by the Township.
The Plan shall identify the location and design of the SSTS and a schedule
for its repair or replacement. Failure to submit and execute an acceptable
Repair or Replacement Plan is a violation of this section.
7-8.3. The Township may not require re-certification of an SSTS within three
(3) years of its certification date provided the system does not fail or become
an imminent public health threat or other cause as deemed appropriate by
the Township.
7-8.4. An SSTS posing an imminent threat to public health or safety shall
be upgraded, replaced or repaired within ten (10) months. Between the
time that the SSTS is identified as an imminent threat to public health, and
it has been repaired, the ISTS shall be pumped so that no ground or water
surface discharge occurs or sewage backs up into a dwelling or other
establishment.
SECTION 8. NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
8-1. CAUSE TO ISSUE A NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Unresolved and either
separate, recurrent, or continuing violations of this section by an applicant,
permittee, installer or other person, as determined by inspections, reinspection, or
investigations, shall constitute non-conformance or non-compliance with this
section.
8-2. SERVING A NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A Notice of Violation shall be
served by mail upon the applicant, permittee, installer or other person found to be
in violation of this section.
8-3. CONTENTS OF A NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A Notice of Violation shall
contain the following:
8-3.1. A statement documenting the findings of fact through inspections, reinspection
or investigations;
10
8-3.2. A list of specific violations of this section;
8-3.3. The specific requirements for correction or removal of said violations;
8-3.4. A mandatory time schedule for correction, removal and compliance
with this section; and
8-3.5. Specific enforcement actions that will be taken if corrective action is
not completed.
8-4. STATE NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATIONS. Any inspection installation,
design, construction, alteration or repair of an SSTS by a licensed person, or any
pumping and disposal of septage by a licensed pumper or hauler, done in violation
of the provisions of this section, shall be cause for notification to the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
SECTION 9. VARIANCES.
9-1. GENERAL. Variances from the literal provisions of this Ordinance may
be considered in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue
hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration. Such variances shall be granted only when it is demonstrated that
such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance.
Conditions may be imposed in the granting of variances to insure protection of
public health and environment, and to protect adjacent properties.
9-1.2. Variances to decrease the vertical separation required beneath the
distribution medium and the saturated soil or bedrock must be approved by
the MPCA as per the procedures contained in Minnesota Rules Chapter
7080 through 7081. Variances to wells and water supply lines require
approval from the Minnesota Department of Health.
9-2. APPLICATIONS. Applications for variances shall be filed with the
Code Enforcement Officer.
9-2.1. An application fee in an amount established by Town Ordinance shall
accompany the application.
9-2.2. The applicant shall provide a site plan and SSTS design, together
with all supporting data. This information shall be submitted in the following
manner:
9-2.2(a). The application shall include a time schedule for the
proposed construction.
11
9-2.2(b). Information included in the application shall have been
prepared by a licensed professional certified by the MPCA in the
applicable SSTS activity.
9-2.2(c). The Town Board may require an applicant to provide
additional information where such information is deemed necessary
for review of the application.
9-2.3. The applicant shall provide a statement signed by the affected
property owners, recording their comments relative to the requested action.
Affected property owners are defined as those having a recorded legal or
equitable ownership interest in property adjacent to the property to which
the action relates.
9-3. REVIEW.
9-3.1. The Code Enforcement Officer shall forward the copies of the
application to appropriate staff and consultants for review and comment.
9-3.2. The application, together with staff, consultant and agency reviews,
shall be forwarded to the Town Board for its decision.
9-3.3. The Town Board shall conduct a meeting to determine whether a
variance shall be approved or denied.
9-3.4. All development, construction and use shall be in accordance with
the approved plans, unless an amended application is submitted and
approved. Any development contrary to the variance shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance.
9-4. STANDARDS. In considering all requests for variance and in taking
subsequent action, the Town Board shall approve the variance only if the following
facts are established:
9-4.1. Without issuance of a variance, the provisions of this Ordinance
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties
in the same district under the terms of this Ordinance.
9-4.2. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
9-4.3. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant
any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district.
12
9-4.4. That the proposed action will not unreasonably endanger the general
health, safety and welfare of the public.
9-4.5. That the proposed action will not unreasonably diminish or impair
established property value within the neighborhood or in any other way be
contrary to the intent of this Ordinance.
9-5. PERFORMANCE.
9-5.1. In order to determine whether a proposed variance will conform to
the requirements of this Ordinance, the Town Board may obtain the services
of qualified professional consultants, the costs of which shall be borne by
the applicant, to review the variance application.
9-5.2. Activities authorized by a variance shall be initiated within six (6)
months after approval of the Town Board. If such activity is not initiated
within such period, the variance shall be void.
SECTION 10. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS. The following standards shall also
apply:
10-1. SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
10-1.1. The separation distance from a well to an SSTS shall be as specified
in Minnesota Statutes 103i, Minnesota Rules Chapter 4725, as amended.
10-1.2. The separation distances from SSTS to designated lakes and rivers
shall be as identified in the White Bear Township Zoning Ordinance (No.
35).
10-2. SSTS ON LOTS CREATED BEFORE JANUARY 23, 1996. All lots
created after January 23, 1996, must have a minimum of two soil treatment and
dispersal areas that can support trenches, seepage beds, mounds, and at-grade
systems as described in Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080.2200 through
7080.2230.
10-3. SSTS IN FLOODPLAINS. SSTS shall not be located in a floodway
and wherever possible, location within any part of a floodplain shall be avoided. If
no option exists to locate a SSTS outside of a floodplain, location within the flood
fringe is allowed if the requirements in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2270 and
all relevant local requirements are met.
10-4. ABANDONMENT. Any SSTS, or any component thereof, which is no
longer intended to be used, must be abandoned in accordance with Minnesota
Rules, Chapter 7080.2500.
13
10-5. CLASS V INJECTION WELLS. All owners of new or replacement
SSTS that are considered to be Class V injection wells, as defined in the Code of
Federal Regulations, title 40, part 144, are required by the Federal Government to
submit SSTS inventory information to the Environmental Protection Agency as
described in CFR40 part 144. Further, owners are required to identify all Class V
injection wells in property transfer disclosures.
10-6. SEWAGE DISCHARGE TO GROUND SURFACE OR SURFACE
WATER. It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, or use any SSTS
system regulated under this Ordinance that results in raw or partially treated
wastewater seeping to the ground surface or flowing into any surface water. Any
surface discharging system must be permitted under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System program.
10-7. HOLDING TANKS. Holding tanks may be allowed for the following
applications; as replacements for existing failing SSTS, SSTS that pose an
imminent threat to public health or safety, or for new construction on lots existing
as of the date of the enactment of this Ordinance and only where it can be shown
conclusively that a SSTS permitted under this Ordinance cannot be feasibly
installed.
10-8. SATURATED SOIL DISAGREEMENTS. If there is a dispute between
the two verifying inspectors, the dispute resolution procedure described in
7080.0700, Subp. 5 must be followed.
10-9. MAINTENANCE.
10-9.1. The owner of an SSTS or the owner’s agent shall regularly, but in
no case less frequently than every three years:
10-9.1(a). Assess whether sewage tanks leak below the design
operating depth and whether sewage tank tops, riser joints, and riser
connections leak through visual evidence of major defects; and
10-9.1(b). Measure or remove the accumulations of scum, grease,
and other floating materials at the top of each septic tank and
compartment, along with the sludge, which consists of the solids
denser than water.
10-9.2. All service contractors providing maintenance shall be required to
submit maintenance reports.
10-10. MANAGEMENT PLANS.
10-10.1. PURPOSE.
The purpose of management plans is to describe how a particular SSTS is
intended to be operated and maintained to sustain the performance
14
required. The plan is to be provided by the certified designer to the system
owner when the treatment system is commissioned.
10-10.2. MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
10-10.2(a). SSTS REQUIRING MANAGEMENT PLANS. Management
plans are required for all new or replacement SSTS. The management plan
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer with the construction
permit application for review and approval. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall be notified of any system modifications made during construction and
the management plan revised and resubmitted at the time of final
construction certification
10-10.2.(b) REQUIRED CONTENTS OF A MANAGEMENT PLAN.
10-10.2(b).(i). Operating requirements describing tasks that the owner
can perform and tasks that a licensed service provider or maintainer
must perform;
10-10.2(b).(ii). Monitoring requirements;
10-10.2(b).(iii). Maintenance requirements including maintenance
procedures and a schedule for routine maintenance;
10-10.2(b).(iv). Statement that the owner is required to notify the Code
Enforcement Officer when the management plan requirements are not
being met;
10-10.2(b).(v). Disclosure of the location and condition of the additional
soil treatment and dispersal area on the owner’s property or a property
serving the owner’s residence.
10-10.2(b).(vi). Other requirements as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
10-11. ABANDONMENT REQUIREMENTS.
10-11.1. Whenever the use of a SSTS or any system component is
discontinued as the result of a system repair, modification, replacement or
decommissioning following connection to a municipal or private sanitary
sewer, or condemnation or demolition of a building served by the system,
further use of the system or any system component for any purpose under
this Ordinance shall be prohibited.
10-11.2. Continued use of a treatment tank where the tank is to become an
integral part of a replacement system or a sanitary sewer system requires
the prior written approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
10-11.3. An owner of an SSTS must retain a licensed installation business
to abandon all components of the treatment system within (60) calendar
days. Abandonment shall be completed in accordance with Minnesota
Rules, Chapter 7080.2500. No prior notification of the Department of an
owner’s intent to abandon a system is necessary.
15
10-11.4. A report of abandonment certified by the licensed installation
business shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer. The report
shall include:
10-11.4(a) Owner’s name and contact information.
10-11.4(b). Property address.
10-11.4(c). System construction permit and operating permit.
10-11.4(d). The reason(s) for abandonment.
10-11.5 A brief description of the abandonment methods used, description
of the system components removed or abandoned in place, and disposition
of any materials or residuals.
SECTION 11. LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
11-1. SITE EVALUATORS, DESIGNERS, INSTALLERS AND PUMPERS.
No person shall engage in the evaluation, inspection, design, installation,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, maintenance, or pumping of on-site
sewage treatment systems in White Bear Township without first obtaining a license
to perform such tasks from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
SECTION 12. ENFORCEMENT.
12-1. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates any of the
provisions of this section or who makes any false statement on the Certificate of
Compliance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment or a
fine or both as defined by law.
12-2. In the event of a violation of this Ordinance, in addition to other
remedies, the Township may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations, as set forth in Ordinance No. 16
(Nuisance).
SECTION 13. PENALTY. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision
of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided in Ordinance No. 26. Each three
(3) days that a violation continues, shall constitute a separate offence subject to
the punishments provided herein.
SECTION 14. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole,
or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 15. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
16
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey
County, Minnesota, this 7th day of November, 2014.
APPROVED:
___________________________________
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
WILLIAM F. MAMPLE, Supervisor
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor
Synopsis published in the White Bear Press on November 26, 2014.
Historical Notes
2014
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 passed November 17,
2014, and effective November 26, 2014, by Kermes (Chair), Mample, Prudhon; Short
(Clerk-Treasurer).
2000
Section 2 passed March 20, 2000, and effective March 29, 2000, by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer);
1997
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15,
originally passed December 15, 1997, and effective December 31, 1997.










ORDINANCE NO. 74
AN ORDINANCE NAMING A STREET IN THE
TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. STREET NAME. That certain street in the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, described as follows, to-wit:
Outlots A and B, Block 1, PORTLAND WOODS ESTATES,
together with the infrastructure (Water & Sewer Lines & hydrants);
That part of Lot 1, Block 1, in Portland Woods Estates as follows:
The Southerly twenty-four (24’) feet of Lot 1 for a distance of One
Hundred Fifty Five (155’) feet from the Southwest corner of Lot 1,
then reduced to the Southerly Fifteen (15’) of Lot 1 to the Southeast
corner of Lot 1, and the Easterly Fifteen (15’) feet of the Southerly
Forty (40’) feet of Lot 1;
The Southeasterly 30 feet of Lot 3, Block 1, Portland Woods
Estates, Ramsey County, Minnesota;
The South ten (10) feet of the West sixty-five (65) feet of Lot 6,
Block 1, together with the North Ten (10) feet of the Southerly
Twenty (20) feet of the Westerly Ten (10) feet of Lot 6, Block 1,
Portland Woods Estates, Ramsey County, Minnesota; and
That part of Lot 6, Block 1, Portland Woods Estates, Ramsey
County, Minnesota, lying West of a line described as commencing
at the most Northerly corner of Outlot A, of said Portland Woods
Estates, thence proceed on an assumed bearing of South 19
degrees 40 minutes East along the Northeasterly line of said Outlot
A a distance of twenty (20) feet to the most Easterly corner thereof,
said most Easterly corner being the point of beginning of the line to
be described; thence South 19 degrees 40 minutes East 17 feet;
thence South 70 degrees 20 minutes West 54 feet more or less to
the Northwesterly lien of said Lot 6 and said line there terminating,
is hereby named “Portland Woods”.
SECTION 2. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinnace shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisros of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 20th day of March, 2000.
APPROVED:
____________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chair
ATTEST:
_______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chair
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
LINDA J. FORD, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press on March 29, 2000.
Historical Notes
2000
ORDINANCE NO. 75
AN ORDINANCE RENAMING A SECTION OF A STREET IN THE
TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. STREET NAME. That certain street in the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, identified by the following street numbers:
5339, 5345, 5349, 5355, 5351, 5341, 5343, 5347, and 5359 Fourth Street
is hereby renamed “Hugo Court”.
SECTION 2. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey
County, Minnesota, this 22nd day of June, 2001.
APPROVED:
__________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
_______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chair
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
LINDA J. FORD, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press July 4, 2001.
ORDINANCE NO. 76
AN ORDINANCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROTECTING THE PLANNING
PROCESS AND LOT, YARD AND DENSITY REQUIREMENTS, ZONING
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES AND STANDARDS AND
PROCEDURES FOR APPROVING VARIANCES FROM THE LITERAL
PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE NO. 35 FOR THE
TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
The Town of White Bear has placed under consideration lot, yard and density
requirements, Zoning districts and boundaries and standards and procedures for
approving variances from the literal provisions of Ordinance No. 35.
SECTION 1. PURPOSE.
1-1. The Town of White Bear, in cooperation with the Town of White
Bear’s Planning Commission, is presently evaluating various provisions of
Ordinance No. 35.
1-2. The objective of this study is to develop land use and zoning
regulations that are consistent with livable neighborhoods.
1-3. In addition to the study, the Town’s Zoning Ordinance and Zoning
District Map may need to be revised in the following areas:
? Zoning Districts
? Zoning District Boundaries
? Lot, Yard and Density Regulations
? Permitted Use Standards Procedures, Standards and Requirements
? Conditional Use Procedures, Standards and Requirements
? Variance Procedures, Standards and Requirements
1-4. There is a need for these studies to be conducted so that the Town
can adopt changes to the Town’s Zoning Ordinance and/or Zoning District Map.
SECTION 2. ORDINANCE 35 STUDY – MORATORIUM.
2-1. The study is authorized by the Town of White Bear. Township staff
shall coordinate the study with the Planning Commission, consultants, property
owners, interested citizens and the Town Board.
2-2. Upon completion of the study, the Planning Commission shall
present it’s recommendation to the Town Board.
2-3. A moratorium on applications for variances pursuant to
Ordinance No. 35 is adopted pending completion of this study and adoption of
any amendments to the Town’s Ordinances, and Zoning District Map as deemed
necessary as a result of this study. The Town will not approve any variances or
building permits for additions or new buildings that require variances during the
moratorium period.
SECTION 3. TERM. The term of this Ordinance shall be for one (1) year from
the date provided in Section 5 of this Ordinance or such time as the Town Board
adopts amendments to the Town Ordinance and Zoning District Map as deemed
necessary as a result of this study.
SECTION 4. VARIANCES.
4-1. Variances from this Ordinance may be granted by the Town Board
based upon a determination that a proposed project would be compatible with
proposed land use and zoning, and that such proposals would be in keeping with
the spirit and intent of this Ordinance. The procedures to be followed in applying
for a variance from this Ordinance shall be in accordance with State law on
findings for variances and shall include the following:
4-1.1. The applicant shall file a completed application form, together with
required exhibits, to the Town.
4-1.2. The application for a variance shall set forth special circumstances
or conditions which the applicant alleges creates the need to act on the
variance request prior to expiration of this moratorium, and shall
demonstrate that the proposed project is compatible with land use plans
and policies and Zoning District map.
4-1.3. The application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
its review and recommendation to the Town Board.
4-1.4. The Town Board may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing prior to
making a final determination on the requested variance.
4-1.5. The Town Board may impose such restrictions upon the proposed
project as may be necessary to comply with the purpose and intent of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 5. EFFECTIVE DATE. Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of
the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 22ND day of January,
2002.
APPROVED:
_________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Town Board of Supervisors:
Robert J. Weisenburger, Chair
Richard A. Sand, Supervisor
Linda J. Ford, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press February 6, 2002.




ORDINANCE NO. 78
AN ORDINANCE RENAMING A SECTION OF A STREET IN THE
TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. STREET NAME. That certain portion of a street in the Town of
White Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, described as follows, to-wit:
Birch Lake Boulevard west from Centerville Road to the centerline of the
Minneapolis St. Paul & Sault Ste. Marie Railway,
is hereby re-named “East Oaks Road”.
SECTION 2. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 3. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 17th day of November, 2003.
APPROVED:
___________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
________________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chair
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Supervisor


ORDINANCE NO. 80
ORDINANCE RELATING TO CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND
FOR APPLICANTS FOR TOWN EMPLOYMENT AND TOWN LICENSES
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS – APPLICANTS FOR
TOWNSHIP EMPLOYMENT.
1-1. PURPOSE. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized
Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment
background checks for the positions described in Section 1-2.
1-2. CRIMINAL HISTORY EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS. The Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the Town of White Bear, to do a criminal
history background investigation on the applicants for the following positions
within the Town of White Bear, unless the Town Board concludes that a
background investigation is not needed: Employment positions: all regular parttime
or full-time employees of the Town of White Bear.
1-2.1. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order
to screen employment applicants, the Ramsey County Sheriff’s
Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota
Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History
information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is
accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Ramsey County
Sheriff’s Department under the care and custody of the Sheriff or his or
her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department
to the Town Board, Town Clerk or other Township staff involved in the
hiring process.
1-2.2. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake
the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions
of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information.
SECTION 2. LICENSE BACKGROUND CHECKS – APPLICANTS FOR
TOWNSHIP LICENSES.
2-1. PURPOSE. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized
Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing
background checks.
2-2. CRIMINAL HISTORY LICENSE BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS. The Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the Town of White Bear, to do a criminal
history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses in
the Township: employees/owners of liquor establishments;
peddler/solicitor/transient merchant licenses; tobacco licenses.
2-2.1. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order
to screen license applicants, the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is
authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions Computerized Criminal Apprehensions Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any
data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Ramsey
Sheriff’s Department under the care and custody of the Sheriff or his or
her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department
to the licensing authority, including the Town Board, Town Clerk or other
Township staff involved in the license approval process.
2-2.2. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake
the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions
of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part hereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
2
3
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 20th day of January, 2009.
APPROVED:
____________________________________
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chairman
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors
ROBERT J. WEISENBURGER, Chair
RICHARD A. SAND, Supervisor
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press January 28, 2009.
Historical Notes
2009
Ordinance, Title, Sections 1, 2, 3, & 4 originally passed on January 20, 2009, and
effective January 28, 2009 by Weisenburger (Chair), Sand, Mample; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
ORDINANCE NO. 81
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE
CITATION OF TRAFFIC OFFENSES IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY
COUNTY, MINNESOTA.
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR HEREBY ORDAINS AS
FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE. The Town of White Bear authorized by resolution the use of
administrative citations for specific traffic offenses, as permitted by the Legislature in Minn.
Stat. § 169.999. The Township is required by that statute to establish and maintain
procedures through which motorists receiving administrative citations may obtain an
independent hearing or judicial review of a citation. The Town Board finds that establishing
a voluntary administrative citation procedure ensures the availability of an independent
hearing and retains full opportunity to obtain judicial review of a citation.
1.1. DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, except as otherwise provided, the
following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Citation. An administrative citation issued to a motorist for a Designated Traffic
Offense occurring within the Township.
Designated Traffic Offense. Those traffic offenses eligible for administrative citation
as designated by Minn. Stat. § 169.999, subd. 1(b)(1), (2) and (3), as it may be
amended from time to time.
Issuing Officer. The licensed peace officer employed by or under contract with
(Township) who issues any particular administrative citation.
Flyer. A document which informs a person receiving an administrative citation of:
- the recipient’s right to challenge the citation or opt for a standard criminal citation;
- the Township’s process for handling challenges to administrative traffic citations;
- the process for paying a traffic citation; and
- the effect of an administrative traffic citation on a recipient’s driving record.
Recipient. The person who receives an administrative citation under this chapter.
SECTION 2. AUTHORIZATION. Licensed peace officers employed or under contract with
the Township may issue administrative citations for Designated Traffic Offenses occurring
within the Township. The fine for committing a Designated Traffic Offense shall be the
amount stated in Minn. Stat. §169.999, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
2-1. FORM OF CITATION. An issuing officer must use the uniform administrative
traffic citation form approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The officer shall also
serve upon the recipient the current version of the Township’s flyer and response form.
2-2. RESPONSE TO CITATION. A recipient shall respond to the citation within 14
days of receipt. The recipient may:
A) Admit the violation stated in the citation and agree to pay the fine;
B) Deny the violation stated in the citation and request a hearing; or
C) Request that the administrative citation be converted to a standard traffic
citation and filed for processing by the Violations Bureau of the Ramsey County
District Court.
The Township shall approve a response form as part of the flyer which states these options
and gives directions for returning the response form. A recipient shall deliver the response
form, or similar writing, to an address stated on the form before the close of business on
the 14th day (or next business day if the 14th day is a weekend or holiday) stating the
recipient’s choice for processing of the citation.
2-3. SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT TO COORDINATE CITATIONS. The Township
designates the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department as its agent for management of the
administrative citations program. The Department shall receive citation responses, assign
administrative traffic cases to a hearing officer whose appointment the Township has
approved, collect fine revenue, account for the citation revenue and maintain funds as
required by State law. The personnel assigned the duties of managing the program by the
Sheriff’s Department shall be referred to in this Ordinance as “the Township’s designee.”
This designation is not intended to create, and shall not create, a joint powers relationship
between the Township and the Department relating to the management of administrative
citations.
2-4. STANDARD CITATION ISSUED IF NO RESPONSE. If the Township’s
designee receives no written response to a citation within the 14-day response period, the
peace officer who issued the citation shall convert the allegations into a standard traffic
citation, file that regular citation at the District Court and mail a copy to the recipient.
SECTION 3. HEARING OFFICERS. The Township shall maintain a list of hearing officers
available to conduct hearings on the merits of an administrative citation, if requested by a
recipient. All hearing officers shall be approved by the Town Board. Hearing officers shall
have executed a contract to provide hearing officer services with at least one of the
following entities: Ramsey County; City of Arden Hills; City of Gem Lake; City of Little
Canada; City of North Oaks; City of Shoreview; City of Vadnais Heights; or the Town of
White Bear.
3-1. REQUEST FOR HEARING. If the recipient responds by requesting a hearing,
the Township’s designee at the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department shall assign the case
to a hearing officer on the list. The designee assigning the case shall notify the hearing
officer, the recipient and the issuing officer of the assignment in writing. The hearing officer
shall schedule a hearing within 28 days of receiving the notice. Any delays in holding the
hearing shall be reported to the Township’s designee by the hearing officer.
3-2. CITATION MATERIALS. At assignment, the Township’s designee shall transmit
a copy of the citation to the hearing officer. Within five days of assignment, the issuing
officer or the officer’s department shall transmit copies of all materials relating to the citation
to the hearing officer, including but not limited to: additional written reports; certificates of
calibration, logs, and other documentation required to support the evidentiary use of speed
detection equipment under Minn. Stat. § 169.14; relevant certificates of training for the
citing officer; and any pictures showing the alleged offense. The hearing officer shall
transmit a copy of any materials received to the recipient at the earliest opportunity but at
least three days in advance of the hearing.
3-3. HEARING. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall receive the testimony of any
witnesses, witness statements, and comments presented by the person cited. The hearing
officer will consider these items alongside the materials submitted by the issuing officer,
and may weigh the evidence and make credibility determinations to the best of the hearing
officer’s ability. The hearing officer is not required to apply the rules of evidence in making
determinations about the evidence presented. The issuing officer is not required to attend
the hearing.
3-4. DECISION, FINDINGS. After considering all of the evidence submitted, the
hearing officer shall determine, by a preponderance of the evidence, whether the person
cited did or did not violate the statute or statutes identified in the citation. The hearing
officer shall make written findings supporting the determination and transmit them to the
cited person and the Township’s designee within five days of closing the hearing.
3-5. PAYMENT FOLLOWING FINDING OF VIOLATION. If the hearing officer finds a
violation, the fine for the Designated Traffic Offense is due within 30 days of the date the
findings are sent to the recipient. The hearing officer may not alter or reduce the fine for
any offense or combine multiple offenses into a single fine. Payment of fines due shall be
made to the Township’s designee.
3-6. STANDARD CITATION ISSUED IF NO PAYMENT. If payment is not made
within the 30 days, the Township’s designee shall request that the issuing officer or the
officer’s department issue a standard traffic citation for the offenses in the administrative
citation, mail a copy of the citation to the individual, and file the citation along with the
hearing officer’s written findings with the Ramsey County District Court.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of
this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part thereof, other than
the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 5. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from
and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear, Ramsey County,
Minnesota, this 21st day of December, 2009.
APPROVED:
__________________________________
RICHARD A. SAND, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
RICHARD A. SAND, Chair
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Supervisor
ROBERT KERMES, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press December 30, 2009.
Historical Notes
2009
Ordinance, Title, Sections 1, 2, 3, & 4 originally passed on December 21, 2009, and effective
December 30, 2009 by Sand (Chair), Mample, Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
ORDINANCE NO. 82
AN ORDINANCE CREATING A HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION
IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
SECTION 1. DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY AND PURPOSE. The Town
Board of the Town of White Bear hereby declares as a matter of public policy that
the preservation, protection and perpetuation of areas, places, buildings,
structures, lands, districts and other objects with historical, cultural or
architectural interest or value is in the best interest of health, safety, welfare and
property of the people.
1-1. The purposes of this Ordinance are to:
1-1.1. Safeguard the heritage of the Town by preserving properties which
reflect elements of the Town’s cultural, social, economic, political, visual
or architectural history;
1-1.2. Protect and enhance the Town’s appeal to residents, visitors and
tourists, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry;
1-1.3. Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;
1-1.4. Promote the preservation and continued use of heritage
preservation sites for the education and general welfare of the people of
the Town of White Bear;
1-1.5. Enhance the economic viability of Heritage Preservation sites and
districts through the protection and promotion of their unique character;
1-1.6. Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of
the Town;
1-1.7. Establish a Heritage Preservation Commission pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, Section 471.193.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.
2-1. TOWN. The corporate limits of the Town of White Bear.
2-2. BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority
charged with the administration and enforcement of the Minnesota Uniform
Building Code, or the building official’s duly authorized representative.
2-3. HERITAGE PRESERVATION DISTRICT. A contiguous collection
or group of places, buildings, structure, lands or other objects that is determined
to be historically, culturally or architecturally significant as a whole and has been
locally designated as a Heritage Preservation District pursuant to Section 5 of
this Ordinance.
2-4. HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITE. Any area, place, building,
structure, and, work of art or other object having special historical, cultural or
architectural interest or value for the community that has been duly designated a
Heritage Preservation Site pursuant to Section 5 of this Ordinance. At the time of
designation it would be determined if the structure is contributory or noncontributory.
2-5. SITE ALTERATION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Town for any
alteration of any designated Heritage Preservation Site.
SECTION 3. ESTABLISHMENT OF HERITAGE PRESERVATION
COMMISSION. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 471.193, there is
hereby created and established a Town of White Bear Heritage Preservation
Commission, hereinafter called the “Commission”. The Commission shall have
the responsibility of recommending to the Town Board areas, places, buildings,
structures, lands, works of art or other objects having special historical, cultural
or architectural interest or value for the community as Heritage Preservation sites
or districts.
3-1. MEMBERSHIP. The Commission shall consist of five (5) voting
members appointed by the Town Board. Of the membership, one (1) member
shall be appointed from the membership of the Town Board. All members must
be residents of the Town of White Bear. At least one of the five members shall be
a member of the Ramsey County Historical Society, if there is one available that
is a resident of the Town. One (1) non-resident, non-voting member could also
serve on the Commission as an ex-officio member to participate in discussions.
Members shall be persons with demonstrated interest and expertise in historic
preservation.
3-2. TERMS OF OFFICE. Terms of office for members shall be for three
(3) years. The vacancy of the unexpired terms shall be filled in the same manner
as the appointment is made. The term of the Representative of the Ramsey
County Historical Society, if one is available and qualified, shall be appointed
annually. Members shall serve without compensation and will continue to hold
office until the end of their term or their successors have been appointed and
qualified. Terms of office shall expire on the last day of March.
3-3. REMOVAL FROM OFFICE: VACANCIES. Any member of the
Heritage Preservation Commission may be removed from office for just cause
and on written charges by a two-thirds vote of the entire Town Board. The
members shall be entitled to a public hearing before the removal vote is taken.
Any member may be removed for non-attendance at Commission meetings
2
without action by the Board, according to rules adopted by the Commission. It
shall be the duty of the chair of the Commission to notify the Town Board
promptly of any vacancies occurring in membership. The Town Board shall fill the
vacancies within ninety (90) days from notification for the unexpired term of the
original appointment.
SECTION 4. ORGANIZATION.
4-1. OFFICERS. The Commission shall elect a chair, vice chair, a
secretary, and a financial liaison from its members. Terms of all elected officers
shall be for one year, with eligibility for re-election.
4-2. RULES.
4-2.1. The Commission shall adopt rules and bylaws for its governance
and for the transaction of its business, subject to review and approval by
the Town Board.
4-2.2. All meetings of the Commission shall be public and shall be called
and conducted in accordance with all open meeting laws.
4-2.3. The Commission shall keep a record of attendance at its meetings
and of motions, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations
showing the vote of each member on each questions requiring a vote, or if
absent or abstaining from voting, indicating this fact. The records of the
Commission shall be public record. Minutes of Commission meetings shall
be kept in the same manner as minutes for other Town boards and
commissions.
4-2.4. The secretary shall provide minutes of each meeting for public
record and keep a record of membership and members’ terms in office.
4-2.5. The financial liaison shall keep a record of the Commission’s
annual budget and funds authorized and spent by project, with the
assistance and oversight of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and provide
financial reports to the Commission.
4-3. APPROPRIATIONS, EXPENSES. The Town Board may make
available to the Commission appropriations as it may see fit for fees and
expenses necessary in the conduct of its work. Subject to approval of the
Town Board and within limits set by appropriations or other funds made
available, the Commission may contract with or employ staff, technicians
and experts as may be deemed proper, and may incur other expenses as
may be necessary and proper for the conduct of its affairs. The
Commission shall have authority to expend all sums so appropriated and
made available for its use from grants, gifts, and other sources for the
3
purposes and activities authorized by this Section. Members of the
Commission shall not receive salaries or fees for their services, but,
subject to prior Commission approval, may receive necessary travel, per
diem, and other expenses while on official business for the Commission, if
funds are provided by the Town Board for these purposes. The
Commission will search for and identify other private and public agency
sources of grants and other funding for its projects and, with the approval
of the Town Board, apply for such appropriate funding as is available.
SECTION 5. DESIGNATION OF HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITES AND
DISTRICT.
5-1. CRITERIA. The Commission shall recommend to the Town Board
areas, places, buildings, structures, lands, works of art or other objects having
special historical, cultural or architectural interest or value for the community to
be designated as Heritage Preservation Sites or Districts. In making such
recommendations the Commission shall apply the following criteria:
5-1.1. Its inherent character, interest or value as part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the Town of White Bear, the State of
Minnesota or the United States.
5-1.2. Its location as a site of a significant historical event.
5-1.3. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture and development of the Town of White Bear.
5-1.4. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style, period, forms or treatment.
5-1.5. Its identification as work of an architect or master builder whose
individual work has influenced the development of the Town of White
Bear.
5-1.6. Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail,
materials, or craftsmanship, which represents a significant architectural
innovation.
5-2. FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS. The Commission shall
determine: a) if the proposed Heritage Preservation Site or District is eligible for
preservation according to the criteria specified in Section 5-1; and b) whether the
Commission recommends to the Town Board that the site or district be
designated for heritage preservation.
5-3. HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION HEARINGS. Prior to
the Commission recommending to the Town Board the designation of any
4
Heritage Preservation Site or District, the Commission shall hold a public hearing
and seek the recommendations of all concerned citizens. Prior to such hearing
the Commission shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the
Town notice of said hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all owners of record of the property or
properties proposed to be designated as Heritage Preservation Site or District
and to all owners of property situated wholly or partly within three-hundred fifty
(350) feet of the proposed Heritage Preservation Site or District at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of the hearing. The Commission may make such
modifications concerning the proposed designation, as it deems necessary in
consideration of the public hearing.
5-4. COMMENT BY THE MINNESOTA HISTORICAL SOCIETY. A
copy of the Commission’s proposed designation of a Heritage Preservation Site
or District, including boundaries and design guidelines, shall be sent to the State
historic preservation officer at the Minnesota Historical Society. The Commission
shall not further act upon the proposed designation until either: a) comment is
received from the State historic preservation officer; or b) 60 days pass after
sending the proposed designation. The Commission may make such
modifications concerning the proposed designation, as it deems necessary in
consideration of the comments of the Minnesota Historical Society.
5-5. PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW. The Heritage Preservation
Commission shall transmit to the Town’s Planning Commission its
recommendation, including boundaries and the proposed program for the
preservation of the Heritage Preservation Site or District. The Planning
Commission shall comment on the proposed designation as a Heritage
Preservation Site or District relative to the Town Zoning Code and
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of White Bear, and any other valid Town
planning considerations relevant to the proposed designation. The Planning
Commission’s comments shall become part of the official record concerning the
proposed designation and shall be submitted by the Commission along with its
recommendation concerning the proposed designation to the Town Board. The
Heritage Preservation Commission may make such modifications concerning the
proposed designation as it deems necessary in consideration of the comments of
the Planning Commission.
5-6. BOARD DESIGNATIONS. Upon request of the Heritage
Preservation Commission, the Town Board may, by Ordinance, designate a
Heritage Preservation Site or District. In the case of denial of the request, the
same site or district shall not be re-submitted within six (6) months of the Board
action.
5-7. BOARD APPROVAL. The Commission shall make no application
to the National Register or the State of Minnesota for the designation of a
historical property or district without the consent of the Town Board.
5
5-8. IDENTIFICATION PLAQUE. Those buildings or structures having
been designated as Historic Preservation Sites by the Town Board may be
awarded a numbered plaque to be displayed on the exterior of the Site in full
public view with the owner’s consent. The plaque is to remain the property of the
Town and shall be removed by request of the Commission should the Site be so
altered as to destroy the historic integrity of the Site.
SECTION 6. PRESERVATION PROGRAM. All decisions of the Commission
with respect to this Section shall be in accordance with the approved program for
the rehabilitation and preservation of each Heritage Preservation Site or District.
The Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation, as may be amended,
shall be used to evaluate a Preservation Program.
6-1. REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATIONS. The Heritage Preservation
Commission shall review and advise the Town Board upon the issuance of Town
permits for work within a designated Heritage Preservation Site or sites
considered by the Commission to be historically significant. The Town Clerk shall
immediately refer permit applications to the Commission for review in accordance
with the following procedures.
6-2. SITE ALTERATION PERMIT. A Site Alteration Permit shall be
required for work affecting a designated Heritage Preservation Site, or within a
Heritage Preservation District, as described below. The Site Alteration Permit
application shall be accompanied by detailed plans including a property site plan,
building elevations and design details and materials as necessary to evaluate the
request. The Commission shall review and approve or disapprove the application
for a Site Alteration Permit. In addition to the Site Alteration Permit, all other
applicable Town permits shall be required.
The following work, when performed on a designated Site or within a designated
District, requires a Site Alteration Permit:
6-2.1. Alteration or addition of architectural details and other related
exterior alterations.
6-2.2. Addition or deletion of awnings, shutters, canopies, and similar
appurtenances.
6-2.3. Application or use of exterior materials of a different king, type, or
texture than those already in use. This provision applies to roofing as well
as siding.
6-2.4. Installation or alteration of signs.
6-2.5. Construction of a new building or accessory structure.
6
6-2.6. Any addition to or alteration of an existing structure which increases
the square footage of the structure or otherwise alters its size, height,
contour, or outline.
6-2.7. Change or alteration of a structure’s architectural style.
6-2.8. Alteration of a roof line.
6-2.9. Demolition in whole or in part. This does not apply to structures
required to be demolished in accordance with Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 463.
6-3. FINDINGS. Before approving any site alteration permit application
required in Section 6-2 of this Ordinance, the Commission shall make findings
based on the program for rehabilitation and preservation of the Heritage
Preservation Site or District in regard to the following:
6-3.1. In the case of a proposed alteration or addition to existing buildings,
the Commission shall make written findings on how the structure may be
architecturally or historically affected considering the existing exterior
appearance, building height, building width, depth, or other dimensions,
roof style, type of building materials, ornamentation, paving and setback.
6-3.2. In the case of the proposed demolition of a building prior to
approval of the demolition, the Commission shall make written findings on
the following: architectural and historic merit of the building, the effect on
surrounding buildings, the effect of any new proposed construction on the
remainder of the building (in case of partial demolition) and on surrounding
buildings, the economic value or usefulness of the building as it now
exists, or if altered or modified, in comparison with the value or usefulness
of any proposed structures designated to replace the present building or
buildings.
6-3.3. In the case of a proposed new building, the Commission shall make
written findings on how the building will, by itself or by reason of its
location on the property, materially affect the architectural or historic value
of buildings on adjacent sites or in the immediate vicinity of the Heritage
Preservation Site.
SECTION 7. APPEAL TO THE TOWN BOARD. The applicant for a Site
Alteration Permit or any other party aggrieved by the decision of the Commission
relative to a Site Alteration Permit shall, within ten (10) working days of the date
of the Commission’s order and decision, have a right to appeal such order and
decision to the Town Board. The appeal shall be deemed perfected upon receipt
by the Town Clerk of a notice of appeal and statement setting forth the grounds
7
for the appeal. The Town Clerk shall transmit a copy of the notice of appeal and
statement to the Town Board and to the Commission. The Town Board may
overturn the Commission’s order and decision by a two-third’s vote of all
members of the Town Board. The Commission, in any written order denying a
permit application, shall advise the applicant of the applicant’s right to appeal to
the Town Board and shall include this Section in all such orders.
SECTION 8. TOWN ACTIONS. The Commission shall be notified of and shall
review and make recommendations with respect to any Town activity by the
Town of White Bear which would result in changing the nature or appearance of
any Heritage Preservation Site or District either pending or established.
SECTION 9. LIMITATIONS. If, within sixty (60) days from the filing of a Site
Alteration Permit application, the Commission has neither approved nor denied
the Site Alteration Permit application, the plans and permit application shall be
deemed to have been approved by the Commission, and if all other requirements
of the Town have been met, the Town shall authorize a permit for the proposed
work. No permit shall be issued nor work commenced in the event the
Commission disapproves the Site Alteration Permit application in accordance
with this Ordinance.
SECTION 10. EMERGENCY REPAIR. In emergency situations where immediate
repair is needed to protect the safety of the structure and its inhabitants, the
building official may, without Commission action, approve the repair of only those
items needed to insure safety.
SECTION 11. ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties in addition to those
otherwise specified in this Ordinance:
11-1. The Commission shall submit an annual report to the State historic
preservation officer by October 31 of each year. The report must summarize the
Commission’s activities, including its designations, reviews, and other activities
occurring in the previous 12 months.
11-2. The Commission shall conduct a continuing survey of all areas,
places, buildings, structures, lands or objects in the Town of White Bear which
the Commission, on the basis of information available or presented to it, has
reason to believe are significant to the cultural, social, economic, political or
architectural history of the Town.
11-3. The Commission shall recommend to the Town Board areas, places,
buildings, structures, lands, works of art or other objects having special historical,
cultural or architectural interest or value for the community to be designated as
Heritage Preservation Sites.
8
11-4. The Commission shall conduct general preservation planning to
determine needed and desirable improvements of older buildings throughout the
Town of White Bear, acting in a resource and advisory capacity to owners of
those buildings regarding their preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation.
11-5. The Commission shall work for the continuing education of the
citizens of the Town of White Bear with respect to the civic and architectural
heritage of the Town. It shall keep current and public a register of designated and
proposed Heritage Preservation Sites and areas along with the plans and
programs that pertain to them.
11-6. The Commission may accept the services, on a permanent or parttime
basis of technical experts and such persons as may be required to perform
its duties, subject to requirements of the Town Board.
11-7. The Commission may recommend to the Town the acceptance of
gifts and contributions to be made to the Town and to assist the Town staff in the
preparation of applicants for grant funds to be made through the Town for the
purpose of heritage preservation. Any contributions or gifts will be expended in
the manner provided through the fiscal policy of the Town of White Bear.
11-8. The Commission may on a continuing basis collect and review Town
planning and development records, documents, studies, models, maps, plans
and drawings to be entered in the White Bear or Chisago County Historical
Society archives as a permanent record of Town history and development.
11-9. The Heritage Preservation Commission may recommend to the
Town Board that certain property eligible for designation as a Heritage
Preservation Site be acquired by gift, by negotiation, or other legal means.
SECTION 12. REPOSITORY FOR DOCUMENTS. The office of the Town Clerk
is designated as the repository for at least one copy of all studies, reports,
recommendations and programs required under this Section. These files will be
maintained in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 138.17.
SECTION 13. RECORDING OF HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITES. The Town
Clerk shall record or file with the Ramsey County Recorder or Register of Titles
the legal description of all properties designated as Heritage Preservation Sites
by the Town of White Bear.
SECTION 14. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION. An owner or occupant of any area,
place, building, structure, or other object within a duly designated Heritage
Preservation Site who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall
be constructed to be a separate offense. The costs of prosecution may be
charged to the violator.
9
10
SECTION 15. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the party held to be invalid.
SECTION 16. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 19th day of April, 2010.
APPROVED:
_____________________________________
RICHARD A. SAND, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
RICHARD A. SAND, Chair
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Supervisor
ROBERT J. KERMES, Supervisor
Synopsis published in the White Bear Press May 5, 2010.
Historical Notes
2010
Ordinance, Title, Sections, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, & 16 originally passed on
April 19, 2010, and effective May 5, 2010 by Sand (Chair), Mample, Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
ORDINANCE NO. 83
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR HEREBY ORDAINS AS
FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES. The purpose of this Ordinance is to
provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of White Bear
Township through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm
drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by the State and
Federal Law. This Ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction
of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to
comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) MS4 permit process. For the purpose of this Ordinance, MS4
means and refers to the Storm Drainage System defined in Section 2-14. The
objectives of this Ordinance are:
1-1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user.
1-2. To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
1-3. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
2-1. Authorized Enforcement Agency: employees or designees of White
Bear Township or the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) as designated
to enforce this Ordinance.
2-2. Best Management Practices (BMP’s): Schedule of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or
indirectly into stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems.
Best Management Practices also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
2-3. Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C., 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
2-4. Construction Activity: Activities subject to NPDES Construction
Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 1
acre or more and projects that disturb less than 1 acre if they are part of a larger
common plan of development. Such activities include but are not limited to
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
2-5. Hazardous Materials: Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
2-6. Illicit Connections: An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter a storm drain system including, but not limited
to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by the Township or, any drain or conveyance connected
from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the
Township.
2-7. Industrial Activity: Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122. 26 (b)(14).
2-8. MPCA: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
2-9. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Stormwater Discharge Permit: A permit issued by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) (or by the State of Minnesota under the authority delegated
pursuant to 33 U.S.C., 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
Waters of the State, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or
general area-wide-basis.
2-10. Non-Stormwater Discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
2-11. Person: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as
the owner’s agent.
2-12. Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil
2
and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquids, solid wastes, and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure;
and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
2-13. Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and boulevards.
2-14. Storm Drainage System: Publicly-owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, infiltration, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
2-15. Storm Water: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
2-16. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP): A document
which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution and
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to Stormwater, Stormwater Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving
Waters to the maximum extent practicable.
2-17. Township: White Bear Township
2-18. Wastewater: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility or property.
2-19. Waters of the State: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems,
drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within,
flow through, or border upon the State of Minnesota or any portion thereof.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY. This Ordinance shall apply to all water entering
the storm drain system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands
unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
SECTION 4. RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION. White Bear Township
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any
3
powers granted or duties imposed upon the MPCA may be delegated in writing
by the Township Engineer of White Bear Township to persons or entities acting
in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the Township.
SECTION 5. ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY. The standards set forth herein and
promulgated pursuant to this Ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this
Ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure
that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of
pollutants.
SECTION 6. DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
6-1. Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or Waters of the
State any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing
any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance
of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
6-1.1. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this Ordinance: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows,
rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated-
typically less than one PPM Chlorine), fire fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants.
6-1.2. Discharges specified in writing by the MPCA as being necessary to
protect the health and safety.
6-1.3. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Township Engineer 48-hours prior to the start of the test.
6-1.4. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under the NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the
MPCA or Federal EPA, provided that the other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
4
6-2. Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
6-2.1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
6-2.2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
6-2.3. A person is considered to be in violation of this Ordinance if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
SECTION 7. SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
7-1. Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations.
White Bear Township may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access
to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of
the State. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the Township may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize damage to the MS4 or the Waters of the State, or to minimize danger
to persons.
7-2. Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this Ordinance may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
Township will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
7-3. Restoration of Access. A person violates this Ordinance by
restoring MS4 access to a premises that had access suspended or terminated
pursuant to this Section. Restoration of access may only occur with prior written
approval of the Township.
SECTION 8. INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION DISCHARGES. Any person
subject to an Industrial or Construction Activity NPDES stormwater discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with
said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Township prior to the
allowing of discharges to the MS4.
5
SECTION 9. MONITORING OF DISCHARGES
9-1. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, or construction activity
as defined in this Ordinance.
9-2. Access to Facilities.
9-2.1. The Township shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this Ordinance as often as may be necessary
to determine compliance with this Ordinance. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency.
9-2.2. Facility operators shall allow the Township ready access to all parts
of the premises for the inspection, sampling, examination, and copying of
records that must be kept under the conditions of the NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by State and Federal law.
9-2.3. The Township shall have the right to install and operate on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
Township to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s
stormwater discharge.
9-2.4. The Township has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used
to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy per manufacturer’s recommendations.
9-2.5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the operator at the written or oral request of the Township, and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.
9-2.6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a
permitted facility is a violation of the stormwater discharge permit and of
this Ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES
permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits
an offense if the person denies the Township reasonable access to the
6
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this Ordinance.
9-2.7. If an officer or agent of the Township has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she
is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this Ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this Ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community,
then the Township may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 10. REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE
STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY USE OF THE BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES. White Bear Township has adopted requirements identifying Best
Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or
Waters of the State. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal
storm drain system or Waters of the State through the use of these structural and
non-structural best management practices. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may
be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and
non-structural best management practices to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all
terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliant with the provisions of this section. These best management
practices shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance with these requirements of the NPDES permit.
SECTION 11. WATERCOURSE PROTECTION. Every person owning property
through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and
maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the
owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or
adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to
the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
SECTION 12. NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS. Notwithstanding any other
requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a property has
information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or
may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the
7
storm drain system, or Waters of the State, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such a release. In the
event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. An owner or lessee is responsible for the residential property they own
or occupy. For commercial and industrial property, responsible persons include
an owner, but not be limited to the tenant, the operator, and an emergency
response officer for the facility or operation. In the event of the release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Township in person or by phone
or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to White Bear
Township within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such
records shall be retained for at least three years.
SECTION 13. ENFORCEMENT.
13-1. Whenever White Bear Township finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the Township may
order compliance by written Notice of Violation to the responsible person. Such a
notice may require without limitation:
13-1.1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
13-1.2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
13-1.3. The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
13-1.4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
13-1.5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
13-1.6. The implementation of source control or treatment best
management practices; and
13-1.7. The deadline within which to remedy the violation.
13-2. If the abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or
restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the
violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will
8
be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
SECTIONS 14. APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Any person receiving a
Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the Township. The notice of
appeal must be received by the Township within 15 days from the date of the
Notice of Violation. The appeal shall be heard by the Town Board of Supervisors
within 30 days from the date of the receipt of the notice to appeal. The decision
of the Board of Supervisors shall be final.
SECTION 15. ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL. If the violation
has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of
Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within the deadline extended by the
decision of the Town Board, then representatives of the Township shall enter
upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
declared unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the Township or designated contractor to enter upon
the premises for the purposes set forth above.
SECTIONS 16. COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION. Within 30 days
after the abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of
the cost of the abatement, including administrative costs and a 25% surcharge,
and the deadline to pay the abatement costs. The property owner may file a
written protest objecting to the costs and payment terms of the abatement within
15 days. The appeal shall be heard by the Town Board of Supervisors within 30
days from the date of the receipt of the notice of appeal. If the amount due is not
paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the Board of
Supervisors after hearing the appeal, the charges will be filed with Ramsey
County and shall become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
SECTION 17. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. The provisions of this Ordinance are
intended to prevent the occurrence of events which would likely create immediate
and irreparable harm to public facilities and the public health if they occurred. If a
person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Ordinance, the
authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
SECTION 18. COMPENSATORY ACTION. In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties, and remedies authorized by this Ordinance, the authorized
enforcement agency may impose upon violator alternative compensatory actions,
such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, lake and/or
creek cleanup, etc.
9
SECTION 19. VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat
to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance and
may be summarily abated or restored at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil
action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may
be taken.
SECTION 20. CRIMINAL PROSECUTION. Any person that violates this
Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
may be subject to the maximum fine and imprisonment allowed by State law.
Each day on which such violation exists or continues, shall constitute a separate
offense punishable to the maximum extent of the law. The authorized
enforcement agency may recover all attorney’s fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with the enforcement of this Ordinance, including sampling
and monitoring expenses.
SECTION 21. REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE. The remedies listed in this
Ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable Federal, State, or Local law and it is within the discretion of the
authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
SECTION 22. SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance are hereby
declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this
Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or
circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not effect the other
provisions or application of this ordinance.
SECTION 23 . EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 21st day of March, 2011.
APPROVED
_____________________________________
RICHARD A. SAND, Town Board Chair
ATTEST:
__________________________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
10
11
Board of Supervisors:
RICHARD A. SAND, Chair
BOB KERMES, Supervisor
BILL MAMPLE, Supervisor
Synopsis published in the White Bear Press on March 30, 2011.
Historical Notes
2011
Ordinance, Title, Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, and 23 originally passed March 7, 2011, and effective March 16, 2011 by Sand
(Chair), Mample, Kermes; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).



ORDINANCE NO. 85
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, MINNESOTA,
TO EXERCISE, ON BEHALF OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR,
THE POWERS CONFERRED BY MINNESOTA
STATUTES, SECTION 462C.01 TO 462C.10
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. The Economic Development Authority of the Town of White Bear
(the “EDA”) has been duly organized pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section
469.090 to 469.1082, as amended, (the “EDA Act”) and Laws of Minnesota 1988,
Chapter 678, as amended, and has all of the powers and duties of an
economic development authority under the EDA Act and of a housing and
redevelopment authority under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Sections
469.001 to 469.047 (the “HRA Act”).
SECTION 2. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has enacted Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 462C (the “Act”) to regulate the planning and implementation
of single family housing programs and multifamily housing development and
has provided for the financing of such programs and developments pursuant to
the terms of the Act.
SECTION 3. The Town desires to authorize the EDA to exercise the powers in
Minnesota Statutes, Sections 462C.01 to 462C.10, to develop and administer
programs of making or purchasing mortgage or rehabilitation loans to finance the
acquisition or rehabilitation of single family housing by low and moderate income
persons and families anywhere within its boundaries, or making or purchasing
loans to finance multifamily housing developments, upon certain conditions set
forth in the Act.
SECTION 4. Accordingly, the EDA is hereby authorized to exercise on behalf of
the Town, all of the powers conferred by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462C.01 to
462C.10.
SECTION 5. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part hereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 16th day of July, 2012.
APPROVED:
_________________________________
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Chair
ROBERT J. KERMES, Supervisor
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor


ORDINANCE NO. 87
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT AND PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES
FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF IN THE
TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. STATUTORY AUTHORITY. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the
authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapters 103B, 105, 462,
and 497, Minnesota Rules, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900, and Minnesota Rules Chapter
8410 and 8420, as amended.
SECTION 2. PURPOSE. The purpose of this Ordinance is to set forth the minimum
requirements for stormwater management that will diminish threats to public health,
safety, public and private property and natural resources of the Township by establishing
performance standards including:
2-1. Protect life and property from dangers associated with flooding.
2-2. Protect public and private property from damage resulting from runoff or
erosion.
2-3. Ensure the annual runoff rates and volumes from post development site
conditions mimic the annual runoff rates and volumes from predevelopment site
conditions.
2-4. Ensure site design minimizes the generation of stormwater and maximizes
pervious areas for stormwater treatment.
2-5. Promote regional stormwater management by watershed.
2-6. Provide a single, consistent set of performance standards that apply to all
developments.
2-7. Protect water quality from nutrients, pathogens, toxics, debris, and thermal
stress.
2-8. Ensure no increase in temperature of stormwater post-construction in order to
protect cold water resources.
2-9. Promote infiltration and groundwater recharge.
2-10. Providing a vegetated corridor (buffer) to protect water resources from
development.
2
2-11. Protect functional values of natural water courses and wetlands.
2-12. Provide plant and animal habitat and support riparian ecosystems.
2-13. Achieve an 80% reduction in sediment load rates to community waters
compared to no controls for all new development, a 40% reduction in sediment load rates
compared to no controls for all redevelopment and street reconstruction, and a 20%
reduction in sediment load rates compared to no controls for existing developments.
SECTION 3. SCOPE. No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial,
industrial, or institutional uses without having provided stormwater management
measures that control or manage runoff from such developments.
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in
common usage and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. For the
purpose of this Ordinance, the words “must” and “shall” are mandatory and not
permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
4-1. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) means erosion and sediment
control and water quality management practices that are the most effective and
practicable means of controlling, preventing, and minimizing degradation of surface
water, including avoidance of impacts, construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time
soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices published by state
or designated area-wide planning agencies.
4-1.1. Individual BMPs found in this permit are described in the current version of
Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
2000. BMPs must be adapted to the site and can be adopted from other sources.
However, they must be similar in purpose and at least as effective and stringent
as MPCA’s BMPs. (Other sources include manufacturers specifications, Storm
Water Management Construction Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans
and Best Management Practices, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 1992,
and Erosion Control Design Manual, Minnesota Department of Transportation, et
al, 1993).
4-2. COMMISSIONER means the Commissioner of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agenda or the Commissioner’s designee.
4-3. COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE means a contiguous area
where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at
different times, on different schedules, but under one proposed plan. One plan is broadly
defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or physical demarcation
indicating that land-disturbing activities may occur.
3
4-4. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. For this permit, construction activity includes
construction activity as defined in 40- C.F.R. part 122.26(b)(14)(x) and small construction
as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 122.26(b)(15). This includes a disturbance to the land that
results in a change in the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative),
or the existing soil topography that may result in accelerated storm water
runoff, leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment into surface waters or drainage
systems. Examples of construction activity may include clearing, grading, filling and
excavating. Construction activity includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total
land area that is a part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger
common plan will ultimately disturb one (1) acre or more.
4-5. DEWATERING means the removal of water for construction activity. It can be
a discharge of appropriated surface or groundwater to dry and/or solidify a construction
site. I may require Minnesota Department of Natural Resources permits to be
appropriated and if contaminated may require other MPCA permits to be discharged.
4-6. ENERGY DISSIPATION means methods employed at pipe outlets to prevent
erosion. Examples include, but are not limited to: concrete aprons, riprap, splash pads,
and gabions that are designed to prevent erosion.
4-7. EROSION PREVENTION means measures employed to prevent erosion
including but not limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch, temporary
or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
4-8. FINAL STABILIZATION means that either:
4-8.1. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform
(e.g., evenly disturbed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with
a density of 70% of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been
established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures,
or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap,
gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
4-8.2. For individual lots in residential construction by either:
4-8.2(a). The homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified above,
or
4-8.2(b). The homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization including
perimeter controls for an individual lot prior to occupation of the home by
the homeowner and informing the homeowner of the need for, and benefits
of, final stabilization.
4-8.3. For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g.,
pipelines across crop or range land) final stabilization may be accomplished by
returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed
4
that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips
immediately adjacent to surface waters and drainage systems, and areas which
are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final
stabilization criteria in 4-8.1 or 4-8.2 above.
4-9. GENERAL CONTRACTOR means the party who signs the construction
contract with the owner to construct the project described in the final plans and
specifications. Where the construction project involves more than one contractor, the
general contractor will be the party responsible for managing the project on behalf of the
owner. In some cases, the owner may be the general contractor. In these cases, the
owner may contact an individual as the operator who would become the co-permittee.
4-10. HOMEOWNER FACTSHEET means a fact sheet developed by the MPCA
to be given to homeowners at the time of sale by a builder to inform the homeowner of
the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization.
4-11. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE means a constructed hard surface that either
prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface
in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples
include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and concrete,
asphalt, or gravel roads.
4-12. NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
means the program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring,
and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301, 318, 402, and 405) and
United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, Sections 11317, 1328, 1342, and
1345.
4-13. NORMAL WETTED PERIMETER means the area of a conveyance, such as
a ditch, channel, or pipe that is in contact with water during flow events that are expected
to occur once every year.
4-14. NOTICE OF TERMINATION means notice to terminate coverage under this
permit after construction is complete, the site has undergone final stabilization, and
maintenance agreements for all permanent facilities have been established, in
accordance with all applicable conditions of this permit. Notice of Termination forms are
available from the MPCA.
4-15. OPERATOR means the person (usually the general contractor), designed
by the owner, who has day to day operational control and/or the ability to modify project
plans and specifications related to the SWPPP. The person must be knowledgeable in
those areas of the permit for which the operator is responsible, (Part II.B. and Park IV).
and must perform those responsibilities in a workmanlike manner.
4-16. OWNER means the person or party possessing the title of the land on which
the construction activities will occur; or if the construction activity is for a lease holder, the
5
party or individual identified as the lease holder; or the contracting government agency
responsible for the construction activity.
4-17. PERMANENT COVER means final stabilization. Examples include grass,
gravel, asphalt, and concrete.
4-18. PERMITTEE means a person or persons, firm, or governmental agency or
other institution that signs the application submitted to the MPCA and is responsible for
compliance with the terms and conditions of this permit.
4-19. SATURATED SOIL means the highest seasonal elevation in the soil that is
in a reduced chemical state because of soil voids being filled with water. Saturated soil is
evidenced by the presence of redoximorphic features or other information.
4-20. SEDIMENT CONTROL means methods employed to prevent sediment from
leaving the site. Sediment control practices include silt fences, sediment traps, earth
dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain
inlet protection, and temporary or permanent sedimentation basins.
4-21. SMALL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY means small construction activity as
defined in 40 C.F.R. part 122.26(b)(15). Small construction activities include clearing,
grading and excavating that result in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre
and less than five acres. Small construction activity includes the disturbance of less than
one (1) acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale
if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one and less than
five (5) acres.
4-22. STABILIZED means the exposed ground surface has been covered by
appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber blanket, or other
material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass seeding is not stabilization.
4-23. STANDARD PLATES means general drawings having or showing similar
characteristics or qualities that are representative of a construction practice or activity.
4-24. STORMWATER is defined under Minnesota Rules 7077.0105, subp. 41(b),
and includes precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and any other
surface runoff and drainage.
4-25. STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN means a plan for
stormwater discharge that includes erosion prevention measures and sediment controls
that, when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and decrease offsite
nonpoint pollution.
4-26. SURFACE WATER OR WATERS means all streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, wetlands, reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways,
watercourses, and irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or private.
6
4-27. TEMPORARY EROSION PROTECTION means methods to prevent
erosion. Examples of temporary cover include: straw, wood fiber blanket, wood chips, and
erosion netting.
4-28. UNDERGROUND WATERS means water contained below the surface of
the earth in the saturated zone including, without limitation, all waters whether under
confined, unconfined, or perched conditions, in near surface unconsolidated sediment or
regolith, or in rock formations deeper underground. The term ground water shall be
synonymous with underground water.
4-29. WATERS OF THE STATE (as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section
115.01, Subd. 22) means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways,
wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or
private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
4-30. WATER QUALITY VOLUME means ½ 1.1” inch of runoff from the new
impervious surfaces created by this project except public linear projects which require
treatment of first .75 inches of runoffand is the volume of water to be treated in the
permanent storm water management system, as required by this permit except as
provided in Appendix A.C.2.
4-31. WETLAND OR WETLANDS is defined in Minnesota Rules 7050.0130,
Subpart F, and includes those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
areas. Constructed wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are not waters of the
state.
4-31.1. Wetlands must have the following attributes:
4-31.1(a). A predominance of hydric soils.
4-31.1(b). Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and
4-31(c). Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such
vegetation.
SECTION 5. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The following standards shall apply to all
developments within the Township:
7
5-1. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. Every applicant for a building permit
that involves disturbing 20,000 10,000 square feet of land, subdivision approval, or a
permit to allow land disturbing activities must submit a stormwater management plan to
the Township. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing
activities shall be issued until approval of this plan. All plans shall be consistent with
National Pollution Discharge Elimination Permit (NPDES) requirements, and the filing or
approval requirements of the Rice Creek Watershed District, Vadnais Lake Area Water
Management Organization, the Ramsey Soil and Water Conservation District, or other
regulatory bodies. All stormwater mitigation and management technologies shall be
consistent with the Community Stormwater Management Design Manual (Design
Manual). The Design Manual is the compilation of design, performance, and review
criteria approved by the Town and adopted by the Town Board for stormwater
management practices.
5-1.1. GENERAL POLICY ON STORMWATER RUNOFF RATES. Site plans for
new development of any kind will be assessed for stormwater quantity control and
stormwater quality management. The general policy on stormwater runoff rates is
to reduce impacts of development by maintaining pre-development hydrological
conditions. When a site is designed for new or renewed development, the
hydrologic regime can be altered in the following ways:
5-1.1(a). Increased runoff volume.
5-1.1(b). Increased imperviousness.
5-1.1(c). Increased flow frequency, duration, and peak runoff rate.
5-1.1(d). Reduce infiltration (groundwater recharge).
5-1.1(e). Modification of the flow pattern.
5-1.1(f). Faster time to peak, due to shorter time of concentration through
storm sewers.
5-1.1(g). Loss of storage.
5-1.1(h). Accelerated channel erosion.
5-1.2. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS. The minimum
requirements of the Stormwater Plan shall be consistent with the most recent
version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s NPDES Construction Permit
Requirements.
5-1.2(a). IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION.
(1). Project name.
8
(2). Project type (residential, commercial, industrial, road construction, or
other).
(3). Project location.
(4). County parcel identification number (legal description).
(5). Names and addresses of the record owner, developer, land surveyor,
engineer, designer of the plat, and any agents, contractors, and
subcontractors who will be responsible for project implementation.
(6). Identification of the entity responsible for long term maintenance of the
project. This induces a maintenance plan and schedule for all permanent
stormwater practices.
(7). Phasing of construction with estimated start date, time frames and
schedules for each construction phase, and completion date.
(8). Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other
governmental entity or agencies including mitigation measures required as
a result of any review for the project.
5-1.3. EXISTING CONDITIONS. A complete site plan and specifications, signed
by the person who designed the plan shall be drawn to an easily legible scale, shall
be clearly labeled with a north arrow and a date of preparation, and shall include,
at a minimum, the following information:
5-1.3(a). Project Map. An 8.5 by 11 inch United States Geological Survey
(USGS) 7.5 minute quad or equivalent map indicating site boundaries and
existing elevations.
5-1.3(b). Property lines and lot dimensions.
5-1.3(c). Existing zoning classifications for land within and abutting the
development, including shoreland, floodway, flood fringe, or general
floodplain, and other natural resource overlay districts.
5-1.3(d). All buildings and outdoor uses including all dimensions and
setbacks.
5-1.3(e). All public and private roads, interior roads, driveways and parking
lots.
5-1.3(f). Identify all natural and artificial water features (including drain tiles)
on site and within ½ mile of project boundary, including, but not limited to
9
lakes, ponds, streams, and ditches. Show ordinary high water marks and
100 year flood elevation for all lakes and county ditches and delineated
wetland boundaries, if any. If not available, appropriate flood zone
determination or wetland delineation, or both, may be required at the
applicant’s expense.
5-1.3(g). Map of watershed drainage areas, soil types, infiltration rates,
depth to bedrock, and depth to seasonal high water table.
5-1.3(h). Steep slopes where areas of 12% or more existing over a distance
for 50 feet or more.
5-1.3(i). Bluff areas where the slope rises at least 25 feet above the toe of
the bluff and the grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25
feet or more above the toe of the bluff averages 30% or greater.
5-1.3(j). Wooded area and tree survey as defined by the Zoning Ordinance.
5-1.3(k). Agricultural Land Preservation Area (s), County Biological Survey
sites, or other officially designated natural resource.
5-1.3(l). Hydrologic calculations for volume runoff, velocities, and peak flow
rates by watershed, for the 2.0-yr, 10-yr, and 100 yr 24-hour storm events.
(1). They shall include:
(i). Pre-existing peak flow rates.
(ii). Assumed runoff curve numbers.
(iii). Time of concentration used in calculations.
(iv). The 100-year flood elevation with and without the
floodway.
5-1.3(m). Bank full discharge rate (1.5 year recurrence interval) of County
Ditch #1 and #14.
5-1.4. PROPOSED CONDITIONS. A complete site plan and specifications, signed
by the person who designed the plan shall be drawn to an easily legible scale, shall
be clearly labeled with a north arrow and a date of preparation, and shall include,
at a minimum, the following information:
5-1.4(a). PROJECT MAP. An 8.5 by 11 inch United States Geological
Survey (USGS) 7.5 minute quad or equivalent map indicating site
boundaries, proposed elevations, and areas not to be disturbed.
10
5-1.4(b). Property lines and lot dimensions of plat.
5-1.4(c). The dimensions and setbacks of all buildings and easements.
5-1.4(d). The location and area of all proposed impervious surfaces
including public and private roads, interior roads, driveways, parking lots,
pedestrian ways, and rooftops. Show all traffic patterns and types of paving
and surfacing materials.
5-1.4(e). Location, size, and approximate grade of proposed public sewer
and water mains.
5-1.4(f). Elevations, sections, profiles, and details as needed to describe all
natural and artificial features of the project.
5-1.4(g). Identify all natural and artificial water features on site and within ½
mile of project boundary, including, but not limited to lakes, ponds, streams,
and ditches. Show ordinary high water marks of all lakes, 100-year flood
elevations and delineated wetland boundaries, if any. If not available,
appropriate flood zone determination or wetland delineation, or both, may
be required at the applicant’s expense.
5-1.4(h). Hydrologic calculations for volume runoff, velocities, and peak flow
rates by watershed, for the 2.0-yr, 10-yr, and 100-yr 24-hour storm events.
These shall include:
(1). Post construction peak flow rates with no detention.
(2). Post construction peak flow rates with detention.
(3). Assumed runoff curve numbers.
(4). Time of concentration used in calculations.
(5). If a flood insurance study has been done by the National Flood
Insurance Program, the 100-year flood elevation with and without the
floodway.
5-1.4(i). Hydrologic calculations for retaining soil particles greater than 5
microns (80% reduction) for new construction sites and greater than 20
microns (40% reduction) for redevelopment sites resulting from a one-year
24-hour storm event.
11
5-1.4(j). Bank full discharge rate (1.5 year recurrence interval) of creek or
stream if there is a waterway on the site or if the site discharges directly to
the waterway.
5-1.4(k). Locations of all stormwater management practices, infiltration
areas, and areas not to be disturbed during construction.
5-1.4(l). Steep slopes where areas of 14 12% or more existing over a
distance for 50 feet or more.
5-1.4(m). LOCATION OF TEMPORARY SEDIMENTATION BASINS. If
more than 10 acres are disturbed and drained to a single point of discharge
temporary sediment basins must be installed, however, if the site has
sensitive features as determined by the Town or the potential of offsite
impacts, then temporary sediment basins must be installed to protect the
resource. This is determined on a site by site basis. When site restrictions
do not allow for temporary sediment basin, equivalent measures such as
smaller basins, check dams, and vegetated buffer strips can be included.
5-1.4(n). Location and engineered designs for structural stormwater
management practices including stormwater treatment devices that remove
oil and floatable material (e.g. basin outlets with submerged entrances).
5-1.4(o). Normal water level, high water level, and emergency overflow
elevations for the site.
5-1.4(p). For discharges to cold water fisheries, a description and plans to
control temperature from stormwater runoff.
5-1.4(q). Floodway and flood fringe boundary, if available.
5-1.5. All proposed stormwater practices, hydrologic models, and design
methodologies shall be reviewed by the Town Engineer and certified for
compliance by the Town in accordance with their plans and specifications.
5-2. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND
DESIGN CRITERIA. The applicant shall consider reducing the need for
stormwater management performance standards by incorporating the use of
natural topography and land cover such as natural swales and depressions as they
exist before development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional
flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of the receiving
waterbody. The development shall minimize impact to significant natural features.
Review the site for steep slopes (greater than 12%), wetlands, wooded areas of
significance, rare and endangered species habitat, areas designated by the
County Biological Survey, metro greenways, or County parks and open space.
These areas should not be developed. The development shall limit impervious
12
surface coverage. Impervious surface coverage of a site shall not exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the site area unless stormwater is conveyed to an approved,
on-site or regional stormwater ponding/retention facility designed to accommodate
the increased runoff prior to discharge form the site into public waters or wetlands.
In designated shoreland areas the development shall meet the impervious surface
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance regardless of conveyance systems.
Proposed design, suggested location and phased implementation of effective,
practicable stormwater management measures for plans shall be designed,
engineered and implemented to achieve the following results:
5-2.1. VOLUME CONTROL. At a minimum, the first half-inch of runoff from a 24-
hour storm is infiltrated unless the site is within 2,000 feet of a special water where
the first 1-inch of runoff from a 24-hour storm event shall be infiltrated. Calculations
shall use the appropriate Hydrologic Soil Group Classification and saturated
infiltration rates unless specific rates are measured by a registered soil scientist.
5-2.2. SEDIMENT CONTROL.
5-2.2(a). For new construction, design practices to retain soil particles
greater than 5 microns on the site (80% reduction) resulting from a one-year
24-hour storm event, according to approved procedures, and assuming no
sediment resuspension.
5-2.2(b). For redevelopment and street reconstruction resulting in exposed
surface parking lots and associated traffic areas, design practices to retain
soil particles greater than 20 microns on the entire site (40% reduction)
resulting from a one-year 24-hour storm event, according to approved
procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension. Under no
circumstances shall the site’s existing sediment control level or trapping
efficiency be reduced as a result of the redevelopment.
5-2.3. OIL AND GREASE CONTROL. For all stormwater plans for commercial or
industrial developments and all other uses where the potential for pollution by oil
or grease, or both, exists, the first 0.5 inches of runoff will be treated using the best
oil and grease removal technology available. This requirement may be waived by
the plan reviewer only when the applicant can demonstrate that installation of such
practices is not necessary.
5-2.4. RUNOFF RATE CONTROL – HYDROLOGIC CALCULATIONS. All runoff
calculations shall be according to the methodology described in the Natural
Resources Conservation Service’s Technical Release 55, “Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds” (commonly known as TR-55), or other methodology approved
by the Town. For agricultural land subject to this section, the maximum runoff curve
number (RCN) used in such calculations shall be 51 for Hydrologic Soil Group
(HSG) A, 68 for hydrologic soil group B, 79 for HSG C, and 84 for HSG D. The TR-
55- specified curve numbers for other land uses shall be used. Heavily disturbed
13
sites will be lowered one permeability class for hydrologic calculations. Lightly
disturbed areas require no modification. Where practices have been implemented
to restore soil structure to pre-developed conditions, no permeability class
modification is required.
5-2.5. RUNOFF RATE CONTROL – DESIGN STANDARDS. All stormwater
facilities shall be designed, installed and maintained to effectively accomplish the
following:
5-2.5(a). Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 2-year, 24-hour
storm event.
5-2.5(b). Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 10-year, 24-
hour storm event. At a minimum the storm sewer conveyance system shall
be designed for this storm event. Low areas must have an acceptable
overland drainage route with the proper transfer capacity when the storm
event is exceeded.
5-2.5(c). Safely pass the 100-year, 24-hour storm event.
5-2.6. OUTLETS. Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable
outlet capable of carrying designed flow at a non-erosive velocity. Outlet design
must consider flow capacity and flow duration. This requirement applies to both
the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to stormwater conveyance or waterbody.
5-2.7. MINIMIZE IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA AND MAXIMIZE
INFILTRATION. The project shall use existing natural drainage ways and
vegetated soil surfaces to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before
discharge into public waters or a stormwater conveyance system (permanent pool
areas of wet ponds tend to lose infiltration capacity and will not be accepted as an
infiltration practice). The applicant shall limit the impervious surface of the
developed site or subdivision by incorporating the following design considerations,
consistent with zoning, subdivision, and PUD requirements:
5-2.7(a). Narrowing street widths.
5-2.7(b). Reducing parking lot space.
5-2.7(c). Sidewalk locations.
5-2.7(d). Reducing setbacks and driveways.
5-2.7(e). Maximizing open space while incorporating smaller lot sizes to
conserve natural areas and reduce the amount of stormwater runoff
generated at the site.
14
5-2.7(f). Using landscaping and soils to treat and infiltrate stormwater runoff.
5-2.7(g). Eliminate curb and gutter where practicable, and use vegetated
swales or equivalent.
5-2.7(h). Look for vegetated areas that can filter sheet flow, removing
sediment and other pollutants, and increasing the time of concentration.
5-2.7(i). Disconnect impervious areas by allowing runoff from small
impervious areas to be directed to pervious areas where it can be infiltrated
or filtered.
5-2.7(j). All runoff from downspouts, driveways and other impervious areas
shall be directed to pervious surfaces, where feasible, or unless the
applicant can demonstrate that the practice is likely to result in groundwater
contamination.
5-2.7(k). Increase buffers around streams, steep slopes, and wetlands to
protect from flood damage and provide additional water quality treatment.
5-2.7(l). Install semi-permeable/permeable or porous paving.
5-2.8. POND REQUIREMENTS. For all projects creating more than one acre of
impervious surface, ponding shall be required. At a minimum all pond design
specifications shall conform to the current version of the approved Community
Design Manual and the current requirements found in the NPDES construction
permit. In addition the following are required:
5-2.8(a). Stormwater infiltration areas shall be provided when feasible as an
alternative to stormwater treatment ponds.
5-2.8(a b). All stormwater ponds shall be provided with a fore bay area to
provide for the settlement of fine sand sized particles.
5-2.8(b c). Pond side slopes shall not exceed 4 feet horizontal to 1 foot
vertical (4:1) and should provide a bench just at the normal water level with
side slopes no less than 10 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical (10:1) for safety
considerations.
5-2.8(c d). All public and private owned stormwater management facilities
shall provide an unobstructed access path (minimum of 20 feet) capable of
supporting light truck traffic during normal whether for the purpose of
conducting inspections of the facility and maintenance thereof. No private
stormwater facility may be approved unless an easement is provided to the
Town allowing for access for maintenance and inspection. Maintenance
agreements before, during, and after development are also required.
15
5-2.8(d e). To provide proper protection for adjacent property within the first
tier from the pond, the design storm interval for the ponding area is a 100-
year, 24-hour storm with correctly sized conveyances for 100-year, 24-hour
storm flows consistent with standards used by the cities, townships,
counties, state, and federal agencies in planning for the flood protection of
homes and public facilities. As an additional safety factor, the lowest floor
and low opening elevation of a structure in a development should be at least
three feet above the 100-year 24-hour elevation of the pond. The low floor
and low opening elevation of structures that are adjacent to ponds should
be certified by the builder during basement shall be staked by the Town
Engineer prior to construction to ensure adequate freeboard. An emergency
overflow system must be established for the health and safety of the area.
If the area is landlocked (no natural drainage outlet), the low floor and low
opening elevation of structures should be five feet above the calculated high
water level. In consideration of the groundwater table, the low floor and low
opening elevation of structures should be four feet above the normal
groundwater elevation. The table below gives the recommended flood
control and freeboard criteria.
5-2.8(e f). Floodplain filling shall be consistent with a state and FEMA
approved floodplain ordinance and RCWD & VLAWMO Rules and shall not
cause a net decrease in flood storage capacity below the projected 100-
year flood elevation unless it is shown that the proposed filling, together with
the filling of all other properties on the affected reach of the waterbody to
the same degree of encroachment as proposed by the applicant, will not
cause high water or unduly aggravate flood flows to the point of flooding on
other properties. The allowable fill area shall be calculated by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Minnesota.
16
Condition Water Bodies with
Piped Outlets
(includes graded
areas that will create
ponded conditions
during the 100-yr
storm event)
Landlocked Water
Bodies
Flowing Channels
Passing Through
Roadways
New Road
Construction (low
point in roadway)
No Lower than the
100-yr 24-hr elevation
1 foot above the 100-
yr 24-hr elevation
No lower than the 50-
yr flood level.
Overflow swale for
flows over the 50-yr
flood level to protect
downstream roadway
embankment
Existing Roadways
(low point in roadway)
If the existing road is
below the 100-yr flood
level, the Town
should require a
variance for the road.
This will allow for
proper review of
safety standards.
No lower than 10
inches below 100-yr
24-hr elevation.
No lower than the 50-
yr flood level.
New construction and
additions to existing
structures (low floor
elevation and lowing
opening of building)
Minimum of 3 feet
above 100-yr, 24-hr
storm event.
Additional
recommendations: 1.
At least 1 foot above
the emergency
overflow elevations.
2. At least 4 feet
above normal
groundwater
elevation. 3. At least 2
feet above hydric or
mottled soils
elevation.
Minimum of 5 feet
above 100-yr 24-hr
elevation.
N/A
Existing Structures
(low floor elevation
and low opening of
building)
Existing structures
should require a
proper review of
safety standards, but
in any event must be
a minimum of 2 feet
above the 100-yr, 24-
hr storm event.
Minimum of 5 feet
above 100-yr 24-hr
elevation.
N/A
17
5-2.9. MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR RIVERS, LAKES AND WETLANDS.
Rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands shall be protected from runoff
generated during construction and after completion of the development.
Runoff shall not be discharged directly into wetlands without appropriate
quality and quantity runoff control, depending on the individual wetland’s
vegetation. Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless
replaced by either restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal
public value. Compensation, including the replacement ratio and quality of
replacement should be consistent with the requirements outlined in the
Board of Water and Soil Resources rules that implement the Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act 1991 including any and all amendments to it, and
consistent with Local Government unit (LGU) regulations including RCWD
and VLAWMO.
5-2.10. BUFFER PROTECTION FOR RIVERS, STREAMS, LAKES, AND
WETLANDS. A minimum 20-foot buffer strip around wetlands, and a 50-
foot buffer along streams, rivers, lakes, and special waters identified in the
NPDS construction permit shall be maintained at all times using native
vegetation. Buffer width shall be increased by at least two feet for every one
percent of slope for the surrounding land along rivers, streams, and lakes
and four feet for every one percent slope for wetlands. The Town may allow
buffer area averaging in cases where averaging will provide additional
protection to either the resource or environmentally valuable adjacent
upland habitat, provided that the resources total buffer area remains the
same. Care should be taken in averaging so that the buffers usefulness is
not short circuited. Detailed buffer design is site specific, and therefore, the
Town can require a larger buffer than the minimum specified. The applicant
shall maintain the buffer for the first year after completion of the project.
Drain tiles will short circuit the benefits of buffers. Therefore, drain tiles on
the project site shall be identified and rendered inoperable.
5-2.11. REGIONAL PONDING. The Town may establish off-site stormwater
management and associated fees, provided that provisions are made to
manage stormwater by an off-site facility, and provided that all of the
following conditions for the off-site facility are met:
5-2.11(a). The facility is in place.
5-2.11(b). The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a
level of stormwater control that at least meets the ordinance
standards.
5-2.11(c). The Town is satisfied that the facility has a legally
obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and
maintenance.
18
5-3. STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL.
5-3.1. ILLEGAL DISPOSAL
5-3.1(a). No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, or
keep or permit to be thrown, placed, left, maintained or kept, any
refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned
objects, articles, or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin conduit or drainage
structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land
in the Town so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except
in containers, recycling bags, or other lawfully established waste
disposal facility.
5-3.1(b). No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt,
or other landscape debris into a water resource buffer, street, road,
alley, catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural
watercourse, flood control channel, storm drain or any fabricated
natural conveyance.
5-3.2. ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
5-3.2(a). No person shall cause any illicit discharge to enter the Town
storm water system unless such discharge: (1) consists of non-storm
water that is authorized by an NPDES point source permit obtained
from the MPCA; or (2) is associated with firefighting activities; or (3)
is otherwise compliance with Township Ordinance.
5-3.2(b). No person shall use any illicit connection to intentionally
convey non-storm water to the Town storm water system.
5-3.3. GOOD HOUSEKEEPING PROVISIONS. Any owner or occupant of
property within the Town shall comply with the following good housekeeping
requirements:
5-3.3(a). No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or
otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste in an area where
discharge to streets or storm drain system may occur. This section
shall apply to both actual and potential discharges.
(1) For pools, water should be allowed to sit seven days to
allow for chlorine to evaporate before discharge. If fungicides
have been used, water must be tested and approved for
discharge to the wastewater treatment plant.
19
5-3.3(b). Runoff of water from residential property shall be minimized
to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the washing
down of paved areas in commercial or industrial property is
prohibited unless necessary or health or safety purposes and not in
violation of any other provisions in Town Ordinances.
5-3.3(c). Storage of Materials, Machinery, and Equipment:
(1) Objects such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil
or other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles
containing hazardous materials, shall not be stored in areas
susceptible to runoff.
(2) Any machinery or equipment that is to be repair or
maintained in areas susceptible to runoff shall be placed in a
confined area to contain leaks, spills, or discharges.
5-3.3(d). Removal of Debris and Residue – Debris and residue
shall be removed, as noted below:
(1) All motor vehicle parking lots shall be swept at a minimum
of twice a year to remove debris, such debris shall be
collected and properly disposed. However, parking lots are
not required to be swept for one month following a day on
which precipitation of one-half inch or more occurs.
(2) Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially
harmful material, such as animal waste, garbage or batteries,
which is located in an area susceptible to runoff, shall be
removed as soon as possible and disposed of properly.
Household hazardous waste may be disposed of at the
Ramsey County sponsored disposal site and shall not be
placed in a trash container.
5-4. REVIEW. The Town shall review the stormwater management plan. This
review shall be completed within fourteen (14) days of receiving the plan from the
developer.
5-4.1. PERMIT REQUIRED. If the Town determines that the stormwater
management plan meets the requirements of this ordinance, the Town shall issue
a permit valid for a specified period of time that authorizes the land disturbance
activity contingent on the implementation and completion of this plan.
5-4.2. DENIAL. If the Town determines that the stormwater management plan
does not meet the requirements of this ordinance, the Town shall not issue a permit
for the land disturbance activity. This plan must be resubmitted for approval before
20
the land disturbance activity begins. All land use and building permit shall be
suspended until the developer has an approved stormwater management plan.
5-5. MODIFICATION OF PLAN. An approved stormwater management plan may
be modified on submission of an application for modification to the Town, and after
approval by the Town. In reviewing such an application, the Town may require additional
reports and data.
5-6. VARIANCE REQUESTS. The Town may grant a variance on a case-by-case
basis. The content of a variance shall be specific, and shall not affect other approved
provision of a SWPPP.
5-6.1. The variance request shall be in writing and include the reason for
requesting the variance.
5-6.2. Economic hardship is not sufficient reason for granting a variance.
5-6.3. The Town shall respond to the variance request in writing and include the
justification for granting or denying the request.
5-7. FINANCIAL SECURITIES. The applicant shall install or construct, or pay the
Town fees for all stormwater management performance standards necessary to maintain
design criteria as given under Section ___, ____, ____. As designated by the Town under
a stormwater utility fee, an applicant may be required to provide an in-kind or monetary
contribution to the development and maintenance of Town stormwater management
facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development activities undertaken
by one or more persons.
5-8. INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT. Follow up inspections will be
performed by the Town on a regular basis during construction to ensure that stormwater
management plan measures are properly installed and maintained. In all cases the
inspectors will attempt to work with the applicant or developer to maintain proper
stormwater management.
5-8.1. CONSTRUCTION STOP ORDER. The Town may issue construction stop
orders until stormwater management measures meet specifications. A second
stormwater management inspection must then be scheduled and passed before
the final inspection will be done.
5-8.2. PERIMETER BREACH. If stormwater management measures malfunction
and breach the perimeter of the site, enter streets, other public areas, or
waterbodies, the applicant shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration
plan, obtain the right-of-way from the adjoining property owner, and implement the
cleanup and restoration plan within 48 hours of obtaining permission. If in the
discretion of the Town, the applicant does not repair the damage caused by the
21
stormwater runoff, the Town can do the remedial work required and charge the
cost to the applicant.
5-8.3. ACTIONS TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE. The Town can take the following
action in the event of a failure by applicant to meet the terms of this ordinance:
5-8.3(a). Withhold inspections or issuance of certificates of occupancy.
5-8.3(b). Revoke any permit issued by the Town to the applicant.
5-8.3(c). Conduct remedial or corrective action on the development site or
adjacent site affected by the failure.
5-8.3(d). Charge applicant for all costs associated with correcting the failure
or remediating damage from the failure. If payment is not made within thirty
days, payment will be made from the applicant’s financial securities.
5-8.3(e). Bring other actions against the applicant to recover costs of
remediation or meeting the terms of this ordinance.
5-8.3(f). Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with or violating
any of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be
subject to a fine or imprisonment or both. Each day that a separate violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
5-9. MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES. The Town requires that
stormwater facilities be maintained.
5-9.1. PRIVATE STORMWATER FACILITIES. All private stormwater facilities
shall be maintained in proper condition consistent with the performance standards
for which they were originally designed.
5-9.2. REMOVAL OF SETTLED MATERIALS. All settled materials from ponds,
sumps, grit chambers, and other devices, including settled solids, shall be removed
and properly disposed of on a five (5) year interval. One to five (5) year waivers
from this requirement may be granted by the Town when the owner presents
evidence that the facility has additional capacity to remove settled solids in
accordance with the original design capacity.
5-9.3. MAINTENANCE PLAN REQUIRED. No private stormwater facilities may
be approved unless a maintenance plan is provided that defines who will conduct
the maintenance, the type of maintenance and the maintenance intervals.
5-9.4 MAINTENANCE-FRIENDLY DESIGN. All stormwater facilities must be
designed to minimize the need for maintenance, to provide easy vehicle and
personnel access for maintenance purposes, and be structurally sound. It shall be
22
the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other
property interests to allow access to the facilities for inspection or maintenance.
5-9.5. INSPECTION. The Town shall inspect all stormwater facilities during
construction, during the first year of operation, and at least once every five years
thereafter.
5-9.6. MAINTENANCE OF PUBLICLY OWNED STORMWATER FACILITIES.
The Town shall annually perform the maintenance of the in place stormwater
facilities within the Town as provided for in the local water management plan.
Further, the Town shall notify the owners of other publicly owned stormwater
facilities if scheduled maintenance is needed according to periodic site inspections
or maintenance plans on file.
5-10. INVENTORY OF STORMWATER FACILITIES. Upon adoption of this
section, the Town shall inventory and maintain a database for all private and public
stormwater facilities within the Town requiring maintenance to assure compliance with
this ordinance. The Town shall notify owners of public and private stormwater facilities of
the need for conducting maintenance at least every five years, starting in 2016.
SECTION 6. REQUIREMENTS FOR DISCHARGING TO WETLANDS. If the project has
any storm water discharges with the potential for significant adverse impacts to a wetland
(e.g. conversion of a natural wetland to a storm water pond), the Permittee(s) must
demonstrate that the wetland mitigative sequence has been followed in accordance with
_____ or ____ of this section Section 9-5.5 of Ordinance No. 35, the Zoning Ordinance.
6-1. If the potential adverse impacts to a wetland on a specific project site have
been addressed by permits or other approvals from an official statewide program (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers 404 program, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or
the State of Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act) that are issued specifically for the
project and project site, the Permittee may use the permit or other determination issued
by these agencies to show that the potential adverse impacts have been addressed. For
the purposes of this permit, deminimus actions are determinations by the permitting
agency that address the project impacts, whereas a non-jurisdictional determination does
not address project impacts.
6-2. If there are impacts from the project that are not addressed in one of the
permits or other determinations discussed in Section 6 (e.g. permanent inundation or
flooding of the wetland, significant degradation of water quality, excavation, filling,
draining), the Permittee must minimize all adverse impacts to wetlands by utilizing
appropriate measures. Measures used must be based on the nature of the wetland, its
vegetative community types and the established hydrology. These measures include in
order of preference:
6-2.1. Avoid all significant adverse impacts to wetlands from the project and post
project discharge.
23
6-2.2. Minimize any unavoidable impacts from the project and post project
discharge.
6-2.3. Provide compensatory mitigation when the Permittee determines that there
is no reasonable and practicable alternative to having a significant adverse impact
on a wetland. For compensatory mitigation, wetland restoration or creation shall
be of the same type, size and whenever reasonable and practicable in the same
watershed as the impacted wetland.
SECTION 7. DISCHARGES REQUIRING ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW. This permit
does not replace or satisfy any environmental review requirements, including those under
the Minnesota Environmental Policy Act (MEPA) or the national Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA). The owner must complete any environmental review required by law, including
any required Environmental Assessment Worksheet or Environmental Impact
Statements, Federal environmental review, or other required review.
SECTION 8. DISCHARGES AFFECTING ENDANGERED OR THREATENED
SPECIES. This permit does not replace or satisfy any review requirements for
Endangered or Threatened species, from new or expanded discharges that adversely
impact or contribute to adverse impacts on a listed endangered or threatened species or
adversely modify a designated critical habitat. The owner must conduct any required
review and coordinate with appropriate agencies for any project with the potential of
affecting threatened or endangered species, or their critical habitat.
SECTION 9. DISCHARGES AFFECTING HISTORIC PLACES OR ARCHEOLOGICAL
SITES. This permit does not replace or satisfy any review requirements for Historic Places
or Archeological Sites, form new or expanded discharges which adversely affect
properties listed or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or affecting
known or discovered Archeological Sites. The owner must be in compliance with national
Historic Preservation Act and conduct all required review and coordination related to
historic preservation, including significant anthropological sites and any burial sites, with
the Minnesota Historic Preservation Officer.
SECTION 10. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision
of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part hereof,
other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 11. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force form
and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, this ___ day of _______, 2015.
24
APPROVED:
__________________________
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisor
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor
STEVEN A. RUZEK, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press ____________, 2015.
Historical Notes
2015
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 originally passed ____________,
2015, and effective ______________, 2015 by Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk).
ORDINANCE NO. 88
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A SIX (6) MONTH MORATORIUM
WITHIN THE TOWN ON THE ISSUANCE OF LIQUOR LICENSES IN THE
TOWN OF WHITE BEAR PURSUANT TO MINN. STAT. 462.355.
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE.
1-1. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish a temporary moratorium on the
issuance of liquor licenses. The Town of White Bear's Ordinance No. 32 does not
adequately reflect the intent of the Town Board in establishing the guidelines for the
issuance of liquor licenses in the Town of White Bear.
1-2. There is a need to revise the ordinance to reflect the intended guidelines for
the issuance of liquor licenses.
SECTION 2. ON-SALE LIQUOR LICENSE REVISION- MORATORIUM.
2-1. The Town Board of Supervisors finds, therefore, that a moratorium is required in
order to protect the planning process and to prevent the creation of on sale liquor establishments
in locations and sizes which are not compatible with the existing use and development of lands
within the Town for such uses pending the completion of necessary studies and the
consideration and implementation of new regulations on that subject. At the present time it is
expected that the necessary study and implementation can be completed within a six (6) month
period.
2-2. The Town Board of Supervisors authorizes Town staff to revise Ordinance No.
32 to reflect their intended guidelines. The amendment should include, but is not limited
to the following:
2-2.1. Seating requirements for restaurants.
2-2.2. On-sale liquor licenses requirements.
SECTION 3. ESTABLISHMENT.
3-1. In accordance with the findings set forth herein and pursuant to the authority
of Minn. Stat. 462.355(Subd. 4) there is hereby established a moratorium on issuance of
on-sale liquor licenses within the Town. During the period of the moratorium, applications
for on-sale liquor licenses shall not be accepted by the Town. The Town Board of
Supervisors shall not consider or grant approval of any application for such a license.
SECTION 4. EXCEPTION:
4-1. This moratorium shall not apply to the following:
4-1.1. Renewal of any existing on-sale liquor licenses. Subject to other restrictions
which the Town may impose pursuant to existing ordinances.
4-1.2. Any temporary license issued for events and/or festivals.
SECTION 5. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of
this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part hereof,
other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its passage and publication and shall be effective for six (6) months from its effective
date and shall expire at that time unless further extended or repealed at an earlier date.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear this 6th day of July,
2016.
APPROVED:
___________________________
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor
STEVEN A. RUZEK, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press July 13, 2016.
Historical Notes:
2016
Original Ordinance Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 passed July 6, 2016, and effective July 13, 2016 by
Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; (Clerk-Treasurer).
ORDINANCE NO. 89
AN ORDINANCE OPTING-OUT OF THE REQUIREMENT OF MINNESOTA
STATUTES, SECTION 462.3593 IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR,
RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE.
1-1. Whereas, on May 12, 2016, Governor Dayton signed into law the creation and
regulation of temporary family health care dwellings, codified at Minn. Stat. 462.3593,
which permit and regulate temporary family health care dwellings;
SECTION 2. ESTABLISHMENT. Whereas, Subdivision 9 of Minn. Stat. 462.3593 allows
cities to “opt out” of those regulations.
2-1. Whereas, Section 7 – General Regulations of Ordinance No. 35 is amended
by adding Section 7-19 which shall read as follows:
7-19. Opt-Out of Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593. Pursuant to
authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, Subdivision 9, the
Town of White Bear opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. 462.3593, which
defines and regulations Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision
of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part hereof,
other than the part held to be invalid.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear this 3rd day of August,
2016.
APPROVED:
_________________________
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor
STEVEN A. RUZEK, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press August 10, 2016.
Historical Notes:
2016
Original Ordinance Section 1, 2, and 3 passed August 3, 2016, and effective August 10, 2016 by Kermes
(Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
ORDINANCE NO. 90
AN ORDINANCE TERMINATING THE MORATORIUM SUSPENDING THE
ISSUANCE OF LIQUOR LICENSES IN THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE WHITE BEAR TOWNSHIP,
HEREBY ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE.
1-1 Purpose. On July 18, 2016, the Town Board did adopt Ordinance No. 88 for
the purpose of studying Town Ordinance No. 32, an Ordinance licensing and regulating
the sale and consumption of intoxicating liquor and providing a penalty for violation.
That pursuant to said Ordinance, the Town did adopt a Moratorium suspending
issuance of all forms of on-sale liquor licenses authorized by Minnesota Statue Chapter
340A.
That the Town Board has conducted a review of Town Ordinance No. 32 and has
adopted an Ordinance amending said Town Ordinance No. 32. The Town Board has
decided that a moratorium against issuance of on-sale liquor licenses is no longer
required.
SECTION 2. MORATORIUM TERMINATION.
2-1 Termination. Pursuant to the authority granted by Minn. Stat. 462.355,
Subdivision 4, the Town of White Bear hereby terminates the Moratorium adopted July
18, 2016 as Ordinance 88. That the Town Clerk is hereby authorized to begin accepting
applications for on-sale liquor licenses issued pursuant to Town Ordinance No. 32 and
to process said applications pursuant to the provisions of Town Ordinance No. 32.
SECTION 3. ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT.
3-1. Adoption. This Ordinance shall become effective upon passage and
publication.
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
4-1 Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon its passage and the
first day of publication.
Passed by the Town Board of the Town of White Bear this 3rd day of
August, 2016.
APPROVED:
__________________________
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor
STEVEN A. RUZEK, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press August 10, 2016.
Historical Notes:
2016
Original Ordinance Sections 1, 2, 3, and 4 passed August 3, 2016, and effective August 10, 2016
by Kermes (Chair), Prudhon, Ruzek; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
ORDINANCE NO. 91
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING EXCLUSION ZONES AND PROHIBITION
OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR HEREBY
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE. The Town of White Bear considers the safety of its residents,
its children in particular, to be of critical importance and the potential threat of
designated predatory offenders in close proximity to them to be an unacceptable risk.
This chapter is intended to exclude sex offenders and predators from locations
throughout the Town of White Bear to help protect the welfare and safety of the
residents and reduce the risk presented by the presence of predatory offenders in close
proximity to the public, children in particular, in areas that the City has control over.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.
2-1. Predatory Offenders: A person who is required to register as a
predatory offender under Minn. Stat. 243.166.
2-2. Loitering: The act of lurking, lingering, or concealing oneself for a period
of more than five minutes in a public space, whether on foot, bike, or in a transport
vehicle.
SECTION 3. A Predatory Offender shall not do any of the following:
3-1. Establish a permanent residence or temporary residence: (a) within 1,000
feet of any school, licensed daycare center, park or playground; or (b) within 1,000 feet
of any designated public school bus stop, church or place of worship, public park or
town easement or public wooded or open space, any docks located at any beaches, or
other places where children are known to congregate.
3-2. Be present upon or loiter on or within 1,000 feet of any school, school bus
stop, church or place of worship, public park or town easement or public wooded or
open space or any public walkways, as well as any docks located at area beaches.
3-3. Be present on or in any vehicle or other conveyance owned, leased, or
contracted by a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school without the written
permission of the school administrator or school administrator’s designee when the
vehicle is in use to transport students to or from a school or school-related activities,
unless enrolled as a student at the school or unless the vehicle is simultaneously made
available to the public as a form of public transportation.
3-4. Be present upon the real property of a child care facility without the written
permission of the child care facility administrator.
3-5. Loiter within 1,000 feet of the real property boundary of a child care
facility.
2
3-6. Operate, manage, be employed by, or act as a contractor or volunteer, or
attend or participate in any public or private fair or carnival including but not limited to
the Township Days.
3-7. Operate, manage, be employed by, or act as a contractor or volunteer at
any place enumerated in Section 3(a) above.
SECTION 4. EXCEPTIONS. A Predatory Offender:
4-1. Who, as of the date of enactment of this ordinance, resides in a dwelling
located within 1,000 feet of the real property boundary of a child care facility, or place
intended primarily for the use by the public as specified in Section 3 above shall not be
in violation of Section 3 for having an established residence within the exclusion zone.
Nothing in this provision shall permit conduct which is otherwise prohibited as
enumerated in Section 3 (a).
4-2. Who is the parent or legal guardian of a minor shall not be in violation of
Section 3 solely during the period of time reasonably necessary to transport the
offender’s own minor child or ward to or from a place specified in Section 3.
4-3. Who is legally entitled to vote shall not be in violation of Section 3 solely
for the period of time reasonably necessary to exercise the right to vote in a public
election if the polling location of the offender is located in a place specified in Section 3.
SECTION 5. CRIMINAL PENALTIES. Any person violating any provision of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White Bear,
Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 19th day of September, 2016.
APPROVED:
_______________________
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ATTEST:
______________________________
WILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
ROBERT J. KERMES, Chair
ED M. PRUDHON, Supervisor
STEVEN A. RUZEK, Supervisor
Published in the White Bear Press September 28, 2016.

SECTION 1.
SECTION 2.
SECTION 3.
SECTION 4.
SECTION 5.
SECTION 6.
SECTION 7.
SECTION 8.
SECTION 9.
SECTION 10.
SECTION 11 .
SECTION 12.
SECTION 13.
SECTION 14.
SECTION 15.
SECTION 16.
SECTION 17.
SECTION 18.
SECTION 19.
SECTION 20.
ORDINANCE NO. 47
Table of Contents
Amendment and Repeal of Conflicting
Ordinances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Title and Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Applicability of Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants . . . 7
Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment
and Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Minimum Standards for Light and Ventilation . 10
Minimum Thermal Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
General Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Maximum Density, Minimum Space, Use
and Location Requirements . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. 14
Licensing of Rental Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 15
Enforcement and Inspection Authority . . . . . . . . . . 17
Unfit for Human Habitation .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Registration of Vacant Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Compliance Order . .. .. . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Alternative Sanctions ........ .. ... .. ........ ..... .. ... 26
Municipal Housing Programs ......... .. ..... ...... 26
Penalties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Severability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Effective Date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
ORDINANCE NO. 47
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 47 RELATING TO AND
REGULATING THE OCCUPANCY AND MAINTENANCE OF HOUSING IN THE
TOWN OF WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA, PRESCRIBING
REGULATIONS TO PROTECT THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND THE
GENERAL WELFARE OF THE PEOPLE OF THE TOWN AND PROVIDING
PENAL TIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF
THE TOWN BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWN OF WHITE BEAR
ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
The Ordinance relating to and regulating the occupancy and maintenance of
housing in the Town of White Bear and prescribing regulations to protect the
public health, safety, and the general welfare of the people of the Town, and
providing penalties for violation thereof, passed and approved November 14,
1977, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows, and all other
ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. In
all other respects all other Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 2. TITLE AND PURPOSE. This Ordinance may be cited as the
"HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY CODE FOR THE TOWN OF
WHITE BEAR, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA". The purpose of this
Ordinance is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the people
of the Town. These general objectives include, among others, the following:
2-1. To protect the character and stability of residential areas within the
Town.
2-2. To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or
are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health, including
the physical, mental and social well-being of persons occupying dwellings within
the Town of White Bear.
2-3. To provide minimum standards for the maintenance and
conservation of existing residential buildings, the rehabilitation of existing
substandard residential buildings, thus to prevent slums and blight.
2-4. To provide minimum standards for cooking, heating and sanitary
equipment necessary to the health and safety of occupants of buildings.
2-5. To provide minimum standards for light and ventilation, necessary
to health and safety.
2-6. To prevent overcrowding of dwellings by providing minimum space
standards per occupant for each dwelling unit.
2-7. To provide a diversity of housing choice and reasonable amount of
low and moderate income housing in the Town.
2-8. With respect to rental disputes, and except as otherwise specifically
provided by the terms of this Ordinance, it is not the intention of the Town Board
to intrude upon the fair and accepted contractual relationship between tenant and
landlord. The Town Board does not intend to intervene as an advocate of either
party, nor to act as an arbiter, nor to be receptive to complaints from tenant or
landlord which are not specifically and clearly relevant to the provisions of this
ordinance. In the absence of such relevance with regard to rental disputes, it is
intended that the contracting parties exercise such legal sanctions as are
available to them without the intervention of Town government. Neither in
enacting this Ordinance is it the intention of the Town Board to interfere or permit
interference with legal rights to personal privacy.
2-9. Any minimum standards shall not exceed the minimum standards
provided for new construction by the Minnesota Building Code, and in the event
any minimum standards herein do exceed said Building Code, the standards of
the Minnesota State Building Code shall govern.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY OF ORDINANCE. Every building and its
premises used in whole or in part as a home or residence, or as an accessory
structure thereof, for a single family or person, and every building used in whole
or in part as a home or residence of two or more persons or families living in
separate units shall conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, irrespective
of when such building may have been constructed, altered, or repaired. This
Ordinance establishes minimum standards for erected dwelling units, accessory
structures, and related premises.
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS. The following definitions shall apply to the
interpretation and enforcement of this Ordinance.
4-1. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - a structure subordinate to the main or
principal dwelling or dwellings and which is not used nor authorized to be used
for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on or partially on
the premises.
4-2. BUILDING - any structure erected for the support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind.
4-3. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER ·- the Town Building Official or
duly authorized representative.
2
4-4. CODE VIOLATIONS - violations of any code adopted and/or
enforced by the Town, which may include but not be limited to the Town Zoning
Ordinance, codes covering plumbing, electrical, mechanical or building
construction, installation or maintenance standards, or fire codes.
4-5. CONDEMN - to adjudge unfit for human habitation.
4-6. DANGEROUS STRUCTURE - a structure which is potentially
hazardous to persons or property, including but not limited to:
4-6.1. A structure which is in danger of partial or complete collapse;
4-6.2. A structure with any exterior parts which are loose or in danger of
failing; or
4-6.3. A structure with any parts such as floors, porches, railings, or stairs,
ramps. balconies or roofs which are accessible and which are either
collapsed, in danger of collapsing or unable to support the weight of
normally imposed loads.
4-7. DWELLING - a building, or portion thereof, designed or used
predominantly for residential occupancy of a continued nature, including 1-family
dwelling, 2-family dwellings, and multiple family dwellings; but not including
hotels and motels.
4-8. DWELLING UNIT - a single residential accommodation which is
arranged, designed, used or, if vacant, intended for use exclusively as a domicile
for one family. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it shall be
considered as part of the building in which the dwelling unit is located.
4-9. FAMILY - any of the following definitions shall apply:
4-9.1. A person or persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption,
together with his or their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, all
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit approved and certified
by the appropriate public agency.
4-9.2. Group or foster care of not more than six (6) wards of clients by an
authorized person or persons, related by blood, marriage, or adoption,
together with his or their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, all
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit approved and certified
by the appropriate public agency.
4-9.3. A group of not more than five (5) persons not related by blood,
marriage or adoption maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit.
3
4-10. FLUSH WATER CLOSET - a toilet, with a bowl and trap made in
one piece, which is connected to the Town water system and sewer system or
other approved water supply and sewer system.
4-11. GARBAGE - putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
4-12. HABITABLE BUILDING - any building or part thereof that meets
minimum standards for use as a home or place of abode by one or more
persons.
4-13. HABIT ABLE ROOM - a room or enclosed floor space used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, including
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished
basements, (those without required ventilation, required electric outlets and
required exit facilities), pantries, utility rooms of less than 50 square feet of floor
space, foyers, communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and
workshops, hobby and recreation areas in parts of the structure below ground
level or in attics.
4-14. HEATED WATER - water heated to a temperature of not less than
120° Fahrenheit, or such lesser temperature required by government authority,
measured at faucet outlet.
4-15. KITCHEN - a space which contains a sink with counter working
space, adequate space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and
adequate space for the storage of cooking utensils.
4-16. MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING - a dwelling or portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units.
4-17. OCCUPANT - any person (including owner or operator) living,
sleeping, cooking and eating in a dwelling unit or living and sleeping in a rooming
unit.
4-18. OPERATOR - the owner or agent who has charge, care, control, or
management of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming
units are let.
4-19. OWNER - any person, firm or corporation who, alone, jointly, or
severally with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care or
control of, any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit within the Town as owner,
employee or agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person
of the title holder. Any such person representing the actual owner shall be bound
to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance to the same extent as the owner.
4
4-20. PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY - the maximum number of persons
permitted to reside in dwelling unit or rooming unit.
4-21. PERSON - an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation
or joint venture or organization of any kind.
4-22. PLUMBING - all of the following supplied facilities and equipment
in a dwelling: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes,
garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents, and any other similar fixtures and the installation thereof,
together with all connections to water, sewer and gas lines.
4-23. PREMISES - a plated lot or part thereof or unplatted parcel of land,
either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure,
including such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon.
4-24. PUBLIC HALL - a hall, corridor or passageway for providing
egress from a dwelling unit to a public way and not within the exclusive control of
one family.
4-25. REFUSE - all putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids
including garbage and rubbish.
4-26. RENTAL DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT - a dwelling or
dwelling unit let for rent or lease.
4-27. REPAIR - to restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation,
serviceability or appearance.
4-28. RODENT HARBORAGE - any place where rodents can live, nest,
or seek shelter.
4-29. ROOMING UNIT - any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking and eating purposes.
4-30. RUBBISH - nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans,
grass and shrubbery clippings, wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding, crockery and
similar materials.
4-31 . SAFETY - the condition of being reasonably free from danger and
hazards which may cause accidents or diseases.
5
4-32. SECURED BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS - a building
secured by means other than those used in the design of the building.
4-33. SUBSTANDARD DWELLING - any dwelling which does not
conform to the minimum standards established by Town Ordinance.
4-34. SUPPLIED - paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control
of the owner, operator, or agent of a dwelling.
4-35. UNOCCUPIED - a building which is not being used for a legal
occupancy as defined in the Town Zoning Ordinance or the Minnesota State
Building Code.
4-36. UNSECURED - a building or portion of a building which is open to
entry by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders.
4-37. VACANT BUILDING - as defined in Ordinance No. 16 (Nuisance).
4-38. MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS-whenever the words "dwelling",
"dwelling unit", "premises", or "structure" are used in this Ordinance they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof'.
SECTION 5. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS. No
owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for
human occupancy, and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the State
of Minnesota, and the Town of White Bear, including the following requirements:
5-1. MAINTENANCE OF SHARED OR PUBLIC AREAS. Every owner of
a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises
thereof.
5-2. MAINTENANCE OF OCCUPIED AREAS. Every occupant of a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary
condition that part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof that he occupies and controls.
5-3. STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH. Every occupant of a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall store and dispose of all his rubbish in
a clean , sanitary, and safe manner as prescribed by the Town Ordinances.
5-4. STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE. Every occupant of a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall store and dispose of all his garbage
and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents
in a clean, sanitary, and safe manner as prescribed by the Town Ordinances.
6
5-5. RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF
GARBAGE AND RUBBISH. Every owner of a multiple family dwelling shall
supply facilities for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and
garbage. In the case of single or two-family dwellings, it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities.
5-6. RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORM AND SCREEN DOORS AND
WINDOWS. The owner of a rental dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units shall be responsible for providing and hanging all screens and storm doors
and storm windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this
Ordinance, except where there is written agreement otherwise between the
owner and occupant.
5-7. RESPONSIBILITY FOR PEST EXTERMINATION. Every occupant
of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of vermin infestations and/or rodents on the premises. Every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit
shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only
one infested. Notwithstanding, however, whenever infestation is caused by the
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonable rodent-proof or
reasonable vermin-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any
dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
5-8. RODENT HARBORAGES PROHIBITED IN OCCUPIED AREAS.
No occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate boxes, lumber, scrap
metal, or any other similar materials in such a manner that may provide a rodent
harborage in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. Stored materials shall be
stacked neatly in piles.
5-9. RODENT HARBORAGES PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC AREAS. No
owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall accumulate or
permit the accumulation of boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other similar
materials in such a manner that may provide a rodent harborage in or about
shared or public areas of a dwelling or its premises. Materials stored by the
owner or permitted to be stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly in piles.
5-10. PREVENTION OF FOOD FOR RODENTS. No owner or occupant
of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store, place, or allow to accumulate any
materials that may serve as food for rodents in a site accessible to rodents.
5-11. SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF FIXTURES AND FACILITIES.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities
7
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise
of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
5-12. MINIMUM HEATING CAPABILITY AND MAINTENANCE. In every
dwelling unit or rooming unit when the control of the supplied heat is the
responsibility of a person other than the occupant, a temperature of at least 68°
Fahrenheit or such lesser temperature required by government authority shall be
maintained at a distance of three feet above the floor and three feet from exterior
walls in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments from
September through May.
5-13. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE. The owner of a multiple family
dwelling or dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be responsible
for the removal of snow and ice from parking lots, driveways, steps and
walkways on the premises. Individual snowfalls of three inches or more, or
successive snowfalls accumulating to a depth of three inches, shall be removed
from parking lots and driveways within 24 hours after cessation of the snowfall.
Individual snowfalls of one inch or more, or successive snowfalls accumulating to
a depth of one inch, shall be removed from steps and walkways within eight
hours after cessation of the snowfall.
5-14. MINIMUM EXTERIOR LIGHTING. The owner of a multiple family
dwelling or dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be responsible
for providing and maintaining effective illumination in all exterior parking lots and
walkways.
5-15. MAINTENANCE OF DRIVING AND PARKING AREAS. The
owner of a multiple family dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall
be responsible for providing and maintaining in good condition paved and
delineated parking areas and driveways for tenants.
5-16. MAINTENANCE OF YARDS. The owner of a multiple family
dwelling or dwellings containing more than two dwelling units shall be
responsible for providing and maintaining premises yards.
SECTION 6. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND
FACILITIES. No person shall occupy as owner, occupant, or let to another for
occupancy and dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purposes of living, sleeping,
cooking and eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
6-1. KITCHEN FACILITIES. Every dwelling unit shall have a room or
portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked and which shall
have adequate circulation area, and which shall be equipped with the following:
8
6-1.1. A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to
an approved water supply system and which provides at all times an
adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure,
and which is connected to an approved sewer system.
6-1.2. Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and
cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does not require
refrigeration for safekeeping, and a counter or table for food preparation.
Said cabinets and/or shelves and counter or table shall be adequate for
the permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit and shall be of sound
construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that will
not impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food.
6-1.3. A stove or similar device for cooking food, and a refrigerator or
similar device for the safe storage of food, which are properly installed
with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation.
Provided that such stove, refrigerator, or similar devices need not be
installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is
expected to provide same on occupancy, in which case sufficient space
and adequate connections for the installation and operation of said stove,
refrigerator or similar device must be provided.
6-2. TOILET FACILITIES. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a
uninhabitable room which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working
condition. In a rental dwelling unit, such room shall have an entrance door which
affords privacy. Said flush water closet shall be equipped with easily cleanable
surfaces, shall be connected to an approved water system that at all times
provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause water
closet to be operated properly, and shall be connected to an approved sewer
system.
6-3. LAVATORY SINK. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a
lavatory sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water
closet, or if located in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close
proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is
located. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and shall be
properly connected to an approved water supply system and shall provide at all
times an adequate amount of heated and unheated water under pressure, and
shall be connected to an approved sewer system.
6-4. BATHTUB OR SHOWER. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a
nonhabitable room which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working
condition. In a rental dwelling unit, su_ch room shall have an entrance door which
affords privacy. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the flush
water closet, or in another room, and shall be properly connected to an approved
water supply system and shall provide at all times an adequate amount of heated
9
and unheated water under pressure, and shall be connected to an approved
sewer system.
6-5. STAIRWAYS, PORCHES AND BALCONIES. Every stairway, inside
or outside of a dwelling, and every porch or balcony, shall be kept in safe
condition and sound repair. Every flight of stairs and every porch and balcony
floor shall be free of deterioration. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which
is more than four risers high shall have handrails. Every porch which is more
than four risers high and every balcony shall have handrails 30 inches high and
every balcony and landing shall have guardrails not less than 36 inches in height.
Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good
condition. No flight of stairs shall have settled out of its intended position or have
pulled away from the supporting or adjacent structures enough to cause a
hazard. No flight of stairs shall have rotting, loose, or deteriorating supports.
Excepting spiral and winding stairways, the treads and risers of every flight of
stair shall be uniform in width and height. Stairways shall be capable of
supporting a live load of 100 pounds per square foot of horizontal projection.
6-6. ACCESS TO DWELLING UNIT. Access to or egress from each
dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any other dwelling unit.
6-7. DOOR LOCKS. No owner shall occupy nor let to another for
occupancy and dwelling or dwelling unit unless all exterior doors of the dwelling
or dwelling unit are equipped with safe, functioning locking devices. Multiple
family dwellings shall be furnished with door locks as follows:
6-7 .1. For the purpose of providing a reasonable amount of safety and
general welfare for persons occupying multiple family dwellings
constructed after May 5, 1969, an approved security system shall be
maintained for each multiple family building to control access. The
security system shall consist of locked building entrance or foyer doors
and locked doors leading from hallways into individual dwelling units.
Dead-latch type door locks shall be provided with lever knobs (or
doorknobs) on the inside of building entrance doors and with key cylinders
on the outside of building entrance doors. Building entrance door latches
shall be of a type that are permanently locked from the outside and
permanently unlocked from the inside.
6-7.2. Every door that is designed to provide ingress or egress for a
dwelling unit within a multiple family building shall be equipped with an
approved lock that has a deadlocking bolt that cannot be retracted by end
pressure, provided, however, that such door shall be open able from the
inside without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.
SECTION 7. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT AND VENTILATION. No
person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any
10
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply
with the following requ irements:
7-1. HABITABLE ROOM VENTILATION. Except where there is supplied
some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer, every habitable room shall have at least one window facing
directly outdoors which can be opened easily with an area of not less than 10%
of the floor area with a minimum of 10 square feet and not less than 4% of the
floor area shall be open able.
7-2. NONHABITABLE ROOM VENTILATION. Every bathroom and
water closet compartment, and every laundry and utility room shall contain at
least the ventilation requirement for habitable rooms contained in Section 7-1 ,
except that no windows shall be required if such rooms are equipped with a
ventilation system capable of providing for five air changes per hour.
7-3. ELECTRIC SERVICE, OUTLETS AND FIXTURES. Every dwelling
unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with electric service,
functioning over current protection devices, electric outlets, and electric fixtures
which are properly installed, which shall be maintained in good and safe working
condition, and shall be connected to a source of electric power in a manner
prescribed by the Ordinance, rules and regulations of the Town of White Bear
and by the laws of the State of Minnesota. The minimum electric outlets and
fixtures shall be as follows:
7-3.1. Dwelling containing one or two dwelling units shall have at least the
equivalent of 60-ampere, three-wire electric service per dwelling unit as a
condition of sale.
7-3.2. Dwelling units shall have at least one branch electric circuit for
each 600 square feet of dwelling unit floor space.
7-3.3. Every habitable room shall have at least one floor or wall-type
electric convenience outlet for each 60 square feet or fraction thereof of
the total floor space, and in no case less than two such electric outlets,
provided, however, that one ceiling or wall-type light fixture may be
supplied in lieu of one required electric outlet.
7-3.4. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, kitchen, laundry room,
and furnace-room, shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type
electric light fixture and every bathroom, kitchen, and laundry room shall
contain at least one electric convenience outlet.
7-3.5. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple family dwelling shall
be adequately lighted by natural or electric light at all times, so as to
provide effective illumination in all parts thereof. Every public hall and
11
stairway in structures containing not more than two dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate
lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time
lighting.
7-3.6. A convenient switch or equivalent device for turning on a light in
each dwelling unit shall be located near the point of entrance to such unit.
SECTION 8. MINIMUM THERMAL ST AND ARDS. No person shall occupy as
owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for
the purpose of living therein, which does not have heating facilities which are
properly installed, and which are maintained in safe and good working condition,
and which are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein
to a temperature of at least 68° Fahrenheit at a distance of three feet above floor
level and three feet from exterior walls at an outside temperature of -25°
Fahrenheit. Gas or electric appliances designed primarily for cooking or water
heating purposes shall not be considered as heating facilities within the meaning
of this section. Portable heating equipment employing flame and the use of liquid
fuel does not meet the requirements of this section and is prohibited. No owner
or occupant shall install, operate or use a space heater employing a flame that is
not vented outside the structure in an approved manner.
SECTION 9. GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall occupy as owner,
occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the
purposes of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
9-1 . FOUNDATIONS, EXTERIOR WALLS AND ROOFS. The
foundation, exterior walls and exterior roof shall be substantially water tight and
protected against vermin and rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and
repair. The foundation element shall adequately support the building at all
points. Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or
rotting boards or timbers, and any other condition which might emit rain or
dampness to the interior portion of the walls or to the exterior spaces of the
dwelling. The roof shall be tight and have no defects which admit rain, and roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the
walls. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or
treatment. If 25% or more of the exterior surface of such wood surface is
unpainted or determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be paint blistered,
the surface shall be painted. If 25% or more of the exterior surface of the
pointing of any brick, block or tone wall is loose or has fallen out, the surface
shall be repaired.
12
9-2. WINDOWS, DOORS AND SCREENS. Every window, exterior door,
and hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and
repair. Every window, other than a fixed window or storm window, shall be
capable of being easily opened. Every window, door and frame shall be
constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction as
to completely exclude rain, wind, vermin and rodents from entering the building.
Every open able window or other device required by Section 7-1, shall be
supplied with 16-mesh screens during the insect season.
9-3. FLOORS, INTERIOR WALLS AND CEILINGS. Every floor, interior
wall, and ceiling shall be adequately protected against the passage and
harborage of vermin and rodents, and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair. Every floor shall be free of loose, warped, protruding or rotted flooring
materials. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be free of holes and large cracks
and loose plaster and shall be maintained in a tight weatherproof condition. Toxic
paint and materials with a lasting toxic effect shall not be used. Every toilet room
and bathroom floor surface shall be capable of being easily maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition.
9-4. RODENT PROOF. Every dwelling and accessory structure and the
premises upon which located shall be maintained in a rodent-free and rodentproof
condition. All openings in the exterior walls, foundations, basements,
ground or first floors, and roofs which have a W' diameter or larger opening shall
be rodent-proofed in an approved manner. Interior floors or basements, cellars
and other areas in contact with the soil shall be paved with concrete or other
rodent impervious material.
9-5. FENCE MAINTENANCE. All fences supplied by the owner or agent
on the premises and all fences erected by an occupant on the premises shall
consist of metal, wood, masonry, or other decay resistant material. Fences shall
be maintained in good condition both in appearance and in structure. Wood
materials, other than decay resistant varieties, shall be protected against decay
by use of paint or other preservatives.
9-6. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE MAINTENANCE. Accessory structures
supplied by the owner, agent or tenant occupant on the premises of a dwelling
shall be structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair and appearance.
The exterior of such structures shall be made weather resistant through the use
of decay-resistant materials such as paint or other preservatives.
9-7. SAFE BUILDING ELEMENTS. Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior
and interior wall, ceilings, inside and outside stair, every porch and balcony, and
every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting loads
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
13
9-8. FACILITIES TO FUNCTION. Every supplied facility piece of
equipment of utility required under Town Ordinances and every chimney and flue
shall be installed and maintained and shall function effectively in a safe, sound
and working condition.
9-9. GRADING AND DRAINAGE. During the period May through
October, every yard, court, passagewpy, and other portions in the premises on
which a dwelling stands shall be graded and drained so as to be free of standing
water that constitutes a detriment to health and safety.
9-10. YARD COVER. Every yard of a premises on which a dwelling
stands shall be provided with lawn or combined ground cover of vegetation,
garden, hedges, shrubbery, and related decorative materials and such yard shall
be maintained consistent with prevailing community standards.
9-11. DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE OR FACILITIES. No owner,
operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which
is required under this Ordinance, to be removed from or shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him,
except for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs
or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies.
SECTION 10. MAXIMUM DENSITY, MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION
REQUIREMENTS. No person shall occupy nor permit or let to be occupied any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply
with the following requirements:
10-1. PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY OF DWELLING UNIT. With the
exception of owners occupying a respective dwelling unit prior to June 1, 1975,
the maximum permissible occupancy of any dwelling unit shall be determined as
follows:
10-1.1. For the first occupant, 150 square feet of habitable room floor
space and for every additional occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet
of habitable room floor space.
10-1.2. In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed 2 times
the number of habitable rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling unit.
10-2. ONE FAMILY PER DWELLING UNIT. Not more than one family,
except for temporary guests, shall occupy a dwelling unit.
10-3. MINIMUM CEILING HEIGHT. In order to qualify as habitable,
rooms shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet, 6 inches, except
that in attics or top-half-stores used for sleeping, study, or similar activities, the
ceiling height shall be not less than 7 feet, 6 inches over at least 40% of the floor
14
area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms in attics or top-half-stores, only
those portions of the floor area in the room having a clear ceiling height of 5 feet
or more may be included.
10-4. ACCESS THROUGH SLEEPING ROOMS AND BATHROOMS.
No dwelling unit built after 1940 and containing two or more sleeping rooms shall
have a room arrangement such that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can
be gained only by going through another sleeping room, nor shall the room
arrangement be such that access to a sleeping room can be gained only by
going through another sleeping room. A bathroom or water closet compartment
shall not be used as the only passageway to any habitable room, hall, basement
or cellar or to the exterior of any dwelling unit.
SECTION 11. LICENSING OF RENTAL UNITS. From and after January 1,
1978, no person shall operate a rental dwelling without first having obtained a
license to do so from the Town of White Bear as hereinafter provided. All rental
licenses shall expire on December 31, 2001, thereafter every two years.
Licenses which have less than one year remaining on this term shall pay one-half
of the license fee.
11-1. LICENSE FEES. The following license fees shall be due 60 days
prior to the license expiration date; in the cases of new unlicensed dwellings,
license fees shall be due upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy; in the
cases of licensing periods of less than two years, license fees shall be prorated
monthly:
11-1.1. For each single family dwelling rented, the license fee shall be as
set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
11-1.2. For the first unit rented within a two-family dwelling, the license
fee shall be as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges), and for
the second unit as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
11-1.3. For each multiple family dwelling, the license fee shall be as set
forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges) per building, plus an amount
per dwelling unit as set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees & Charges).
A delinquency penalty of 5% of the license fee for each day of operation
without a valid license shall be charged operators of rental dwellings.
Once issued, a license is nontransferable and the licensee shall not be
entitled to a refund of any license fee upon revocation or suspension.
11-2. OWNER OR AGENT TO APPLY. License application or renewal
shall be made by the owner of rental units or his legally constituted agent.
15
Application forms may be acquired from and subsequently filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer. The applicant shall supply:
11-2.1. Name, address, and telephone number of dwelling owner, owning
partners if a partnership, corporate officers if a corporation.
11-2.2. Name, address, and telephone number of designated resident
agent, if any.
11-2.3. Name, address and telephone number of vendee, if the dwelling
is being sold through a contract for deed.
11-2.4. Legal address of the dwelling.
11-2.5. Number of dwelling units within the dwelling.
11-2.6. Description of procedure through which tenant inquiries and
complaints are to be processed.
11-3. RESIDENT AGENT REQUIRED. No operating license shall be
issued or renewed for a non-resident owner of rental dwelling units (one who
does not reside in any of the following Minnesota Counties: Hennepin, Ramsey,
Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Scott, or Washington) unless such owner designates in
writing to the Code Enforcement Officer the name of his resident agent (one who
does reside in any of the following Minnesota Counties: Hennepin, Ramsey,
Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Scott, or Washington) who is responsible for
maintenance and upkeep and who is legally constituted and empowered to
receive service of notice of violation of the provisions of the Town Ordinance, to
receive orders and to institute remedial action to effect such orders and to accept
all service or process pursuant to law. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
notified in writing of any change of resident agent.
11-4. CONFORMANCE TO LAWS. No operating license shall be issued
or renewed unless the rental dwelling and its premises conform to the
Ordinances of the Town of White Bear and the laws of the State of Minnesota.
11-5. INSPECTION CONDITION. No operating license shall be issued or
renewed unless the owner of rental units agrees in his application to permit
inspections pursuant to Section 11 .
11-6. POSTING OF LICENSE. Every licensee of a multiple dwelling shall
cause to be conspicuously posted in the main entry way or other conspicuous
location therein the current license for the respective multiple dwelling.
11-7. LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. No operating license shall be
transferable to another person or to another rental dwelling. Every person
16
holding an operating license shall give notice in writing to the Code Enforcement
Officer within 72 hours after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of
the legal control of any licensed rental dwelling. Such notice shall include the
name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such
rental dwelling or dwellings.
11-8. OCCUPANCY REGISTER REQUIRED. Every owner of a licensed
rental dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall keep, or cause to be
kept, a current register of occupancy for each dwelling unit which provides the
following information:
11-8.1. Dwelling unit address.
11-8.2. Number of bedrooms in dwelling unit.
11-8.3. Names of adult occupants and number of adults and children
(under 18 years of age) currently occupying the dwelling units.
11-8.4. Dates renters occupied and vacated dwelling units.
11-8.5. A chronological list of complaints and request for repair by
dwelling unit occupants, which complaints and requests are related to the
provisions of this Ordinance, and
11-8.6. A similar chronological list of all corrections made in response to
such requests and complaints.
Such register shall be made available for viewing or copying by the Code
Enforcement Officer at all reasonable times.
11-9. LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION. Every operating
license issued under the provisions of this Ordinance is subject to suspension or
revocation by the Town Board should the licensed owner or his duly authorized
resident agent fail to operate or maintain licensed rental dwellings and units
therein consistent with the provisions of the Ordinances of the Town of White
Bear and the laws of the State of Minnesota. In the event that an operating
license is suspended or revoked by the Town Board for just cause, it shall be
unlawful for the owner of his duly authorized agent to thereafter permit any new
occupancies of vacant or thereafter vacated rental units until such time as valid
operating license may be restored by the Town Board. Any person violating this
provision shall be guilty of a violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 12. ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION AUTHORITY. The Town
Board and their designated agents shall be the Code Enforcement Officer who
shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and who are hereby
authorized to cause inspections on a scheduled basis for rental units, or
17
otherwise when reason exists to believe that a violation of this Ordinance has
been or is being committed. Inspections shall be conducted during reasonable
daylight hours and the Code Enforcement Officer shall present evidence of
official capacity to the occupant in charge of a respective dwelling unit.
12-1. INSPECTION ACCESS. Any owner, occupant, or other person in
charge of a dwelling or dwelling unit may refuse to permit free access and entry
to the structure or premise under his control for inspection pursuant to this
Ordinance, whereupon the Code Enforcement Officer may seek a court order
authorizing such inspection.
SECTION 13. UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
(1). Any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which is damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or other
which lacks provision for basic illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities to the
extent that the defects create a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or of the public may be declared unfit for human habitation.
Whenever any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit has been declared unfit for
human habitation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall order same vacated within
a reasonable time and shall post a placard on same indicating that it is unfit for
human habitation, and any operating license previously issued for such dwelling
shall be revoked.
(2). It shall be unlawful for such dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit to
be used for human habitation until the defective conditions have been corrected
and written approval has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. It shall
be unlawful for any person to deface or remove the declaration placard from any
such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit.
13-1. SECURE UNFIT AND VACATED DWELLINGS. The owner of any
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which has been declared unfit for human
habitation, or which is otherwise vacant for a period of 60 days or more, shall
make same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety and
welfare of the public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant
dwelling open at doors or windows, if unguarded , shall be deemed to be a hazard
to the health, safety and welfare of the public and a public nuisance within the
meaning of this Ordinance.
13-2. DANGEROUS STRUCTURE DECLARATION. In the event that a
dwelling has been declared unfit for human habitation and the owner has not
remedied the defects within a prescribed reasonable time, the dwelling may be
declared a hazardous building and treated constant with the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes.
18
13-3. Buildings determined to be vacant, unfit for human habitation, or
declared a dangerous structure must obtain a Certificate of Occupancy prior to
such building being reoccupied.
13-4. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human habitation, or is
found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned.
SECTION 14. REGISTRATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to declare when a building is vacant
as defined in Section 4-37 of this Ordinance.
14-1. CLASSIFICATION OF VACANT BULDINGS. A building or portion
of a building which is:
14-1.1. UNOCCUPIED AND UNSECURED. A building or portion of a
building meeting this definition is deemed a Category I Building.
14-1 .2. UNOCCUPIED AND SECURED BY OTHER THAN NORMAL
MEANS. A building or portion of a building meeting this definition is
deemed a Category I Building.
14-1.3. UNOCCUPIED FOR A PERIOD OF TIME OVER THREE
HUNDRED SIXTY-FIVE (365) DAYS AND DURING WHICH TIME THE
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER HAS ISSUED AN ORDER TO
CORRECT NUISANCE CONDITIONS. A building or portion of a building
meeting this definition is deemed a Category I Building.
14-1.4. UNOCCUPIED AND CONDEMNED. A building or portion of a
building meeting this definition is deemed a Category II Building.
14-1.5. UNOCCUPIED AND HAS MULTIPLE HOUSING OR BUILDING
CODE VIOLATIONS. A building or portion of a building meeting this
definition is deemed a Category II Building.
14-1.6. CONDEMNED AND ILLEGALLY OCCUPIED. A building or
portion of a building meeting this definition is deemed a Category II
Building.
14-1.7. UNOCCUPIED AND A DANGEROUS STRUCTURE. A building
or portion of a building meeting this definition is deemed a Category Ill
Building.
14-1.8. For the purpose of regulating vacant buildings, the following
additional categorical standards may also apply:
19
14-1.S(a). Any Category I Building or portion thereof may be
deemed a Category II Building where the building or portion thereof
would also meet the combination of any two (2) Category I
classification standards under this Section.
14-1.S(b). Any Category II Building or portion thereof may be
deemed a Category Ill Building where the building or portion
thereof also meets the definition of a nuisance building under Town
Ordinance No. 16 (Nuisance), or has been a Category II Vacant
building for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive months. For the
purpose of computing the number of months under this section, the
calculation shall commence as of the date the subject building
becomes a vacant building as defined under Section 14. No
deferment, or any appeal filed with the Code Enforcement Officer,
regarding any enforcement action or order, shall serve to stay the
computation of the number of months under this section.
14-2. REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
14-2.1. The owner shall register with the Town not later than thirty (30)
days after any building in the Town becomes a vacant building, as defined
in Section 14-1.
14-2.2. The registration shall be submitted on forms provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall include the following information supplied
by the owner:
14-2.2(a). A description of the premises.
14-2.2(b). The names and addresses of the owner or owners.
14-2.2(c). The names and addresses of all know lien holders and
all other parties with an ownership interest in the building.
14-2.2(d). For all vacant buildings, the owner shall submit a vacant
building plan and timetable which must meet the approval of the
Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement officer shall
require completion of the plan within a reasonable period of time,
up to three hundred sixty-five (365) days.
14-2.2(e). A copy of any current Truth-in-Sale of Housing
Disclosure Report if required by law or ordinance.
14-2.3. The owner shall order and pay for a code compliance inspection
within sixty (60) days for all category classifications. The code compliance
inspection is required regardless of the building's legal occupancy
20
standard or intended use. Owners of all category classifications on the
effective date of this Ordinance that have not ordered a code compliance
inspection shall have sixty (60) days following the effective date of this
Ordinance to order and pay for a code compliance inspection. The code
compliance inspection fee is set forth in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees &
Charges).
14-2.4. In order to decrease the risk of fire, explosion or dangerous
conditions, the owner shall install an excess flow automatic gas shut-off
valve ("excess flow valve") on the building's gas piping immediately
downstream of the gas meter outlet within sixty (60) days after the
designation of any building or portions thereof classified under Section
14-1 as a Category II or a Category Ill vacant building. If the owner fails
to install an excess flow valve, the Code Enforcement Officer, under the
authority of this Ordinance, may install the excess flow valve on the
building and enter the building if necessary. The costs incurred by the
Town for installation of the excess flow valve shall be assessed against
the property as a summary nuisance abatement under the provisions of
Ordinance No. 16 (Nuisance). Owners of Category II or Ill Vacant
Buildings with active water and gas service on the effective date of this
Ordinance shall have sixty (60) days following the effective date of this
Ordinance to install an excess flow valve. Prior to installation of the excess
flow valve, the owner, or another who can demonstrate a secured interest
in the property must obtain the required permits from the Town Building
Official. Any excess flow valve model must be approved and installed as
required by the Town Building Official.
14-2.5. The procedures established in Section 14-2.4 may be waived
under the following conditions:
14-2.S(a). Emergency Installation by Town. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that failure to install an excess flow
valve constitutes an immediate danger or hazard which, if not
immediately addressed, will endanger the health or safety of the
public, the Town may proceed with an emergency abatement under
the provisions of Ordinance No. 16 (Nuisance).
14-2.S(b). Exemption Obtained by Owner. The owner or another
who can demonstrate a secured interest in the property shall be
exempt from the requirements of Section 14-2.4 if the following
conditions are met:
14-2.S(b).(1). The owner or another who can demonstrate a
secured interest in the property has registered the building
as a vacant building with the Code Enforcement Officer; and
21
14-2.5(b).(2). After registration, the owner or another who
can demonstrate a secured interest in the property has
received or ordered a code compliance inspection and has
shut off gas service and winterized the property.
14-2.6. The vacant building plan submitted shall comply with the
Minnesota State Building Code and this Ordinance. Any repairs,
improvements or alterations to the property must comply with any
applicable housing or building codes.
14-2.7. All applicable laws and codes shall be complied with by the
owner. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any
changes in information supplied as part of the vacant building registration
within thirty (30) days of the change. If the plan or timetable for the vacant
building is revised in any way, the revisions must meet the approval of the
Code Enforcement Officer.
14.2.8. The owner and the subsequent owners shall keep the building
secured and safe and the building and ground properly maintained until
the rehabilitation or demolition has been completed.
14-2.9. Failure of the owner or any subsequent owner to maintain the
building and premises according to the approved vacant building plan
submitted to the Town shall be grounds for revocation of the plan and
shall be subject to any applicable penalties provided by law.
14-2.10. The new owner(s) shall register or re-register the vacant building
with the Code Enforcement Officer within thirty (30) days of any transfer of
an ownership interest in a vacant building. The new owner(s) shall comply
with the approved plan and timetable submitted by the previous owner
until any proposed changes are submitted and meet the approval of the
Code Enforcement Officer.
14-2.11. Vacant building fees:
14-2.11(a). The owner of a vacant building shall be pay an annual
registration fee as established in Ordinance No. 54 (Fees &
Charges) each year the building remains a vacant building. The
registration fee is intended to at least partially recoup, and shall be
reasonably related to the administrative costs for registering and
processing the vacant building owner registration form, for the costs
of the Town in monitoring the vacant building site, and for the
annual Code Compliance Inspection.
14-2.11 (b ). The annual fee shall be paid no later than thirty (30)
days after the building becomes vacant. If the fee is not paid within
22
thirty (30) days of being due, the owner shall be subject to
prosecution as prescribed in this Ordinance.
14-2.11(c). The fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any
building permits, with the exception of a demolition permit.
14-2.12. The Code Enforcement Officer shall include in the file any
property-specific written statements from community organizations, other
interested parties or citizens regarding the history, problems, status or
blighting influence of a vacant building.
14-3. EXEMPTIONS.
14-3.1. Fire Damaged Structures. In order to encourage the prompt
renovation of property, the owner of a fire damaged building may be
exempt from paying vacant building fees required under this Ordinance,
provided that within thirty (30) days from the date of the fire, the owner
submits a request for an exemption in writing to the Code Enforcement
Officer. This request shall include the following information supplied by the
owner:
14-3.1(a). A description of the premises.
14-3.1(b). The name and address of the owner or owners.
14-3.1.(c). A statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building
in an expedient manner.
14-3.1.(d). An exemption granted under this section shall be valid
for no more than ninety (90) days. In the event that the owner of the
property at the time of the fire who received an exemption under
this section should, at any time after the fire, transfer to another
person any ownership interest in the subject property, the
exemption under this section is immediately void and any new
owner(s) shall be responsible for paying any required vacant
building fees.
14-3.2. Buildings Owned by The Economic Development Authority
(EDA). Buildings owned by the EDA are regularly monitored and
maintained by the Town. Therefore, these buildings are exempt from the
registration requirements and fees as outlined in this section.
14-3.3. NOTIFICATION. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a
current list, updated monthly, of all vacant buildings which have become
known to the Code Enforcement Officer, as well as a list of all previously
declared vacant buildings which are no longer subject to the provisions of
23
this Ordinance. The list shall be available for review at the Township
Office.
14-3.4. COLLECTION OF UNPAID FEES.
14-3.4(a). Mailed and posted notice.
14-3.4(a).(1). Written Notice of Fees. The Town Building
Official shall, in addition to any other action the Town may
undertake, mail notice of the fees in conformance with the
requirements set forth in this section.
14-3.4(a).(2). Notice of collection of fees shall include the
amount of the vacant building fee that is the responsibility of
the building owner and a statement that the fee shall be paid
within the time period(s) identified in the notice.
14-3.4(b). Fee and Liability. The Town shall be entitled to collect
the costs of vacant building registration and monitoring. The fees
associated with the vacant building program shall be a debt owed
to the Town and unpaid costs shall be collected by special
assessment under the authority in Minnesota Statutes, Section
429.101 . Action under this section does not preclude any other civil
or criminal enforcement procedure.
SECTION 15. COMPLIANCE ORDER. Whenever the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or the
premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the provisions of this Ordinance,
he may issue a Compliance Order setting forth the violations of the Ordinance
and ordering the owner, occupant, operator, or agent to" correct such violations.
This Compliance Order shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Describe the location and nature of the violations of this Ordinance.
(3) Establish a reasonable time for the correction of such violation and
notify of appeal recourse.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the
case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon any such occupant, if a
copy thereof is:
(a) Served personally, or
(b) Mailed to a last known address, or
24
(c) Upon failure to effect notice through (a) and (b) as set out in
this Section, posted at a conspicuous place in or about the
dwelling which is affected by the notice.
15-1. RIGHT OF APPEAL. When it is alleged by any person to whom a
Compliance Order is directed that such Compliance Order is based upon
erroneous interpretation of this Ordinance, such person may appeal the
compliance order to the Town Board sitting as a Board of Appeals and
Adjustments. Such appeals must be in writing, must specify the grounds for the
appeal, must be accompanied by a filing fee as established by the Town Board
Resolution in cash or cashier's check, and must be filed with the Town Clerk
within five (5) business days after service of the Compliance Order. The filing of
an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless such a stay would cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
15-2. BOARD OF APPEALS DECISION. Upon at least five (5) business
days notice to the appellant of the time and place for hearing the appeal, and
within thirty (30) days after said appeal is filed, the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments shall hold a hearing thereon, taking into consideration any advice
and recommendation from the Code Enforcement Officer. The Board of Appeals
and Adjustments may reverse, modify, or affirm, in whole or in part, the
compliance order and may order return of all or part of the filing fee if the appeal
is upheld.
15-3. RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit upon whom
a pending compliance order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose thereof to another person until the provision of the tag or
compliance order have been complied with unless such owner shall furnish to the
grantee, lessee, or mortgagee a true copy of any notice of violation or
Compliance Order and shall obtain and possess a receipt of acknowledgement.
Anyone securing an interest in the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit who
has received notice of the existence of a violation tag or Compliance Order shall
be bound by same without further service of notice upon him and shall be liable
to all penalties and procedures provided by this Ordinance.
15-4. PENALTIES. Any person who fails to comply with a compliance
order after right of appeal has expired, and any person who fails to comply with a
modified compliance order within the time set therein, upon conviction therefore
shall be punished as hereinafter provided for conviction of violation of this
Ordinance.
15-5. ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Upon
failure to comply with a Compliance Order within the time set therein and no
appeal having been taken, or upon failure to comply with a modified Compliance
Order within the time set therein, the criminal penalty established hereunder
25
notwithstanding, the Town Board may by resolution cause the cited deficiency to
be remedied as set forth in the compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall
be a lien against the subject real estate and may be levied and collected as a
special assessment in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429,
but the assessment shall be payable in a single installment.
SECTION 16. ALTERNATIVE SANCTIONS. Notwithstanding the availability of
the foregoing compliance procedures and the penalties, whenever the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit
or the premises surrounding any of these fails to meet the requirements set forth
in this Ordinance, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a violation tag
summoning the responsible person into court or request the issuance of a
criminal complaint and arrest warrant.
SECTION 17. MUNICIPAL HOUSING PROGRAMS.
17-1. The Town of White Bear has heretofore created an economic
development authority referred to as the Economic Development Authority of the
Town of White Bear (the "Authority") pursuant to Laws of Minnesota 1988,
Chapter 678 (the "Act").
17-2. Minnesota Statutes, Sections 469.090 to 469.109 (the "EDA law")
authorizes the Authority to exercise the powers and duties of a redevelopment
agency under, among other things, Minnesota Statutes, Sections 469.001 to
469.047 (the "HRA Law").
17-3. Subdivision 2 of the Act grants to the Town and the Town Board of
Supervisors all the powers and duties granted to or imposed on a city and a
governing body of a city under the EDA Law.
17 -4. The EDA Law provides, in part, that if an economic development
authority exercises the powers of a housing and redevelopment authority
contained in the HRA Law or any other law, the city shall exercise the powers
relating to housing and redevelopment authority granted to a city by the HRA
Law or other law.
17-5. Minnesota Statutes, Section 462C.02, Subdivision 6, provides that
a "city" includes, among other things, any public body which is an economic
development authority of a city, and is authorized by ordinance to exercise the
powers conferred by Minnesota Statutes, Sections 462C.01 to 462C.1 0.
17-6. PURPOSE. The Economic Development Authority of the Town of
White Bear is hereby authorized to exercise on behalf of the Town the powers
conferred by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462C.
26
SECTION 18. PENALTIES. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be punished as provided by Ordinance No. 26
(Maximum Fines). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate punishable offense.
SECTION 19. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 20. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of White
Bear, Ramsey County, Minnesota, this 3rd y anuary~. 201-1..
,,,. I
HARD A. SAND, Chair
ATTEST:
ILLIAM F. SHORT, Clerk-Treasurer
Board of Supervisors:
RICHARD A. SAND, Chair
WILLIAM R. MAMPLE, Supervisor
ROBERT J. KERMES, Supervisor
Synopsis published in the White Bear Press on January 12, 2011.
Historical Notes
2011
Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 , 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 passed
January 3, 2010, and effective January 12, 1011 by Sand (Chair), Mam pie and Kermes; Short
(Clerk-Treasurer).
1998
Section 11 passed December 21, 1998, and effective January 6, 1999 by Weisenburger
(Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1992
Section 16, 17, and 18 passed February 3, 1992, and effective February 19, 1992 by
Weisenburger (Chair), Sand and Ford; Short (Clerk-Treasurer).
1977
Ordinance, Title and Section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 , 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18
originally passed November 14, 1977, and effective November 24, 1977 by Perron (Chair), Sand
and Jungkunz; Rolph (Clerk-Treasurer).
27