MUNICIPAL CODE OF WATERTOWN, MINNESOTA 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted June 14, 1994 
Effective July 1, 1994 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WATERTOWN, MINNESOTA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Norman A. Bauer 
Mayor 
____________ 
Carol Griffith 
Jerome B. Hirsch 
Hal D. Pysick 
Nelson E. Tuvey 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael A. Ericson 
City Administrator 
____________ 
David P. Hubert 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Marilyn Paschka 
Clerk-Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Watertown, Minnesota. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Michael A. Ericson, City Administrator, and David P. Hubert, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ORDINANCE NO. 197 
CITY OF WATERTOWN, MINNESOTA 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Watertown, Minnesota; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The city council of the City of Watertown, Carver County, Minnesota ordains: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "MUNICIPAL CODE OF WATERTOWN, MINNESOTA" (the "Code") published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 62, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 28, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressed in this Code, or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or ordinance shall be punished as a misdemeanor, unless otherwise provided in this Code. The term misdemeanor shall be as defined in M.S.A. § 609.02, subd. 3. Each day of violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the penalty as provided in this section shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a specified penalty other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so specified shall be held to relate to the amended section, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 28, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. The Municipal Code of Watertown, Minnesota, and this ordinance are adopted pursuant to the authorization of M.S.A. §§ 415.02 and 415.021, and the Code shall be prima facie evidence of the laws of the City of Watertown and receivable in evidence by all courts. 
    Section 8. Upon adoption of this ordinance by the city council and publication in the Carver County News , this ordinance shall become effective on July 1, 1994. 
    Passed and Adopted by the City Council of the City of Watertown this 14th day of June, 1994. 
/s/   
      Norman A. Bauer, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Marilyn Paschka, 
      Clerk-Treasurer   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and correct copy of Ordinance No. 197 pertaining to the adoption of the Municipal Code of Watertown passed and adopted at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Watertown, Minnesota, held on the 14th day of June, 1994. 
Dated June 15, 1994 
/s/   
      Marilyn Paschka 
      Clerk-Treasurer   Published in the Carver County News on the 23rd day of June, 1994. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 311 10- 9-07 Omit 8 312 10- 9-07 Include 8 313 10-23-07 Include 8 314  1- 8-08 Include 8 315  1- 8-08 Include 8 316  1- 8-08 Include 8 318  4-22-08 Omit 8 319  5-13-08 Omit 8 320  6-24-08 Omit 8 321  7- 8-08 Omit 8 322  7- 8-08 Omit 8 323  7-22-08 Omit 8 324  8-12-08 Omit 8 325  9-10-08 Omit 8 326  9-10-08 Include 8 327  9-10-08 Include 8 329  9-10-08 Omit 8 330 11-10-08 Include 8 332  2-24-09 Include 8 337  6-23-09 Include 8 338  6-23-09 Include 8 339  7-28-09 Include 8 340  7-28-09 Include 8 344  9-22-09 Include 8 346 11-24-09 Omit 8 349  6- 8-10 Include 8 351  8- 9-10 Include 8 352  9-28-10 Include 8 353  9-14-10 Omit 8 357  4-12-11 Include 8 359  6-14-11 Include 8 360  8- 9-11 Include 8 361  8-23-11 Include 8 362 10-25-11 Include 8 364 12-13-11 Include 8 365  1-10-12 Include 8 366  1-10-12 Include 8 367  1-24-12 Include 8 328  9-18-08 Include 9 333  2-24-09 Include 9 334  2-24-09 Include 9 336  6-23-09 Include 9 345 10-27-09 Include 9 354 12-14-10 Include 9 355 12-14-10 Include 9 368  1-24-12 Include 9 369  1-24-12 Include 9 370  1-24-12 Omit 9 371  7-31-12 Omit 9 372 12-11-12 Omit 9 373 12-11-12 Omit 9 374 12-11-12 Omit 9 375  1- 8-13 Omit 9 376  1-22-13 Include 9 377 10- 8-13 Omit 9 378 12-10-13 Omit 9 379  2-11-14 Omit 9 380 10-28-14 Include 10 381 12- 9-14 Omit 10 382 12- 9-14 Include 10 383 12- 9-14 Include 10 384  3-10-15 Omit 11 385  3-24-15 Include 11 386  5-26-15 Include 11 387  7-14-15 Include 12 388  7-14-15 Omit 12 389 12- 8-15 Include 12 391  3-22-16 Include 12 390  2- 9-16 Include 13 392  4-12-16 Include 13 393  5-10-16 Include 13 394  5-10-16 Include 13 395  5-10-16 Include 13 396  5-10-16 Omit 13 397  6-28-16 Include 13 398  8-23-16 Include 13 399  9-13-16 Include 14 400 12-13-16 Omit 14 401  6-27-17 Include 15 406  4-24-18 Include 16 407  5- 8-18 Include 16 408  5- 8-18 Include 16 409 11-13-18 Include 17 411  1- 8-19 Include 17  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Municipal Code of Watertown, Minnesota." 
State Law reference- Codification, M.S.A. § 415.021. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Agent or employee. Whenever the Code requires an act to be done, which act may legally be done by an agent or employee as well as by the principal, such requirement shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized agent or employee. 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Watertown, Minnesota, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City council; council. The terms "city council" and "council" shall mean the city council of the City of Watertown, Minnesota. 
    Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Municipal Code of Watertown, Minnesota. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Carver, Minnesota. 
    Gender. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender shall extend and be applied to both the masculine and feminine genders, and to firms, partnerships and corporations. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    M.S.A. The abbreviation "M.S.A." shall mean and refer to the latest edition or supplement of Minnesota Statutes Annotated. 
    Number. A word importing the singular may extend and be applied to the plural, and vice versa. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Watertown, Minnesota." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency shall mean and include such officer or any designee or authorized subordinate and shall also include the successor in function to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency. 
    Owner. The word "owner" when applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place subject to the primary control of any public agency, including but not limited to any park, street, public way, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The word "state" shall mean the State of Minnesota. 
    Street. The word "street" shall embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city. 
    Tenant; occupant; lessee. The words "tenant," "occupant" and "lessee," when applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written and in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Words and phrases. The words and phrases shall be construed in their plain, ordinary and usual sense, except that technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties and rights. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeals. 
    The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the provision repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing fees, fines, charges, rates, or other specific monetary values. 
(9)  Any floodplain, stormwater or rezoning ordinance. 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing traffic or parking regulations on any street or public way, including traffic schedules. 
(12)  Any ordinance regarding salaries or compensation of city officers or employees. 
(13)  Any ordinance regarding subdivisions or subdivision regulations. 
(14)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. All ordinances are on file in the office of the clerk-treasurer. 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make such additions or amendments a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Municipal Code of Watertown, Minnesota, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Municipal Code of Watertown, Minnesota, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:...." The new section may then be set out in full. 
(e)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," or "this section," as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or city ordinance shall be punished as a misdemeanor;0;19, unless otherwise provided in this Code. The term "misdemeanor" shall be as defined in M.S.A. § 609.02, subd. 3. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a specified penalty other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so sp,ied shall be held to relate to the amended section, u nless such and Governmentalpenalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(Ord. No. 61, § 1, 10-7-69) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt penalty of up to $700.00, M.S.A. § 609.034. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration and enforcement of the regulations regarding sale of limited intoxicating malt or intoxicating liquor for on-premises consumption, § 6-41 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the provisions regarding animals, § 10-26 et seq.; administration of the provisions regarding buildings and building regulations, § 14-41 et seq.; administration of the provisions regarding emergency preparedness, § 18-41 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the zoning chapter, § 62-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Statutory cities defined, M.S.A. § 410.015; classes of cities, M.S.A. § 410.04. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Powers, M.S.A. § 412.211 et seq. 

Sec. 2-26. - Salary of mayor. 
    The salary of the mayor of the city shall be established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 1, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 144, § 1, 10-9-84; Ord. No. 164, § 1, 12-1-87) 
Sec. 2-27. - Salary of councilmembers. 
    The salary of each councilmember of the city shall be established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 2, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 144, § 2, 10-9-84; Ord. No. 164, § 2, 12-1-87) 
State Law reference- City council authorized to fix salaries of council and mayor, M.S.A. § 415.11. 
Sec. 2-28. - Candidacy. 
(a)  Affidavit of candidacy. A candidate's name appears on the ballot if the candidate files an affidavit of candidacy with the city clerk within the prescribed filing period and either: 
(1)  Pays to the clerk the filing fee for which section 2-28(b) provides, or 
(2)  Presents to the clerk a petition in place of the filing fee with the number of signatures as prescribed by M.S.A. § 204B.l1, Subd. 2(d). 
(b)  Filing fee. The filing fee as prescribed in M.S.A. § 205.13, Subd. 3b can be found in the city's annual fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Secs. 2-29-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Open meetings law, M.S.A. § 471.705. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-51-2-54. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-55. - Appointment to boards, committees and commissions. 
    The city council shall appoint all members and fill all vacancies of any boards, committees or commissions established or created by the council. The council shall determine the number and terms of the members of each such board, committee or commission and their compensation, if any. Appointees shall hold their office for the term of their appointment until their successors are appointed and qualified unless first otherwise removed by the council, with or without cause, by majority vote of the council. Vacancies during a term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. All vacancies on boards, committees or commissions shall be advertised to seek applicants. The council may interview applicants before making appointments. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 1, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 2-56. - Duties of boards, committees and commissions. 
    The council may establish or create any board, committee or commission for any purpose allowed by law including for the administration of a municipal function jointly shared with another political subdivision. The council shall determine the duties and powers of each such board, committee or commission. Unless otherwise provided, a member of the city staff shall act as secretary and shall record the minutes, motions, resolutions, decisions and recommendations of each meeting of such board, committee or commission. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 1, 7-28-09) 
Secs. 2-57-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Duties of the planning commission regarding moving of buildings, § 14-77; mobile homes and parks, § 30-26 et seq.; zoning, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, M.S.A. § 462.351 et seq.; planning commission, M.S.A. § 462.354. 

Sec. 2-61. - Established. 
    A planning commission is established pursuant to the Minnesota Municipal Planning Act (M.S.A. §§ 462.351 and 462.364), and has the powers and duties assigned to it by that Act, by this Code, and state law. The planning commission is hereby designated the planning agency of the city pursuant to the Municipal Planning Act. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 1, 11-6-68; Ord. No. 339, § 2, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 2-62. - Composition; term; vacancies; oath; voting. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council and one non-voting city council liaison member appointed by the city council, and one non-voting liaison member appointed by the Watertown Township Board of Supervisors pursuant to the joint resolution as to orderly annexation between the City of Watertown and Watertown Township dated March 11, 2008. 
(b)  Voting members of the commission shall be appointed by the council for staggered terms of three years. Both original and successive appointees shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed and qualified. Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, take an oath that they will faithfully discharge the duties of their office. 
(c)  Failure to attend three consecutive meetings shall be a basis for removal. 
(d)  No member of the commission may vote on any question in which the member has a fiduciary interest, either directly or indirectly. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 2, 11-6-68; Ord. No. 119, § 2, 4-1-80; Ord. No. 278, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 339, § 2, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 2-63. - Officers. 
(a)  At the first meeting in January of each year the planning commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson and vice-chairperson. The officers shall take office immediately following their election and shall hold office for a term of one year and until their successors are elected and assume office. 
(b)  The chairperson of the planning commission shall preside at all meetings, appoint committees and perform other such duties as may be ordered by the commission. The vice-chairperson shall act in the capacity of the chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. If the office of the chairperson becomes vacant, the vice-chairperson shall succeed to this office for the unexpired term and the commission shall elect a successor to the office of vice-chairperson for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 3, 11-6-68; Ord. No. 339, § 2, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 2-64. - Meetings; records and reports; expenditures. 
    The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its meetings, resolutions, transactions and findings, which record shall be a public record. On or before January 1 of each year, the commission shall submit to the city council a report of its work during the preceding year. Expenditures of the commission shall be within amounts appropriated for such purpose by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 4, 11-6-68; Ord. No. 339, § 2, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 2-65. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have the powers and duties allowed under state law including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The preparation of a comprehensive plan for the future development of the city that is submitted to the council for implementation and to recommend amendments of the plan to the council from time to time as necessary or desirable. 
(2)  To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of the zoning code and the subdivision regulations and to report to the council its advice and recommendations in regard thereto. 
(3)  To review and study applications and proposals for amendments to the zoning code and applications for special permits and to advise the council of its recommendations in regard thereto. 
(4)  To review sketch plans, site plans, preliminary plats and final plats and advise the council of its recommendations in regard thereto. 
(5)  To act in an advisory capacity to the council in all matters wherein powers are assigned to the council by state law concerning comprehensive planning, zoning, platting, changes in streets, and other matters of a general planning nature. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2, 7-28-09) 
State Law reference- Powers of planning commission, M.S.A. § 462.351 et seq. 
Secs. 2-66-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Economic development, M.S.A. ch. 469. 

Sec. 2-71. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is authorized by M.S.A. ch. 469 (the act), and specifically M.S.A. § 469.091, to establish an economic development authority (EDA) to coordinate and administer economic development and redevelopment plans and programs of the city. 
(b)  It is found and determined by the city council that the encouragement and financial support of economic development and redevelopment in the city is vital to the orderly development and financing of the city and is in the best interests of the health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(c)  It is further found and determined that the economic development and redevelopment of the city can best be accomplished by the establishment of an economic development authority as authorized by the act. 
(d)  The city council has in accordance with the act and M.S.A. § 469.093 provided public notice and conducted a public hearing on October 13, 1992, concerning the establishing of an economic development authority at which hearing all persons desiring to express their views were heard. 
(Reso. No. R/R/21/92/3, § 1, 11-10-92) 
Sec. 2-72. - Created; terms; powers; vacancy. 
(a)  The economic development authority is hereby established. The economic development authority is a public body corporate and politic and a political subdivision of the state. 
(b)  The economic development authority shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in M.S.A. §§ 469.029-469.108 and all other applicable laws, except as limited by this division. 
(c)  The economic development authority shall consist of a governing body of five commissioners. Two of the commissioners shall be members of the city council. All commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Those initially appointed shall be appointed for terms of two, three, four, five and six years, respectively. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed for six-year terms. A vacancy is created in the membership of the commission when a city councilmember of the economic development authority is no longer a member of the city council. 
(Reso. No. R/R/21/92/3, § 2, 11-10-92) 
Sec. 2-73. - Limitation on powers. 
    The following limits shall apply to the economic development authority of the city and its operation: 
(1)  The sale of all bonds or other obligations issued by the economic development authority shall be first approved by the city council. 
(2)  The economic development authority shall follow the budget process for city departments as may be provided by the city and in accordance with city policies. 
(3)  Development and redevelopment plans of the economic development authority shall be consistent with the city comprehensive plan and official controls implementing the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  The economic development authority shall obtain approval from the city council of its proposed plans for development and redevelopment. 
(Reso. No. R/R/21/92/3, § 3, 11-10-92) 
Sec. 2-74. - Powers of city. 
(a)  As provided in the act it is the intention of the city council that nothing in this division nor any activities of the economic development authority shall be construed to impair the obligations of the city under any of its contracts or to affect in any detrimental manner the rights and privileges of a holder of a bond or other obligation heretofore issued by the city. The city council shall not modify any limit in effect at the time any bonds or obligations are issued or contracts executed to the detriment of the holder of the bonds or obligations or any contracting party. 
(b)  The city council may make any changes to this division as authorized by the act. 
(c)  The city council shall adopt such ordinances and resolutions as are required and permitted by the act to give full effect to this division. 
(Reso. No. R/R/21/92/3, §§ 3, 5, 11-10-92) 
Sec. 2-75. - Transfer of authority of city housing and redevelopment authority (HRA). 
(a)  Effective as of January 1, 1993, pursuant to the authorization in M.S.A. § 469.094, the city does hereby transfer to the economic development authority of the city established by this division, all activities, programs, operations and authority of the city housing and redevelopment authority, which authority has been dissolved, including the transfer of the control, authority and operation of any project as defined in M.S.A. § 469.174, Subd. 8 or any other program or project authorized by M.S.A. §§ 469.001-469.047 or M.S.A. §§ 469.124-469.134 located within the city. The economic development authority shall accept the control, authority, and operation of all projects, programs or activities of the housing redevelopment agency. The economic development authority shall exercise all of the powers that the housing redevelopment agency could exercise. 
(b)  The economic development authority shall covenant and pledge to perform the terms, conditions, and covenants of the bond indenture or other agreements executed for the security of any bonds issued by the housing and redevelopment authority. The economic development authority shall exercise all of the powers necessary to perform the terms, conditions and covenants of any indenture or other agreements executed for the security of the bonds and shall become obligated on any such bonds by reason of the transfer as provided in this division. 
(Reso. No. R/R/21/92/3, § 4, 11-10-92) 
Secs. 2-76-2-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARK COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 38. 

Sec. 2-79. - Composition; terms; organization. 
(a)  The park commission shall consist of seven voting members who shall be appointed by the city council and may be removed by a majority vote of the city council. Failure to attend three consecutive meetings shall be a basis for removal. 
(b)  Members of the park commission shall serve a three-year term with one-third being appointed each year. Members shall be residents of the city throughout their term of office. 
(c)  The park commission shall elect a chairman from among its appointed members for a term of one year. The park commission may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary for its own administration. 
(Reso. No. R/R/7/89/2, §§ 1-3, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 278, § 2, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 2-80. - Meetings. 
    The park commission shall hold monthly meetings. The park commission shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its meetings and transactions. 
(Reso. No. R/R/7/89/2, § 4, 4-11-89) 
Sec. 2-81. - Powers and duties. 
    The park commission shall study and make recommendations to the city council concerning park and recreational facility needs of the community, including recreational programs in which the city participates. The park commission may: 
(1)  Recommend policies governing the use of parks and recreational facilities. 
(2)  Recommend contracts and agreements for park and recreational facility use between the city and other entities. 
(3)  Prepare and recommend annual and five-year park capital improvement plans for community recreation areas and facilities. 
(4)  Recommend policies and programs to develop and increase public awareness of community parks and recreational facilities. 
(Reso. No. R/R/7/89/2, § 5, 4-11-89) 
DIVISION 5. - COMMISSION ON AGING 

Sec. 2-82. - Established. 
    A Watertown Commission on Aging is hereby established to facilitate the performances of its duties and the exercising of its functions as a commission established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 3, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 2-83. - Composition; term; vacancies; oath; voting. 
(a)  The Watertown Commission on Aging shall consist of a maximum of 11 voting members who are at least 45 years of age. This voting body may consist of residents of the City of Watertown; no more than one representative each from the townships of Watertown, Woodland, Franklin and Hollywood; and no more than one representative from any one local service group. Service groups include Watertown-Mayer School District, non-public schools, churches, senior care facilities or any other organization whose purpose is to improve the lives of older adults in the Watertown area. Those acting as city council liaison shall be considered non-voting members. All members shall serve three-year terms. No two members of the same household may serve on the Watertown Commission on Aging at the same time. 
(b)  The commission shall adopt its own bylaws with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 3, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 2-84. - Officers. 
(a)  At the first meeting of each year, the commission shall hold an organizational meeting. At this meeting, the commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson and vice-chairperson. The officers shall take office immediately following their election and shall hold office for a term of one year and until their successors are elected and assume office. If the chairperson retires from the commission before the next regular organizational meeting, the vice-chairperson shall be chairperson. If both the chairperson and vice-chairperson retire, new officers shall be elected at the next regular meeting. The chairperson, or in his/her absence, the vice-chairperson, shall preside at meetings, appoint sub-committees from its own membership and perform duties as ordered by the commission. If both the chairperson and vice-chairperson are absent from a meeting, the commission shall select another member to chair the meeting. 
(b)  A member of the city staff shall act as secretary and shall record the minutes, motions, resolutions and recommendations of each meeting. 
Sec. 2-85. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission on aging shall serve as an advisory body to the city council in addressing the special needs of the people aging in Watertown. All final decisions shall be made by the city council. 
(1)  The commission on aging shall make recommendations to the city council in the areas of transportation, information and assistance, independent living in the home, social and recreational programs, senior centers and senior housing, but will not be limited to these issues. 
(2)  The commission on aging shall make recommendations to the city council regarding funding for special services to be provided for the citizens aging in Watertown. 
(3)  The commission on aging shall propose needs studies of this age group where necessary and make recommendations to the city council according to the results. 
(4)  The commission on aging shall coordinate services with other agencies for this age group. 
(5)  The commission on aging shall conduct public forums on issues in areas of transportation, information and assistance, independent living in the home, social and recreational programs, senior centers and senior housing, but will not be limited to these issues. 
(6)  The commission on aging shall, as it deems appropriate, establish special subcommittees comprised of its own members and other citizens from the community. 
(7)  The commission on aging members may also serve on committees and represent the city at functions related to aging issues. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 3, 7-28-09) 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Personnel, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Authority to create offices, M.S.A. § 412.111. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-86. - Clerk-treasurer. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in M.S.A. § 412.02, Subd. 3, and M.S.A. § 412.591, Subd. 2, the offices of clerk and treasurer of the city shall be combined as the office of clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 1, 3-15-77) 
Secs. 2-87-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-96. - Position established. 
    The position of city administrator is established. 
Sec. 2-97. - Appointment; removal. 
    The city administrator shall be appointed by the city council on the basis of his training, experience and administrative qualifications. The city administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period by a majority of the city council and may be removed from office after 30 calendar days' written notice by a majority of the city council. 
Sec. 2-98. - Powers and duties. 
    The city administrator shall: 
(1)  Subject to all applicable laws and city council control, direct the administration of municipal affairs and be the chief administrative officer of the city. 
(2)  See that all laws, ordinances and resolutions of the city are enforced and make recommendations for changes or additions to ordinances and resolutions when necessary. 
(3)  Supervise and exercise control over the activities of all municipal departments and personnel of the city in the administration of municipal policy directly or indirectly through subordinate supervisors, and shall have the authority to recommend their employment, discipline and/or removal. 
(4)  Attend and participate in all meetings of the city council. The city administrator shall be responsible for the preparation of the city council agenda and recommend to the city council such measures as the city administrator may deem necessary for the welfare of the citizens and efficient administration of the city. The city administrator may attend, at his discretion or at the direction of the city council, other committee and commission meetings. 
(5)  With the assistance of the clerk-treasurer, prepare an annual fiscal budget and capital improvement plan for the city council. The city administrator shall maintain financial guidelines for the city within the scope of the approved budget and capital program. The city administrator, with the assistance of the clerk-treasurer, shall submit reports to the city council on the financial conditions of municipal accounts and make sure the annual financial statement is prepared in accordance with law. 
(6)  Supervise the preparation of annual and long-range work programs for all departments and submit them, along with a capital improvement forecast, to the city council. 
(7)  Direct and execute the investments for the city. 
(8)  Coordinate all city insurance matters, including group insurance programs. 
(9)  Handle all personnel matters for the city in conjunction with policy established by the city council. The city administrator shall negotiate, or delegate the negotiation of, terms and conditions of employee labor contracts for presentation to the city council. 
(10)  Represent the city at official functions, as directed by the city council, and maintain good public relations with the citizens of the community. Subject to the prerogatives of the mayor, the city administrator shall serve as the city's information representative, confer with the media, civic groups, developers and other organizations. The city administrator shall prepare news releases and develop and discuss public relations material as he deems necessary, or at the direction of the city council. 
(11)  Act as purchasing agent for the city and be responsible for making all purchases in accordance with the approved municipal budget. The city administrator shall have the authority to sign purchase orders for routine services, equipment and supplies in accordance with the adopted purchasing procedures of the city. All claims resulting from orders placed by the city administrator shall be audited for payment by the city council. The city administrator shall negotiate contracts for any kind of merchandise, materials, equipment or construction work for presentation to the city council. 
(12)  Coordinate municipal programs and activities as directed by the city council. The city administrator shall monitor all consultant and contract work performed for the city. The city administrator shall coordinate the activities of all consultants, advisory bodies and committees established by the city council. 
(13)  Keep informed regarding federal, state and county programs which affect the city. The city administrator shall consult with officials of both public and private agencies, as may be required. 
(14)  Maintain familiarity with alternate and supplemental sources of revenue, including federal and state aids, loans, grants and other sources of revenue, and submit recommendations to the city council for actions necessary to take advantage of such sources. 
(15)  Inform the city council on matters dealing with the administration of the city and recommend to the city council any policies and other measures deemed necessary for the efficient administration of city affairs. 
(16)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or required of the administrator by the city council. 
Chapter 3 - LICENSE BACKGROUND CHECKS 

Sec. 3-1. - Applicants for city licenses. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's Computerized Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 2, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 3-2. - Criminal history license background investigations. 
    The city's designated law enforcement agency is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses within the city: 
City licenses: 
Alcoholic beverages see City Code Ch. 6 
Pawn brokers see City Code Ch. 39 
Peddlers and solicitors see City Code Ch. 42 
Sexually oriented businesses see City Code Ch. 47 
    In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license applicants, the city's designated law enforcement agency is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the sheriffs office under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be released by the city's designated law enforcement agency to the licensing authority, including the city council, the city administrator, or other city staff involved the license approval process. 
    Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the city's designated law enforcement agency by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S.A. ch. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S.A. § 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: 
(1)  The grounds and reasons for the denial. 
(2)  The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S.A. § 364.06. 
(3)  The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license. 
(4)  That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 2, 1-22-13) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 395, adopted May 10, 2016, amended Ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1-6-3, § 6-3.5, §§ 6-4-6-15, § 6-15.5, and §§ 6-16-6-31, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 81, adopted Oct. 2, 1974; Ord. No. 154, adopted Jan. 7, 1987; Ord. No. 237, adopted Oct. 8, 2002; Ord. No. 245, adopted Apr. 22, 2003; and Ord. No. 263, adopted Dec. 14, 2004. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; building and building regulations, ch. 14; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 38; sexually oriented businesses, ch. 47; signs, ch. 48; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 54; zoning, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Liquor act, M.S.A. § 340A.101 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
    The provisions of M.S.A. ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of alcoholic beverages including intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor and wine are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the city council that all future amendments to M.S.A. ch. 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted. 
    The council is authorized by the provisions of M.S.A. § 340A.509, to impose, and has imposed in this article, additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in M.S.A. ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    In addition to or as a supplement to the definitions contained in M.S.A. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this chapter: 
    Alcoholic beverage, means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and includes the term "liquor" as used in this chapter. 
    Brewer, means a person who manufacturers malt liquor for sale. 
    Brew pub, means a brewer who also holds one or more retail on-sale licenses and who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one licensed premises, the entire production of which is solely for consumption on tap on any licensed premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from those licensed premises as permitted by M.S.A. § 340A.24. 
    Club, means an incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered veterans' organization, which: 
(1)  Has more than 30 members; 
(2)  Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members; and 
(3)  Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body. 
    Cocktail room, means an accessory building or use that is located on or adjacent to a distillery that is used for the on-sale consumption of distilled liquor produced by the distiller as permitted by M.S.A. § 340A.22, Subd. 2. 
    Exclusive liquor store, means an establishment used exclusively for the sale of those items authorized by M.S.A. § 340A.412, Subd. 14. 
    Growler, means a 64-ounce container packaged and labeled as required by M.S.A. § 340A.285. 
    Hotel, means an establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which has a dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time and a minimum of ten guest rooms. 
    Intoxicating liquor, means ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight. 
    Liquor, as used in this chapter, except as the context may otherwise require, without modification by the words "intoxicating" or "3.2 percent malt", includes intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, malt liquor and wine. 
    Malt liquor, means any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less that one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
    Microdistillery, means a distillery operated within the state of Minnesota producing premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year. 
    3.2 percent malt liquor, means malt liquor containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
    Off-sale, means the sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed premises only. 
    On-sale, means the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only. 
    Restaurant, means an establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietorship or manager, having facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/water table service is provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is served and consumed while seated at a single location and which has a license from the state to serve food. An establishment which serves only prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of this chapter. 
    Small brewer, means a brewer that produces less than 20,000 barrels of malt liquor in a year. 
    Tap-room, means an accessory building or use that is located on or adjacent to a brewery producing no more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually that is used for the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by the brewer as permitted by M.S.A. § 340A.26. 
    Wine, means the product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in each instance containing not less that one-half of one percent nor more than 24 percent alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. Wine does not include distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited. 
(a)  The city council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners, operators and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity and sex. The council especially intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault and disorderly conduct. The council also finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter, as set forth in this section reflects the prevailing community standards of the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breast and genitals covered with a nontransparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts and genitals covered with a nontransparent material. 
(c)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any alcoholic beverages license issued under this chapter or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-3.5. - Pyrotechnics prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any licensee or any other person to permit, allow or use pyrotechnics, fireworks, flares or signals of any kind in or on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-4. - Liquor in unlicensed places; restrictions on purchase and consumption. 
(a)  No person shall mix, serve or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place or place of business unless such person has a license to sell liquor "on-sale" from the city or a permit from the commissioner of public safety under the provisions of M.S.A. § 340A.414 has been approved by the council. No person shall consume liquor in any such unlicensed place. 
(b)  Subject to the approval of the state commissioner of public safety, temporary on-sale licenses shall be issued only to clubs or charitable, religious or other nonprofit organizations in existence for at least three years. A temporary license authorizes the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the licensee and subject to restrictions imposed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-5. - Consumption in public places; possession of opened containers in certain areas prohibited. 
(a)  Except where and when the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted, no person shall consume liquor in a public park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter or any municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city. 
(b)  Except where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted, no person shall have in his or her possession while within a motor vehicle or while upon any public highway, street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot or in any park within the city any bottle, can or other receptacle containing liquor which has been opened, or the seal of which has been broken, or the contents of which has been partially removed. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-6. - Exception to public consumption prohibition of beer, wine and liquor. 
(a)  It shall not be illegal for a person of legal age to have in his/her possession or to consume liquor within a public park or in a public building in the city if such item was purchased from a bona fide club or organization which has received a temporary "on-sale" license from the city and such possession or consumption is at the location and on the date and during the hours provided for the sale of such item as required by such license. 
(b)  It shall not be illegal for a person of legal age to have in his/her possession or to consume liquor in a public park or building when such item is offered free of charge to the consumer as part of an organized social event and under the following conditions: 
(1)  The liquor offered or provided cannot be sold at any cost-all items must be offered or provided free of charge (tip jars or passing of the hat for items is strictly prohibited). 
(2)  The person or party offering or providing the liquor agrees to defend and indemnify the city for any claims that arise as a result of the event. 
(3)  The person or party offering or providing the liquor agrees to hold the city harmless. 
Sec. 6-7. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-8. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    It shall be the duty of all law enforcement officers of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter, to search premises and seize evidence of law violation and preserve the same as evidence against any person alleged to be violating this chapter, and to prepare the necessary processes and papers therefor. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-9. - Term and expiration of licenses. 
    Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and display permits issued by the commissioner of public safety, and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-10. - Number and types of licenses issued by the city. 
(a)  Number of licenses. Except as otherwise provided in this section or M.S.A. § 340A.413, there shall be no limit on the number of licenses that may be issued by the city council. 
(1)  On-sale licenses and permits: 
a.  3.2 percent malt liquor. The city council may issue an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.403. 
b.  Intoxicating liquor. The city council may issue an on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses which may be issued as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.404. 
c.  Exclusive liquor store. The city council may issue an on-sale intoxicating liquor license pursuant to M.S.A. § 340A.412, Subd. 14. 
d.  Wine. The city council may issue an on-sale license to sell wine as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.404, Subd. 5. The holder of an on-sale wine license issued pursuant to this section that also holds a license to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors on-sale may also sell intoxicating malt liquors on-sale without an additional license. 
e.  Bed and breakfast wine. The city council may issue an on-sale wine license to a bed and breakfast facility pursuant to M.S.A. § 340A.404, Subd. 5(c). 
f.  Sunday intoxicating liquor may be issued only to a licensee which has been issued an intoxicating liquor license. 
g.  Consumption and display. The city council may issue a consumption and display license pursuant to M.S.A. § 340A.414 and M.S.A. § 340A.414, Subd. 9. 
h.  Brew pub. The city council may issue an on-sale brew pub license as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.24 
i.  Brewer tap room. The city council may issue an on-sale brewer taproom license as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.26 
j.  Microdistillery cocktail room. The city council may issue an on-sale microdistillery cocktail room license as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.22 
k.  Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor. The city council may issue an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.403, Subd. 2. 
l.  Temporary intoxicating liquor. The city council may issue on-sale intoxicating liquor license as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.404, Subd. 10. 
(2)  Off-sale licenses and permits. The city council is authorized to issue the following "off-sale" licenses: 
a.  Intoxicating liquor. The city council may issue an off-sale intoxicating liquor license to an exclusive liquor store as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.405. 
b.  Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor. The city council may issue an off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.403. 
c.  Small brewer. The city council may issue an off-sale malt liquor license to a small brewer as allowed by M.S.A. §§ 340A.28 and 340A.285 (Sunday growler). 
d.  Brew pub. The city council may issue an off-sale intoxicating malt liquor license to a brew pub as allowed by M.S.A. §§ 340A.24 and 340A.285 (Sunday growler). 
e.  Microdistillery. The city council may issue an off-sale intoxicating liquor license to a microdistillery as allowed by M.S.A. § 340A.22. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-11. - Intoxicating liquor; combination licenses. 
    The city council is authorized to issue combination on-sale and off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the same licensee pursuant to M.S.A. § 340A.406. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-12. - Clubs. 
    Clubs shall not sell 3.2 percent malt liquor except to members and to bona fide guests in the company of members. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-13. - License fees; pro rata. 
(a)  No license or other fee established by the city for a liquor license shall exceed any limit established by M.S.A. ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  The council may establish from time to time by ordinance or resolution the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed notice of the hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licenses at least 30 days before the hearing. 
(c)  The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. 
(d)  All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. The license fee is nonrefundable even if the application is denied. A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only if authorized by M.S.A. § 340A.408, Subd. 5. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-14. - Licensing procedures. 
(a)  At the time of an original application the applicant shall pay a minimum investigation fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council for each person listed on the application form, which shall include all natural persons, partners, managers, corporate officers and corporate shareowners. This fee shall be paid when an application is filed with the city, and it shall not be subject to refund. If the expenses of any investigation are extraordinary and exceed the minimum investigation fee the applicant shall pay all reasonable additional expenses incurred by the city for such investigation. Failure to pay such additional expenses within a five-day period shall be cause for the city to discontinue processing of the application. At any time an additional investigation is required due to a change in ownership or control of a partnership, corporation or other organization a licensee shall pay a minimum investigation fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  All applications shall be processed by the city administrator for verification and investigation of the facts set forth therein. The chief of police or sheriff shall investigate the background of all persons listed in the application form or the city may hire other parties to make such investigations as it may deem appropriate. Jointly or separately they shall submit a written report to the city council on the results of their investigation. The city shall conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant. The application in such case shall be made on a form prescribed by the state and with such additional information as the city council may require. If the city council deems it in the public interest to have an investigation made on a particular application for renewal of a license, it shall so determine. In any case, if the council determines that a comprehensive background and financial investigation of the applicant is necessary, it may conduct the investigation itself or contract with the state or others for the investigation. No license shall be issued, transferred or renewed if the results show to the satisfaction of the council that issuance would not be in the public interest. If an investigation outside the state is required, the applicant shall be charged the cost, not to exceed actual costs incurred, which shall be paid by the applicant after deducting any initial investigation fee already paid. The fee shall be payable by the applicant whether or not the license is granted. 
(c)  The city council shall investigate all facts set out in the application for any alcoholic beverage license and not investigated in the preliminary background and financial investigation conducted pursuant to section 6-15(a) and (b). Upon receipt of the report of the preliminary background and financial investigation in regard to an initial application, the city council shall instruct the clerk-treasurer to cause to be published in the official newspaper of the city, at least ten days in advance, a notice of hearing to be held by the city council on the application for the intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or wine license, setting forth the date, time and place when the hearing will be held, the name of the applicant, the premises where the business is to be conducted, the nature of the business and such other information as the council may direct. At the hearing, an opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of a license. A license shall not be approved before the next regular meeting of the city council. After the hearing under this section, the city council may, in its discretion, require further investigation and/or hearing before issuance or denial of a license. After such investigation and hearing, the council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application. No on-sale wine license shall become effective until it, together with the security furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the state commissioner of public safety. 
(d)  If a license is approved, the city council may withhold its issuance until the applicant has qualified in all respects for said license. If the premises to be licensed is not complete at the time of approval the council may approve the license but withhold its issuance until the premises have been completed in accordance with all representations made by the applicant. In such a case the council may rescind their action approving the license if the applicant has not proceeded with reasonable dispatch to complete the subject premises, but such action may only be taken following ten days' notice to the applicant. 
(e)  The issuance of any license hereunder is and shall remain at the sole and absolute discretion of the city council. 
(f)  All licenses shall be and are issued subject to conformance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, ordinances, laws and statutes. 
(g)  Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to the applicant only. Each such license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application and shall not be effective beyond the compact and contiguous space described therein. 
(h)  No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place to place or from person to person without complying with all requirements of an original application, including the payment of all fees therefore. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-15. - Renewal applications. 
(a)  Applications for the renewal of an existing alcoholic beverage license shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license, and shall be made in such form as the city council may approve. If, in the judgment of the city council, good and sufficient cause is shown by an applicant for his failure to file for a renewal within the time provided, the city council may, if the other applicable provisions of this chapter are complied with, grant the application. 
(b)  At the earliest practical time after application is made for renewal of an "on-sale" license by a restaurant or hotel, and in any event prior to the time that the application is approved by the city council, the applicant shall file with the clerk-treasurer a statement made by a certified public accountant that shows the total gross sales and the total food sales of the restaurant or hotel for the year immediately preceding the date of filing of the renewal application. The requirement in this subsection shall not apply to renewal applications for wine licenses or 3.2 malt liquor licenses. 
(c)  The council shall make such investigation of the facts set out in the application and a review of the past operation of the licensee as it may determine appropriate and may call a public hearing and take such other steps as allowed by law before the issuance of a renewal license. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-15.5. - Transfer of license. 
    No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval of the city council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-16. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S.A. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur. 
(c)  No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle or other container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur. 
(d)  No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur. 
(e)  Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-17. - Conditions of license. 
    The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition is met. 
(1)  Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving liquor in an establishment which has an "on-sale" license shall receive training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training shall be provided by an organization approved by the council. Proof of training shall be provided by the licensee. 
(2)  Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally with the employee. 
(3)  Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city employee, or any other person designated by the council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect and search the premise of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers remain on the premises without a warrant. 
(4)  No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited. 
(5)  Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-18. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The city council may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the violation of any provisions of this chapter or for the violation of any other law, statute or ordinance regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. However, no such action shall be taken without ten days; written notice to the licensee. The city council shall either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke any retail license or permit or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation upon a finding that the licensee or permit holder has failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages. Except in cases of failure of financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee or permit holder has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S.A. §§ 14.57-14.69 of the administrative procedure act. The hearing is not required to be conducted before an employee of the state office of administrative hearing. If a license is revoked, no portion of the license fee may be refunded. 
(b)  The city council or the state commissioner of public safety may impose the penalties provided in this section on a retail licensee who knowingly: 
(1)  Sells alcoholic beverages to another retail licensee for the purpose of resale; 
(2)  Purchases alcoholic beverages from another retail licensee for the purpose of resale; 
(3)  Conducts or permits the conduct of gambling on the licensed premises in violation of the law; 
(4)  Fails to remove or dispose of alcoholic beverages when ordered by the commissioner to do so under M.S.A. § 340A.508, Subd. 3; 
(5)  Sells any liquor related product to a minor. 
(c)  Lapse of required dram shop insurance or withdrawal of a required proof of financial responsibility shall result in an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter without further action of the city council. Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current liability policy or withdrawal of proof of financial responsibility shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or withdrawal of proof of financial responsibility or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing. If such a request is made in writing to the clerk-treasurer, a hearing shall be granted within ten days or such longer period as may be requested. Any suspension under this subsection shall continue until the city council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of this chapter and state law have again been met. The city council must be notified of any change in status of the holder's insurance by the insurance company providing the coverage. 
(d)  The provisions of section 6-19(a) pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-19. - Persons ineligible for licenses. 
    The provisions of this section shall govern an applicant's initial and continued eligibility for a license pursuant to this chapter, and no license shall be issued to: 
(a)  A natural person: 
(1)  Who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien and not a resident of the state. If the applicant is a corporation, all shareholders shall be residents of the state. 
(2)  Who is under 21 years of age. 
(3)  Who has had an intoxicating liquor or malt liquor license revoked within five years of the license application, or to any person who at the time of the violation owns a controlling interest of the capital stock of a corporation licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested. 
(4)  Who is not of good moral character and repute. 
(5)  Who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer, brewer or wholesaler of intoxicating liquor, or who is employed by a manufacturer or wholesaler of intoxicating liquor. 
(6)  Who has a direct or indirect financial interest in any other establishment within the city that has a license issued under this chapter. The word "interest" as used in this provision shall mean a controlling interest of any such establishment. 
(7)  Who has been convicted of a felony. 
(8)  Who within the past five years has been convicted of a violation of any law, statute or ordinance regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor. 
(b)  A partnership, which has a partner ineligible for a license under above natural person section. 
(c)  A corporation or other organization, which has an officer, shareowner or manager ineligible for a license under the above natural person section. The term "shareowner" as used in this provision shall mean any person who, together with direct relatives, who has a controlling interest of the assets of said corporation. 
(d)  A restaurant located on property owned by a person ineligible for a license under the above natural person section. 
(e)  A restaurant located on property upon which taxes, special assessments or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. 
(f)  A restaurant, as defined herein, which does not have a minimum market valuation totaling an amount set from time to time by the city council on the city fee schedule. The calculation shall be estimated on a per seat basis, as computed by the city assessor. 
(g)  A foreign corporation. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-20. - License restrictions. 
    The following provisions shall govern the initial issuance of a license and the continued validity of a license issued pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)  Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises described in the application. 
(2)  The licensee shall at all times comply with all provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable laws, statutes and ordinances regarding the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, as the same shall be in effect at the time the license is issued and as the same shall exist from time to time thereafter. 
(3)  All business, liability insurance and financial records of the licensee, including all financial reports and tax returns, shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable times. 
(4)  The business of a licensee who has been issued an intoxicating liquor license shall be conducted in such a manner that at least 25 percent of the gross sales of the business for any license year shall be for the serving of food. The business of a restaurant which is part of a greater operation, such as a hotel or motel, shall be conducted in such a manner that at least 25 percent of the gross sales of the total operation attributable to the serving of food and intoxicating liquor for any license year shall be for the serving of food. The licensee shall be required to make annual reports showing the percentage of gross sales attributable to food service. 
(5)  All sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made in areas designed primarily for the service of food, and no such sale shall be made in any area where the purchase of food is not available, except for those premises for which an exclusive liquor store license has been issued. 
(6)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. 
(7)  No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church. The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the church to the closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to be sold. 
(8)  No license shall be issued to any person or for any place or any business ineligible under state law. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-21. - Minors on premises. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multipurpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor is not sold. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-22. - Application for license; form. 
(a)  An application form for licenses required by this chapter shall be prepared by the city administrator. In addition to any information which may be required by the Minnesota State Liquor Control Commissioner, the form shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Applicant's age; 
(3)  Representations as to applicant's character (with such references as the council may require); 
(4)  Applicant's citizenship; 
(5)  The type of license the applicant is seeking; 
(6)  The business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location; 
(7)  Whether the applicant is a natural person, partnership, corporation or other form of organization; 
(8)  If the applicant is a natural person the requested personal information about the applicant and his/her background; 
(9)  If the applicant is a partnership the names and addresses of all partners and the requested personal information about each partner and his/her background. The financial interest of each partner shall be disclosed, and a managing partner shall be designated. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the original application form; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation or other organization the names and addresses of all officers and the proposed manager, and the requested personal information about each and his/her background. The names, addresses and financial interest shall be disclosed for all corporate shareowners who, together with direct relatives, have a controlling interest of the assets of said corporation, and the requested personal information shall be furnished about each such person and his/her background. True copies of the articles of incorporation and corporate bylaws shall be submitted with the original application form; 
(11)  The amount of assets which the applicant has in the business premises, fixtures, stock and operating capital shall be disclosed, together with proof of the source of such assets; 
(12)  The names and addresses of all persons, other than those listed above, who have any financial interest in the business, premises, fixtures, stock or operating capital, together with the amount and nature of such interest and the terms for payment or other reimbursement thereof. This shall include but not be limited to all lessors, mortgagors, lenders, lien holders, trustors and persons who have co-signed notes or otherwise loaned, pledged or extended security to the applicant for any indebtedness; 
(13)  The address and legal description of the premise to be licensed and plans of the site and all buildings thereon, showing all appropriate dimensions; 
(14)  If the applicant is a natural person the application form shall be executed by that person. If the applicant is a partnership the application form shall be executed by the managing partner, and if the applicant is a corporation or other organization the application form shall be executed by a corporate or organization officer; 
(15)  How long applicant has been in that business; 
(16)  How long applicant has been in that business at that place; and 
(17)  Such other information as the council may require from time to time. 
(b)  Every application for any license to sell alcoholic beverages shall also include a copy of each summons received by the applicant under M.S.A. § 340A.802 during the preceding year. 
(c)  In addition to containing the information prescribed in this section, the application for any license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be in the form prescribed by the state bureau of criminal apprehension and shall be verified and filed with the clerk-treasurer. No person shall make a false statement in an application. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-23. - Dram shop liability financial responsibility. 
    No alcoholic beverage license may be issued, maintained or renewed unless the applicant demonstrates proof of financial responsibility as required in M.S.A. § 340A.409 with regard to liability under M.S.A. § 340A.801. Such proof shall be filed with the state commissioner. Applicants for licenses to whom the requirement for proof of financial responsibility applies include applicants as required in M.S.A. § 340A.409. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S.A. § 340A.409. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-24. - Approval of security. 
    The security offered under this chapter shall be approved by the city council and, when applicable, by the state commissioner of public safety. Liability insurance policies required by this chapter but not by state law shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. Operation of a licensed business without having on file with the city at all times effective security as required in this chapter is a cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 6-25. - Consumption and display permits. 
(a)  No business establishment or club which does not hold an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display of alcoholic beverages or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a permit from the commissioner of public safety. 
(b)  The presence of intoxicating liquor on the premises of such business establishment or club shall be prima facia evidence of possession of intoxicating liquor for the purpose of sale. The serving any liquid knowing that it is for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor shall be prima facia evidence that intoxicating liquor is being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this ordinance. 
(c)  A permit for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor to be issued by the state commissioner of public safety pursuant to M.S.A. § 340A.414 shall be subject to prior approval by the city council. Application to the city for approval of the permit shall be on the form prescribed by the state. The council may call a public hearing on the application and grant or refuse approval of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Secs. 6-26-6-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 263, § 3, adopted Dec. 14, 2004, repealed §§ 6-27-6-30, which pertained to municipal liquor stores, provisions of state law adopted pertaining to municipal liquor stores, location and operation of said stores, and the creation of a municipal liquor store fund and derived from Ord. No. 245, adopted Apr. 22, 2003. 
Sec. 6-31. - Publication by summary. 
(a)  Summary approval. Pursuant to M.S.A. § 412.191, Subd. 4, the council hereby determines that publication of the title and a summary of this chapter will clearly inform the public of the intent and effect of this chapter. The text of the summary of this chapter, entitled "Official Summary of Ordinance No. 245", is hereby approved and the council determines that it clearly informs the public of the intent and effect of this chapter. 
(b)  Publication, inspection, and posting. The city clerk-treasurer is hereby directed that only the title of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and the attached summary be published with a notice that a printed copy of the entire ordinance is available for inspection by any person during regular office hours at the office of the city clerk-treasurer. A copy of the entire text of the ordinance shall also be posted at the Watertown Community Library, 309 Lewis Avenue South, Watertown, Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public nuisances affecting health including diseased animals running at large and carcasses of dead animals, § 26-29; impermissible animal noises declared a public nuisance, § 26-30(15). 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, M.S.A. §§ 343.01 et seq., 346.01 et seq.; dogs, M.S.A. § 347.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 10-26. - Establishment of pound. 
    The city council shall have the authority to either create and establish a city pound or to contract with any private person for the establishment of a pound or to receive and care for any animals impounded under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 8, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 10-27. - Appointment, duties of animal control officer. 
    The city council shall appoint an animal control officer, whose duties shall be to enforce this chapter together with any other officer of the city and to impound all dogs or cats found running at large in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 9, 3-18-75) 
Sec. 10-28. - Violations; fines and penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable to payment of a fine for a first, second or third offense in an amount established by city council resolution. A fourth or subsequent offense shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 14, 3-18-75; Ord. No. 93, § 1, 2-15-77; Ord. No. 125, § 2, 5-5-81; Ord. No. 158, § 9, 3-3-87; Ord. No. 260, § 1, 11-23-04; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Secs. 10-29-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 390, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 2016, redesignated Art. III "Dogs and Cats" to "Dogs". 
State Law reference- Dogs, M.S.A. § 347.01 et seq.; licenses, M.S.A. § 347.09; impoundment, M.S.A. §§ 35.71, 347.14. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-51. - Persons responsible as owner or keeper. 
    Any person who harbors or keeps a dog at, on or about his premises shall be deemed an owner, keeper or person entitled to possession of such dog for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5, 3-18-75; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 10-52. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the charge or custody of any dog to allow such dog to run at large within the corporate limits of the city at any time. This restriction shall not be deemed to prohibit the appearance of dogs upon the streets of this city when accompanied by any person when such dogs are on a leash and are at all times kept under control of the accompanying person. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 6, 3-18-75; Ord. No. 158, § 1, 3-3-87; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 10-53. - Public nuisance declared. 
    Any dog found in the city or running at large is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be impounded as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7, 3-18-75; Ord. No. 158, § 1, 3-3-87; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 26-26 et seq. 
Sec. 10-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 390, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 2016, repealed § 10-54, which pertained to the removal of a collar or tag and derived from Ord. No. 84, § 4, adopted Mar. 18, 1975 and Ord. No. 158, § 7, adopted Mar. 3, 1987. 
Sec. 10-55. - Adoption of state rabies control regulations by reference. 
    The provisions of M.S.A. §§ 35.67-35.69, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be in full force and effect within the city as if fully set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 2, 3-2-82; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Editor's note- Former § 10-70 has been designated as § 10-55 at the discretion of the editor. The historical notation of the former § 10-70 has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Secs. 10-56-10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 390, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 2016, repealed §§ 10-66-10-69, which pertained to required fee, registration procedure, and proof of rabies vaccination, and derived from Ord. No. 84, §§ 1-3, adopted Mar. 18, 1975; Ord. No. 125, § 1, adopted May 5, 1981; Ord. No. 132, §§ 1(1-3), adopted Mar. 2, 1982; Ord. No. 158, §§ 4-6, adopted Mar. 3, 1987; and Ord. No. 260, § 2, adopted Nov. 23, 2004. See also editor's note at § 10-55. 

Secs. 10-66-10-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 10-81. - Authority; notice to owner. 
(a)  Any dog found running at large within the city shall be picked up and impounded by any law enforcement officer, city official or employee or any other person designated by the city for the purpose of enforcing this article. Impounded dogs shall be kept at a location to be determined by the city and shall be housed and fed in a humane manner. 
(b)  Upon impounding, the owner of the dog, if known, shall be immediately notified by telephone or personal contact or by written notice to his last known address. If the owner is unknown, a written description of the dog and time and place of taking shall be posted at the city hall. The notice shall advise both the known and unknown owner that he has five regular business days to claim the animal during regular business hours, the impounding fee to be paid, and that if the dog is not reclaimed by its owner within that time it shall be disposed of as provided in section 10-84. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 11, 3-18-75; Ord. No. 158, § 2, 3-3-87; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 10-82. - Diseased animals; obstructing enforcement. 
    If an animal is diseased, vicious, dangerous, rabid or exposed to rabies, and cannot be impounded after reasonable effort or without serious risk to the person attempting to impound the animal, such animal may be immediately destroyed in a humane manner. No person shall obstruct, hinder or interfere with any person lawfully enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 8, 3-3-87; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 10-83. - Redemption of impounded animal. 
    The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this article may redeem such animal by first paying all the impounding fees, costs, charges and fines that have accrued up to the time of making the redemption. The impounding fees and fines shall be paid to the clerk-treasurer. Upon payment of such costs and charges, the city shall release the animal to the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 12, 3-18-75; Ord. No. 158, § 3, 3-3-87; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 10-84. - Disposal of unredeemed animal. 
    Any animal impounded and not redeemed within five days after the date of impoundment may be put up for adoption, euthanized, sold or disposed of in such other way as the city shall determine. Any unredeemed animal may be surrendered to any licensed, educational or scientific institution pursuant to M.S.A. § 35.71. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 13, 3-18-75; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Secs. 10-85-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 10-101. - Exotic animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall keep, maintain or harbor within the City of Watertown any of the following exotic animals: 
(1)  Any skunk, whether captured in the wild, domestically raised, descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated against rabies. 
(2)  Any large cat of the family Felidae such as lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars and ocelots, except commonly accepted domesticated house cats. 
(3)  Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingos and jackals, except domesticated dogs. 
(4)  Any crossbreed such as the crossbreeds between dogs and coyotes or dogs and wolves but does not include cross bred domesticated animals. 
(5)  Any poisonous serpent such as a rattlesnake, coral snake, water moccasin or cobra. 
(6)  Any raccoon, bear, badger, or bison. 
(b)  Any other animal which is not listed explicitly above, but which can be reasonably defined as an exotic animal, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 241, § 1, 12-10-02) 
ARTICLE V. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 10-102. - Farm and livestock animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall keep, maintain or harbor within any zoning district, with the exception of agricultural zoning districts within the city, any of the following farm animals: 
(1)  Any pig, whether potbelly or typical farm-raised, descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated against rabies. 
(2)  Any hoofed animal including but not limited to goats, horses, cows, and sheep, descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated against rabies. 
(3)  Any poultry or fowl including but not limited to chicken roosters, ducks, geese, and pigeons. This does not include any caged non-farm birds used as pets. 
(4)  Any bees, whether kept in a hive or not, which are harbored for the purposes of private or commercial production of honey, breeding, or other agricultural type uses. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 6-23-09; Ord No. 390, § 1, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 406, 4-24-18) 
Sec.10-103. Farm - and livestock animals permitted. 
(a)  The keeping of chicken hens as a source of eggs and meat sources shall be permitted in any detached single-family residential zoning district as provided in this section except as allowed by agricultural, commercial, or industrial zoning districts within the city. The keeping of chicken hens in multi-family zoned districts is not permitted. 
(1)  The limited keeping of chicken hens may be permitted as an additional accessory use to a single-family property dwelling unit. 
(2)  The owner of the chicken hens shall live in the dwelling unit on the property. 
(3)  No more than five total chicken hens shall be kept on the single-family dwelling unit property. 
(4)  All chicken hens shall be kept within a separate enclosed accessory structure and/or fenced outdoor animal run in accordance with this Code regulating accessory structures and fences under section 62-477, unless otherwise stated herein. 
a.  Fencing used to contain chicken hens shall comply with subsection 62-479(5) and be sufficient to contain the chicken hens from being able to leave the site. 
b.  The accessory structure and/or containment area shall be maintained in good repair, in a clean and sanitary manner, free of vermin or pests, and free of objectionable odors and comply with chapter 26. 
(5)  Chicken hens shall not be kept within the dwelling unit or attached accessory structure. 
(6)  Chicken hens shall remain in the detached accessory structure and/or containment area at all times and shall not run at large. 
(7)  Chicken hens shall remain in the accessory structure from sunset to sunrise each day to prevent nuisance noise and the attraction of vermin and predators. 
(8)  The slaughter of chicken hens on site is prohibited. 
(9)  The sale of eggs, chicken hens, or other commercial activity on the premises is prohibited. 
(10)  Feces and discarded feed shall be regularly collected and only stored temporarily onsite in a leak-proof container with tight-fitting cover to prevent nuisance odors and the attraction of vermin. Such waste shall not be composted on site. 
(11)  Feed shall be stored in a leak-proof container with a tight-fitting cover to prevent attracting vermin. 
(12)  Deceased chicken hens must be disposed of according to the state board of animal health rules which require chicken carcasses to be disposed of as soon as possible after death, usually within 48 to 72 hours. Legal forms of chicken carcass disposal include offsite burial, offsite incineration or rendering, or offsite composting. 
(Ord. No. 406, 4-24-18) 
Secs. 10-104-10-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ANIMAL TRAPPING 

Sec. 10-111. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to preclude the potential harm that may be inflicted upon people, particularly children, and to prevent the crippling, unselective catching, and destruction of wildlife and domestic animals that may come into contact with traps. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 1, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 10-112. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Leghold trap means any device consisting of two metal jaws which lay horizontally to form a circle, square or similar shape when the trap is set, or a trap which is similar to such device in design and which is intended to catch and secure an animal by the leg, toes or paw. Such a device may be known as a "steel," "jaw(ed) leg," "long-spring," "coil-spring," "flat-under spring," "foot," "front-hold," "game," or similar named trap. 
    Trapping means the setting or laying, or other use of a trap or snare with the intent of capturing or killing an animal. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 2, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 10-113. - Leghold traps prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to set, place or use any leghold animal trap or snare within the city limits of the City of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 10-114. - Live traps permitted. 
    Live traps designed to trap an animal without intent to injure the animal are allowed without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 4, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 10-115. - Limited permits. 
    In extraordinary cases, the city council may grant a limited permit for the abatement of a specific animal nuisance, but only when the proposed use is determined to be in the public interest and will not cause any hazard to children, other wildlife or domestic animals. Permits shall specify the type of trap to be used, time limits for trapping, location, number of traps and approved maintenance procedures of trap lines. Applications for limited permits shall be made to the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a written statement of proof of need or necessity and a certified list of property owners within a minimum of 300 feet of the trapping area. Property owners shall be notified that such application is being considered by the city. The permit fee shall be as set by resolution or ordinance of the council. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 5, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 10-116. - Violation and penalty. 
    Violation of this article is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 6, 10-9-07) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Possession of open containers while on any street or other public right-of-way or park prohibited, § 6-5; alarm systems, § 22-26 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 27; accumulation of junk, construction material, automobile parts and bodies declared public nuisances, § 26-30; manufactured housing, ch. 30; mailboxes prohibited in public right-of-way, § 34-2; planning, ch. 46.5; solid waste requirements, ch. 50; utility regulations, ch. 58; requirements for building sewers and connections to sanitary sewer system, § 58-41; subdivisions, ch. 52. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 310, §§ 1-5, adopted Aug. 28, 2007, repealed Art. II, §§ 14-26-14-29 and enacted a new Art. II, §§ 14-25-14-30 as herein set out. Prior to amendment Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 247, §§ 1-5, adopted Aug. 26, 2003; Ord. No. 201A, §§ 1-5, adopted Apr. 11, 1995; and Ord. No. 216, §§ 1-5, adopted Mar. 9, 1999. 
State Law reference- State building code, M.S.A. ch. 326B et seq.; municipal enforcement, M.S.A. § 326B.121. 

Sec. 14-25. - Codes adopted by reference. 
    The Minnesota State Building Code (the "Code"), as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant to M.S.A. ch. 326B, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and Standards Unit, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this ordinance. The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 385, § 1, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 14-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 364, § 1, adopted December 13, 2011, repealed § 14-26, which pertained to application, administration and enforcement and derived from Ord. No. 309, adopted August 28, 2007; and Ord. No. 310, adopted August 28, 2007. 
Sec. 14-27. - Permits and fees. 
    The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in the State Building Code, including Minnesota Administrative Rules Chapter 1300. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by the Code in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the city council. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by the Code in accordance with M.S.A. § 326B.148. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 385, § 1, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 14-28. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of the code is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 14-29. - Building code optional chapters. 
    The Minnesota State Building Code, Minnesota Administrative Rules Chapter 1300, allows the city to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code. 
    The following optional provisions identified in the most current edition of the state building code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the building code for the City of Watertown. 
(1)  Special Fire Protection Systems. Chapter 1306 of Minnesota Rules petiaining to Special Fire Protection Systems which is an optional chapter of the Minnesota State Building Code is hereby adopted by reference and the requirements of this chapter shall be applicable to the City of Watertown and included and administered as pati of the Minnesota State Building Code previously adopted by the City of Watertown. 
(2)  Selection of Subpart 3 of Chapter 1306.0020. Pursuant to the requirement of Subpart 1 of Chapter 1306.0020, the City hereby selects and adopts subpart 3 of said Chapter 1306.0020, Minnesota Rules, as the subpart applicable to the adoption of this chapter of Minnesota Rules, such adoption is without amendment. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 5, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 385, § 1, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 14-30. - Perpetual existence. 
    This article shall perpetually include the most current edition of the Minnesota Statute Building Code with the exception of the optional appendix chapters. Optional appendix chapters shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 6, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 14-31. - Survey requirements. 
(a)  Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a certified site survey (excluding interior remodels, re-roofs, re-siding and general maintenance) at a scale and in quantities deemed necessary by the zoning administrator. Because the survey will be used to determine an application's conformance with city Code, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure information provided on the survey corresponds to submitted building plans (including existing and proposed topography). An issued building permit shall authorize only land alterations identified on a survey. Surveys shall include all information as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to provide for enforcement of this chapter and the zoning chapter. 
(b)  Upon completion of foundation work the city shall be provided with an as-built foundation survey unless waived by the zoning administrator. The as-built foundation survey shall certify both the final set-backs of the structure being built and the elevations at which the new structure exists. If a builder continues with construction (at his own risk) without providing the foundation survey, all expenditures incurred beyond the construction of the foundation will not be considered in determining the actions required to bring the building back into conformance if not built to approved plans. The foundation survey shall be on-site before framing inspection is done and approved by the building official. 
(c)  Upon completion of construction the city shall be provided with an as-built survey unless waived by the zoning administrator. The as-built survey shall certify the final topography of the site and verify the drainage patterns existing upon completion of work. The city reserves the right to withhold the certificate of occupancy for a structure until final grading addresses all problems that may be detrimental to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 14-32-14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 14-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. 
    Building official means the building inspector for the city. 
    Removal location means any location in the city to which a building may properly be moved and on which such building may properly be located after such moving under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 5-1-79) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-67. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Enforcing officers. The building official, the sheriff's department and the city engineer shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Permittee liable for expense above deposit. The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damage or cost in excess of deposited amounts of securities, and the city attorney shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such damages, costs or expenses. 
(c)  Original premises left unsafe. The city shall proceed to do the work necessary to leaving the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition, where the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this article, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposit. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 17, 5-1-79) 
Sec. 14-68. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 18, 5-1-79) 
Sec. 14-69. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the building official. 
(b)  Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit under this section shall file an application for such permit with the building official. 
(1)  Form. The application shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the building official, and shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
(2)  Contents. The application shall set forth: 
a.  A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of exterior and interior and four photographs, showing ground and street elevations for all sides of the building. 
b.  A legal description of the premises from which the building is to be moved. 
c.  A legal description of the premises to which it is proposed such building be removed (relocated), if located in the city. 
d.  The portion of the premises to be occupied by the building when moved if located in the city. 
e.  The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved. 
f.  Proposed moving date and hours. 
g.  Any additional information which the building official shall find necessary to make a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(3)  Deadline. Such application for a permit shall be made at least 30 days prior to the proposed moving date in order to allow the building official to make the inspection required. 
(4)  Accompanying papers. 
a.  Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file with the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which it is to be removed are free of any liens, encumbrances, etc., and that all taxes and any other charges against such building and lot are paid in full. 
b.  Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant shall file with the application a written statement or bill of sale or other sufficient evidence that he is entitled to move the building. 
(5)  Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of $250.00, plus a sufficient sum, as estimated by the building official, to cover all other charges required under the terms of this article or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 111, §§ 6, 7, 5-1-79) 
Sec. 14-70. - Duties of building official. 
(a)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a completed application to move a building to a removal location in the city, the building official shall inspect the building wherever located and the equipment to be used to move the building to determine whether the building and equipment meet the standards for removal to the city or whether any of the reasons for denial listed under section 14-71(b) are present. 
(b)  Report to planning commission. Following the inspection required by subsection (a), the building official shall report his findings to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 10, 5-1-79) 
Sec. 14-71. - Duties of planning commission. 
(a)  Recommendation to city council. The planning commission shall receive the report of the building official pursuant to section 14-70(b) and shall make their recommendation to the city council to either approve, deny or conditionally approve such application. 
(b)  Reasons for denial. Based upon the findings of the building official, the planning commission shall recommend denial of the permit application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  That any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with. 
(2)  That the building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the city. 
(3)  That the building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the city. 
(4)  That the building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the removal location is in the city. 
(5)  That the applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and property would be endangered by its use. 
(6)  That zoning or other ordinances of the city would be violated by the building in its removal location. 
(7)  That for any reason persons or property in the city would be endangered by the moving of the building. 
(8)  That the building to be moved is not worth at least 75 percent of the cost of a similar new building as determined by the building official. 
(9)  That the building in its removal location would fail to comply in any respect with any provision of any ordinance of the city or, in the alternative, that proper assurance of such compliance has or has not been given. 
(10)  That the building is in variance with either the established or the expected pattern of building development with the neighborhood to which the building is to be moved. The findings of a comparative study of age, bulk, architectural style and quality of construction of both the building to be moved and the buildings either existing or expected in the neighborhood shall be the criteria by which the planning commission shall determine the degree of variance. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 11, 5-1-79) 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 14-72. - Decision of city council. 
    Based upon the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall approve, deny or conditionally approve the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 12, 5-1-79) 
Sec. 14-73. - Fees and deposits. 
(a)  Deposit. The building official shall deposit all fees and deposits under this article with the city in the same manner as all other receipts to the city are deposited. 
(b)  Return upon nonissuance. Upon council decision to deny or refuse to issue a permit applied for under this article, the building official shall return to the applicant any deposits. Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 13, 5-1-79) 
Sec. 14-74. - Designation of streets for removal. 
    The building official shall procure from the city engineer a list of designated streets, railroad crossings and bridges over which the building may be moved. The building official shall have the list approved by the sheriff and shall reproduce the list upon the permit in writing. In making their determinations, the city engineer and the sheriff's department shall act to assure maximum safety to persons and property in the city and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 14, 5-1-79) 
Sec. 14-75. - Duties of permittee. 
    Every permittee under this article shall: 
(1)  Use designated streets. Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the written permit. 
(2)  Notify of revised moving time. Notify the building official in writing of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application. 
(3)  Notify of damage. Notify the building official in writing of any and all damage done to property belonging to the city within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred. 
(4)  Display lights. Cause red lights to be displayed on every side of the building during the nighttime and red flags during the daytime while such building is being moved or standing on the street, in such manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall where necessary erect and maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the building. 
(5)  Street occupancy period. Remove the building from the city streets after four days of such occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the building official. 
(6)  Comply with governing law. Comply with the building code, the zoning code and all other applicable ordinances and laws upon relocating the building in the city. 
(7)  Pay expense of traffic officer. Pay the expense of a traffic officer, ordered by the sheriff's department to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury, at the rate of $50.00 per day or part of a day for the estimated period required for the moving. 
(8)  Clear old premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site, when located in the city, so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 15, 5-1-79) 
Sec. 14-76. - Conditions of permit. 
(a)  Where the removal location of any building is known by the building official to be subject to any restrictive covenants of record, he shall not issue a permit under the provisions of this article unless and until he is satisfied that all of the terms and conditions of such covenants have been complied with. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article unless and until the city council shall be satisfied that the building proposed to be removed will in its removal location conform to the general character and to the type of architecture of the neighborhood. 
(c)  It is not intended by this article to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties; provided however, that when this article imposes a greater or heavier restriction than is imposed or required by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or by easement, covenant or agreement, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(d)  Every applicant or permittee under this article shall pay, in addition to all other required fees, an additional fee of $0.29 per mile to be traveled by the building official in making any inspection under the provisions of this article or any other ordinance of this city computed from the city hall to the site, location or premises where an inspection is to be made, together with an hourly fee for the building official for the time spent in connection with such inspection. 
(e)  The building to be placed upon the removal location shall be completed for occupancy within 90 days after the date of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 16, 5-1-79) 
Secs. 14-77-14-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL HOUSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 257, adopted Sept. 13, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 14-77-14-89. To allow for future expansion, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 14-101-14-112. 

Sec. 14-101. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, maintenance and repair of all buildings and structures within the city used for the purpose of rental housing. The purpose of this article is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this article. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be rented, leased, or let for human habitation. All provisions of this article shall apply to dwellings in existence at the time of adoption of this article. Rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, hotels, motels, are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Application to existing buildings. Additions, alterations or repairs, shall be done in compliance with the building, fire, plumbing and mechanical codes. Applicable permits shall apply as required by these codes. 
(1)  Properties not existing as rental property at the time of adoption of this article and afterward becoming rental property shall, before being certified, comply with all the provisions of this article. Properties pre-existing at the adoption of this article shall be allowed a reasonable time to comply. Reasonable time being defined on a case-by-case basis subject to the discretion of the code official. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-77, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-102. - Definitions. 
    Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
    Apartment building is a building or portion of a building that contains three or more dwelling units. 
    Building code is the Minnesota State Building Code. 
    Code official is the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, or any duly authorized representative. 
    Condemn shall mean to adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
    Congregate residence is any building or portion thereof that contains facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation, as required by this article, and may include facilities for eating and cooking and for occupancy by other than a family. A congregate residence may be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, and fraternity or sorority house but does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses. 
    Dwelling is a building wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes by human occupants; but not including hotels and motels. 
    Dwelling unit is a room or a group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with facilities, which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes. 
    Efficiency dwelling unit is a dwelling unit containing only one habitable room and meeting the requirements of subsection 14-5(a)(2) exception. 
    Egress is an arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of exit from a building. 
    Electrical code is the Minnesota State Electrical Code. 
    Extermination is the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination method approved by the code official; and to remove all signs of extermination thereafter. 
    Fire code is the Minnesota State Fire Code. 
    Floor area is the net floor area within the enclosed walls of a room in which the ceiling height is not less than five feet, excluding areas used for closets and built-in equipment, such as cabinets, kitchen units, fixtures and appliances. 
    Habitable room is a room or enclosed floor space, used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces. 
    Health officer is the legally designated health officer or official of the state, county and/or city. 
    Hot water is water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees F (49 degrees C). 
    Infestation is the presence of insects, rodents, or other pests within or around the dwelling on the premises. 
    Kitchen is a room or an area equipped for preparing and cooking food. 
    Let is to give the use of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit by an owner or manager to a tenant in return for rent. 
    Manager is a person or firm who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Mechanical code is the Minnesota State Mechanical Code. 
    Nuisance. The following shall be defined as nuisances: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance that may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or on an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation that may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the code official or health officer. 
(4)  Overcrowding a room with occupants. 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination. 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities. 
(7)  Un-cleanliness, as determined by the health officer. 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the health officer. 
    Occupancy is the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
    Occupant is a person living alone, or two or more persons all related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children, occupying and maintaining a common household in a single dwelling unit, or a group of not more than five persons, any two of whom are not related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children, occupying and maintaining a common household in a single dwelling unit. 
    Owner is a person, firm or corporation who, alone, jointly or severally with others, owns or has an ownership interest in a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit within the city. 
    Plumbing code is the State of Minnesota Plumbing Code. 
    Plumbing system is all potable water supplies and distribution pipes, all plumbing fixtures and traps and all drainage and vent pipes. 
    Premises is the dwelling and its land and all buildings thereon and areas thereof. 
    Refuse is all putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids including garbage and rubbish. Putrescible are liable to undergo bacterial decomposition when in contact with air and moisture at normal temperatures. 
    Rent is a stated return or payment for the temporary possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit. The return or payment may be money or service or property. 
    Rooming house is a building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one or two-family dwelling. 
    Rooming unit is a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes, along with a private or shared sanitation facilities. 
    Safety is the condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards, which may cause injury or illness. 
    Substandard building is any building where any condition exists that endangers the life, limb, health, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof. 
    Tenant can be a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
    Variance is a difference between that which is required or specified and that which is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-78, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-103. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce or cause the enforcement of all of the provisions of this article. For such purposes, the building official or his/her designated representative shall have the powers of a code official. The code official shall have the power to render interpretations of this article. Such interpretations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article. 
(b)  Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or when the code official or housing inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of this article, the code official or housing inspector may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this article, provided that property owner is notified and either property owner or tenant or other person having charge or control of the building or premises permits entry. If entry is refused, the code official or housing inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(c)  Responsibilities defined. Owners remain liable for violations of duties imposed by this article even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of the building, and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this article. 
(1)  Buildings and structures and parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for such maintenance. To determine compliance with this subsection, the building may be re-inspected. 
(2)  Owners, in addition to being responsible for maintaining buildings in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which the owner occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a building containing two or more dwelling units. 
(3)  Owners shall, when required by this article, health laws or the health officer, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and when infestation has taken place, shall be responsible for any insects, rodents or other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling. 
(4)  Occupants of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling unit or premises which they occupy and control, shall properly dispose of their recyclables, rubbish, garbage and other organic waste. 
(5)  Occupants shall, when required by this article or city ordinance, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities necessary to keep their premises safe and sanitary. 
(d)  Substandard buildings. Buildings or portions thereof that are determined to be substandard as defined in this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
(e)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision or determination made by the code official or housing inspector pursuant to this article may, within 14 days of the decision, appeal to the board of appeals in accordance with section 14-113. 
(f)  Violations, criminal. A violation of any provision of this Rental Housing Ordinance is a misdemeanor. Each day the property is in violation is a separate violation. Violations, civil. Whenever it is determined by the code official that any property upon inspection there is found alleged violations, a correction notice shall be issued to the owner or designated representative. Such alleged violations must be corrected, re-inspected and verified by the code official for compliance with this article within the time period as set forth: 
(1)  Smoke detector violations and fines. Existing group R occupancies not already equipped with single station smoke alarms shall be equipped with approved single station smoke alarms. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with section 14-109(b). Required smoke alarms shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be immediately replaced or repaired when defective. Each required detector missing or not in operational condition at time of inspection shall be a violation of this article and will be subject to a fine of $25.00 per detector per 24-hour period until re-inspected and found to be in operational condition. 
(2)  All other violations. Preparations for the actual work for correcting the alleged violations shall be commenced immediately and work re-inspected within 25 working days or within the time period as specified by the code official. 
(3)  Penalties for all other violations. The following penalties shall be imposed upon the property owner(s) if the alleged violations are not corrected and verified by the code official within the time period allowed by this article: 
i.  Fines. $50.00 fine. An additional charge of $5.00 per day commencing on the day that the alleged violation or violations continue after the expiration of the specified reasonable consideration period as established by this article and extending thereafter until the violation or violations are verified by the code official. 
(4)  Extensions. Extensions may be granted by the code official. The request shall be made in writing with justifiable cause demonstrated for the requested extension. All requests shall be made and delivered to the code official prior to the expiration date of the violation or violations. 
i.  Extensions may be granted the code official upon due evidence shown that the property owner is using all reasonable means necessary to mitigate concerns raised by the code official. 
(5)  Orders after an appeal. After any order of the code official or the housing appeals board made pursuant to this article becomes final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to fines as stated in subsection (f)(3) or as specified by the appeals board. 
(g)  Prohibited acts. Whoever does any of the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  No license. Allowing the occupancy of a dwelling unit or rooming unit prior to the issuance of a rental housing license and payment of the license inspection fee. 
(2)  Over occupancy. Permitting a dwelling unit or rooming unit that is occupied by more persons than the dwelling unit or rooming unit is certified for. 
(3)  Improper occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes that were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies shall be considered substandard. 
(4)  Occupying vacated unit. Occupies or allows occupancy of a unit that was posted and ordered vacated. 
(5)  Occupying uncertified bedrooms. Occupies or allows occupancy of a room as a bedroom that is not certified as a bedroom and does not qualify as a bedroom. 
(6)  Tampering or non-functioning smoke detector. Any occupant, owner or manager of a dwelling or rooming unit who willfully disables a smoke detector or causes it to be nonfunctioning is guilty of a misdemeanor. If the unit is occupied by more than one tenant, each tenant shall be held accountable. 
i.  Notification. The occupant of a dwelling or rooming unit must notify the owner or manager of the unit within 24 hours of discovering that a detector is not functioning. The owner or manager shall take immediate action to render the detector operational or replace it. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-79, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 313, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-07) 
Sec. 14-104. - Rental housing license. 
(a)  Application. The owner or manager of a structure, in which one or more dwelling units or rooming units are let or intended to be let, shall make application for a rental housing license prior to letting the unit, unless such unit is currently certified. An owner or manager of such structure shall not allow occupancy of such unit until the certification-inspection fee has been paid and a rental housing license has been issued. The code official or housing inspector may issue a temporary rental housing license not exceeding three months in duration in order to bring the unit into compliance with this article. 
(b)  Issuance. The code official or housing inspector shall issue a rental housing license for each dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, when upon inspection finds such unit meets or exceeds the minimum requirements set forth by this article; also a rental housing license shall be issued for each dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, when a variance has been granted by the board of appeals; provided, however, it is found that no condition exists, in a shared or public area of the building or in any other part of the unit, which could endanger the health or safety of the occupants of such unit or of the public. Such license shall show the number of occupants for which the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is approved for and once issued shall remain valid until it expires or such time as the code official or housing inspector determines that the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit does not meet the minimum requirements set by this article. 
(c)  Renewals. A rental housing license shall expire two years after the date of issuance. Re-inspection of all dwellings, dwelling units or rooming units shall be required prior to issuance of a new certificate. Applications for licenses shall be made in writing on forms provided by the city and accompanied by the fee amounts as established by the city council. Such application shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the license. 
(d)  Revocation. A rental housing license may be suspended or revoked as prescribed in this article. 
(1)  Every license or permit issued under this article is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to suspend or revoke the same should the license holder or their agents, employees, representatives, or lessees directly or indirectly operate or maintain rental dwellings contrary to the provisions of this article or any other City Code provision, or any permit issued by the city or the laws of the State of Minnesota. 
(2)  The license may be suspended or revoked by the city council after written notice is sent the license holder specifying the ordinance or law violations with which they are charged. This notice shall also specify the date for hearing before the city council, which shall not be less than ten days from the date of the notice. 
(3)  At such hearing before the city council, the license holder or their attorneys may submit and present witnesses on their behalf. 
(4)  After a hearing, the city council may suspend or revoke the license if the council deems it necessary to protect public health, safety or general welfare. 
(e)  Fees. A rental housing license-inspection fee as established by the city council. 
(f)  Complaint inspections. The code official or housing inspector shall inspect a unit upon receiving a legitimate complaint. Complainant's name shall be kept confidential pursuant to the Minnesota Data Privacy Act. Upon inspection and finding a violation the inspector shall notify the owner, manager or tenant in writing to correct the violation. The owner or manager may request an advisory inspection of a unit. 
(g)  Protocol of complaints. Prior to contacting the city, tenants shall first notify the building owner of a complaint in writing, requesting action to correct the issue. Complaints relating to no heat, water, sanitation, may be made both verbally and in writing. Issues relating to immediate life safety are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(h)  License availability. Licenses shall be made available upon request. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-80, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-105. - Space and occupancy standards. 
    No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be let for occupancy to another, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Room dimensions. Room dimensions shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Ceiling heights. Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at less than 48 inches on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of these members. If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof. 
(2)  Floor area. Dwelling units and congregate residences shall have at least one room for common living area that shall have not less than 120 square feet of floor area. Rooms used for sleeping purposes by one person shall have an area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more than one person occupies a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be 50 square feet for each occupant. 
(3)  Width. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than seven feet in any dimension. 
(b)  Kitchen. Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall have adequate circulation area, and which shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A kitchen sink that is in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the city. Sinks shall be of nonabsorbent materials. 
(2)  A stove, or similar device, for cooking food, and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than 45 degrees Fahrenheit but more than 32 degrees Fahrenheit under ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation; provided that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space and adequate connections for the safe and efficient installation and operation of said stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided. 
(3)  Cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
(c)  Lighting. All enclosed portions of the dwelling unit customarily occupied by human beings shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed openings with an area not less than one eighth of the total floor area, or shall be provided with artificial light. Such openings shall open directly onto a public way or a yard or court. 
    Public hallways, corridors, stairways and other exit facilities shall be adequately lighted. 
(d)  Ventilation. Guestrooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not less than four percent of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of four square feet. Exterior openings for natural ventilation shall be provided with tight fitting insect screens. Bathrooms, water closet compartments and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area not less than four percent of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of one and one-half square feet. In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation in bathrooms containing a bathtub, shower or combination thereof; and similar rooms, a working mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside. 
(e)  Sanitation. All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with applicable requirements of the plumbing code. 
(1)  Dwelling unit. Dwelling units shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower. 
(2)  Rooming units. Where private water closets are not provided, there shall be provided at least one bathroom accessible from a public hallway. 
(f)  Bathroom accessibility. Where bathrooms are shared by rooming units by occupants of a dwelling unit, the bathroom shall be located so that no occupant has to pass through another occupant's room to use the facility. 
(g)  Room separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this article shall be installed in a room that will afford privacy to the occupant. Bathrooms shall be separated from food-preparation areas by a tight fitting door. 
(h)  Floor coverings. Bathroom floors shall have a smooth, hard nonabsorbent surface such as vinyl tile, vinyl sheet goods, ceramic tile or concrete. Floor surfaces shall be maintained in good condition so the floor can be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-81, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-106. - Structural requirements. 
    All existing structural components are deemed acceptable provided that, in the opinion of the code official, such components have been properly maintained and do not make the building or property hazardous as defined by M.S.A. § 463.15 Subd. 3. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-82, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-107. - Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing requirements. 
(a)  Heating. Dwelling units and guestrooms shall be provided with heating appliances capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments. Owners shall turn on the heating appliances when the outside temperature falls to 64 degrees Fahrenheit or below. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with their listings. Un-vented fuel-burning appliances are not permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. 
(1)  Chimneys and vents. Every fuel-burning appliance shall discharge the products of combustion to a vent, factory-built chimney, masonry chimney or a chimney or vent that is approved by the appliance manufacturer. Chimneys or vents shall be designed for the type of appliance being vented. 
(2)  Exhaust Vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
(3)  Hazardous mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment that was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or mechanical equipment not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or that has not been maintained in good and safe condition shall be considered substandard. 
(b)  Electrical. The electrical service, lines, switches, outlets, fixtures and fixture coverings, and supports in every building or structure shall be in good repair. Broken, loose, frayed, inoperative, defective or missing portions shall be repaired or replaced. All unsafe conditions shall be corrected. 
(1)  Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type. 
i.  Extension cords shall be used only with portable appliances and shall not be used as a substitute for permanent wiring. Extension cords shall be plugged directly into an approved outlet, power tap or multi-plug adapter and shall, except for approved multi-plug extension cords, serve only one portable appliance. The amp capacity of the extension cord shall not be less than the rated capacity of the portable appliance supplied by the cord and shall be grounded when serving a grounded appliance. Extension cords shall be maintained in good condition without splices, deterioration or damage. Extension cords and flexible cords shall not be attached to the structure, extend through walls, ceilings, and floors or under doors or floor coverings, or be subject to environmental or physical damage. 
(2)  Switches and outlets. Every habitable room shall be provided with at least one switched ceiling or wall light and one duplex outlet. 
i.  Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric light fixture and one convenience outlet. 
ii.  Outlets within six feet of a sink or bathtub shall be Ground Fault Interrupted (GFI) outlets. 
(3)  Hazardous electrical wiring. Electrical wiring that was installed in violation of ordinance requirements in effect at the time of installation or electrical wiring not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or that has been maintained in good condition or that is not being used in a safe manner shall be considered substandard. 
(c)  Plumbing. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(1)  Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation. All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or of a similarly nonabsorbent material. 
(2)  Plumbing system leaks. Leaking drain or supply lines shall be repaired or replaced. All unsafe conditions shall be corrected. 
(3)  Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or to the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(4)  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture as required by the Minnesota State Plumbing Code. Hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(5)  Hazardous plumbing. Plumbing that was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or plumbing not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or that has not been maintained in good condition or that is not free of cross-connections or siphonage between fixtures shall be considered substandard. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-83, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-108. - Means of egress. 
(a)  General. Dwelling units or rooming units shall have access directly to the outside or to a common hallway or public corridor with egress to the outside. An exit shall not pass through a hazardous area such as a furnace room, boiler room, storage room, garage or similar areas. 
(b)  Means of egress system. Means of egress system shall be deemed as meeting the intent of this article, provided that the means of egress system or systems is evaluated by the code official and judged to be equivalent to the exit means of egress system that was required by the code under which the building was constructed or equivalent provisions of the currently adopted fire code. This includes, but not limited to, number of exits, separation of exits, egress illumination, emergency egress illumination, emergency exit signage and illumination, corridors, corridor doors, and egress travel distance. 
(c)  Obstruction of egress. Means of egress shall not be obstructed in any manner and shall remain free of any material or matter where its presence would obstruct or render the means of egress hazardous. All egress routes shall be properly maintained in a safe manner. A clear and unobstructed means of access with a minimum width of 30 inches and a minimum height of 78 inches shall be maintained from the operating face of an electrical service panel, meter or switchboard. Tenants shall at all times have free access to the service panel for their dwelling unit. 
(d)  Escape windows. Sleeping rooms below the fourth story shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without the use of separate tools or special knowledge and shall open directly onto a public way or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building. 
(1)  Escape window requirements. An escape window from a sleeping room shall have a minimum net clear opening of five square feet. The minimum net clear opening height shall be 24 inches and the minimum net clear opening width shall be 20 inches. The finished sill shall not be more than 48 inches above the floor. If necessary to add a window, the new window shall meet the requirements of the building code for a new escape window. 
    Replacement escape windows. When replacing an existing escape window, the replacement window shall meet the minimum requirements of an escape window as defined in this article. 
(e)  Security locks. When an exit door from a dwelling unit is required to provide security from unlawful entry, the door shall be provided with a dead-bolt lock or approved device, which is operable from the inside without the use of a key, special knowledge, or extraordinary effort. 
(f)  Inadequate exits. Except for those buildings or portions thereof that have been provided with adequate exit facilities conforming to the provisions of this article, buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities were installed in violation of ordinance requirements in effect at the time of their construction or whose exit facilities have not been increased in number or width in relation to any increase in occupant load due to alterations, additions or change in use or occupancy subsequent to the time of construction shall be considered substandard. 
    Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at the time of their construction, buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when the code official finds that an unsafe condition exists through an improper location of exits, a lack of an adequate number or width of exits, or when other conditions exist that are dangerous to human life. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-77, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-109. - Life safety. 
(a)  General. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of fire resistive construction, fire warning devices and fire extinguishing devices as provided by this article and the Fire Code. 
(b)  Smoke detectors. Single station smoke detectors shall be installed on each floor and basement. Smoke detectors shall also be required in each bedroom or sleeping area and in the hallway or common area outside the door of a bedroom or sleeping area. The inspector may require additional smoke detectors where additional protection may be required. 
    Power supply. The power supply can be either by battery operation or by the building wiring with battery backup. 
(c)  Fire extinguishers. All rental units shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 2A 10BC. The extinguisher shall be located within the individual dwelling unit or in a common hallway or corridor within 50 feet of the dwelling unit door. 
    Fire extinguishers shall be serviced at least annually or as required by the code official. A tag with the name of the servicing company and the service date shall be affixed to the extinguisher and shall remain affixed until the next servicing. 
(d)  Fire sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems. All existing fire sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems shall be maintained in accordance to the current Fire Code. 
(e)  Inadequate fire-protection or firefighters equipment. Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this article, except those buildings or portions thereof that conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
(f)  Carbon monoxide (C/O) alarms shall be required in each rental unit. It shall be the owner's responsibility of a rental dwelling to: (1) Provide and install one approved and operational C/O detector within ten feet of each room lawfully used for sleeping purposes, and (2) replace any required C/O detector that has been stolen, removed, found missing, or rendered inoperable. C/O alarms must be either hardwired into electrical wiring, directly plugged into an electrical outlet without a switch, or battery powered. No person shall remove batteries from, or in any way render inoperable, a required C/O detector. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings may have approved and operational C/O alarms installed between 15 and 25 feet of carbon monoxide producing central fixtures and equipment provided there is a centralized alarm system or other mechanism for responsible parties to hear the alarm at all times. 
(2)  An owner of a multifamily dwelling that contains minimal or no sources of carbon monoxide may be exempted from the requirements. Attached garages will be considered to be a significant source of carbon monoxide. Such request for exemption must be made in writing and an inspection must verify the circumstances of such requests. 
(3)  The requirements of this section do not apply to facilities owned or operated by the State of Minnesota. 
    Carbon monoxide detector violations and fines: Required C/O alarms shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be immediately replaced or repaired when defective. Each required detector missing or not in operational condition at the time of the inspection shall be in violation of this article and will be subject to a fine of $25.00 per detector per 24-hour period until re-inspected and found to be in operational condition. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-85, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 313, § 3, 10-23-07; Ord. No. 314, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 316, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 14-110. - General building requirements. 
(a)  Building identification. Every building shall have the assigned street numbers displayed on the building in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. Said numbers shall be no less than four inches in height and shall contrast with the background on which they are displayed. 
(b)  Handrails. Stairways having four or more risers shall have a continuous full-length handrail on at least one side. The handrail shall be mounted no less than 34 inches nor more than 38 inches above the nosing of the stair tread. The handgrip portion of the handrail shall not be less than 11/4 inches and no more than two inches in cross-sectional dimension. The ends of the handrails shall be returned to the walls. 
(1)  Stairways that are 66 inches in width or more require handrails on both sides. 
(2)  Existing handrails that are not deemed to be hazardous by the code official or housing inspector are allowed to remain as they are. 
(c)  Guardrails. Unenclosed floor and roof openings, open sides of stairways, landings, decks, balconies, porches or occupied roofs which are more than 30 inches above the grade or floor below shall be protected by a guardrail. Guardrails shall be a minimum of 36 inches high. Open railings shall have intermediate rails, spindles or an ornamental pattern such that a four-inch sphere can not pass through. When approved by the code official, the spacing between intermediate railings or openings in existing ornamental patterns may be accepted. 
    Existing guardrails that are not deemed to be hazardous by the code official or code official are allowed to remain as they are. 
(d)  Refuse. The property owner or property manager shall provide an adequate number of refuse containers to contain the amount of refuse produced on the property or as required by local sanitation ordinance. Containers shall be rodent and animal proof plastic, fiberglass or rust resistant metal with a tight fitting cover. Containers shall have a maximum capacity of 35 gallons with two handles or a container of any size supplied by the waste removal company that can be mechanically lifted. It shall be the tenant's responsibility to place their garbage and refuse in the approved refuse containers provided by the owner. The owner or manager shall be responsible for ensuring that the garbage and refuse is removed from the property at least once every seven days. Refuse containers shall not be stored in a front yard. 
(e)  Unused or discarded items. Discarded, unused and junk appliances, furniture, mattresses and other items shall be removed from the property. 
(f)  Storage of items. Large amounts of combustible items and materials shall not be stored in attics or basements. Storage shall be maintained two feet or more below ceilings and floor joists. Combustible materials and items shall not be stored within three feet of any fuel burning appliances. Storage of items shall be orderly and shall not block or obstruct exits. A minimum three foot aisle shall be maintained to all exists, furnaces, water heaters, water meters, gas meters or other building service equipment. 
(g)  Fuel storage. LP tanks, gasoline containers and fueled equipment, including but not limited to motorcycles, mopeds, lawn-care equipment and portable cooking equipment, shall not be stored or repaired in an apartment building or dwelling unit. 
(h)  Barbecues and open flames. In any structure containing two or more dwelling units, no person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level, on any roof, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of any structure. No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch, or similar heating or lighting chemicals or device in such locations. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-86, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 313, § 3, 10-23-07) 
Sec. 14-111. - Exterior building requirements. 
(a)  General. Any building or portion thereof that is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with this article, or any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions referenced in this section to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby are declared to be substandard buildings. 
    The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained and clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways. Parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(d)  Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
(e)  Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation. 
(f)  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(g)  Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major assembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. 
(h)  Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the building owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(i)  Faulty weather protection. Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they have faulty weather protection which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster. 
(2)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors. 
(3)  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering. 
(4)  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
(j)  Fire hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste, or vegetation that, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause shall be considered substandard. 
(k)  Faulty materials of construction. The use of materials of construction, except those that are specifically allowed or approved by this code and the Building Code, and that have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition, shall cause a building to be substandard. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-87, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-112. - Notices and orders of the code official. 
(a)  Compliance order. The code official shall prepare a compliance order, listing all violations and the date or dates when such violations shall be corrected. The property owner shall have the responsibility to correct all violations within the time limit set forth by the code official. Any questions regarding the compliance of said violations, the property owner may contact the code official. 
(b)  Substandard occupancy. No occupancy shall be permitted for any dwelling or rental unit when, in the opinion of the code official, there exists inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition or abandonment which constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety or health. 
(c)  Notice to vacate. The code official shall have to authority to issue a notice to vacate order on any building that is, in the opinion of the code official and as defined in this article, deemed substandard. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-88, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 14-113. - Appeal. 
(a)  Appeal. Any person may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the code official under this article by filing an appeal to the city. A written appeal to the city a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant. 
    Time allotted for appeal. The appeal shall be filed within 14 days or within the time of correction as allowed by the code official, whichever is shorter, from the date of the service of such order or action of the code official. 
(b)  Scheduling and noticing appeal for hearing. The city council shall establish an appeals board. The appeals board shall establish policies and procedures as to when and where, and how appeals will be heard. The appeals board shall not have the authority to override any section or provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 14-89, 9-13-04) 
Chapter 15 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1-15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 15-31. - License required. 
    Beginning January 1, 2011, no person acting individually or jointly with any other person may maintain, own or operate a body art establishment in the City of Watertown without having an establishment license issued by the Commissioner of Health of the State of Minnesota as required by M.S.A. ch. 146B and by the City of Watertown as required by this article. Any such activity is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 352, § 1, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 15-32. - Application. 
    A person desiring a city body art establishment license shall submit to the city a copy of the application submitted to the commissioner of health and a copy of the license issued by the commissioner of health pursuant to the requirements of M.S.A. § 146B.02, and a copy of the application submitted to the commissioner of health and a copy of the license issued by the commissioner of health for body art technicians pursuant to the requirements of M.S.A. § 146B.03 for any person performing body art procedure at the location of the establishment licensed under this article together with such other form and information as may be reasonably required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 352, § 2, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 15-33. - Action on licensure application. 
    All applications shall be processed by the city clerk or his/her delegate for verification and investigation of the facts set forth therein. The city shall take such additional action or steps as deemed appropriate to investigate the background of all persons listed in the application. The city may hire other parties to make such investigations as it may deem appropriate. If the city council deems it in the public interest, such investigation may be made upon an application for renewal of a license. No license shall be issued if the results show to the satisfaction of the council that issuance would not be in the public interest. 
    If a license is denied the applicant must be notified of the determination and the grounds for it, and the applicant may request a hearing before the city council by filing a written statement with the city administrator within 15 days of the notice of denial. After the hearing, the city administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the decision. If the application is denied by the council, the applicant may appeal as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 352, § 3, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 15-34. - Persons ineligible for a license. 
    No license shall be issued to a person: 
(1)  Under the age of 18; 
(2)  Who has been convicted of a felony; 
(3)  Who is not of good moral character and repute; 
(4)  Who within the past five years has been convicted of a violation of any law, statute, or ordinance relating to the operation of a body art establishment, body art, body piercing, branding or any other activity relating to body art as defined in M.S.A. ch. 146B. 
(Ord. No. 352, § 4, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 15-35. - Hours of operation. 
    Body art establishments may be open for operation only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday of each week. Body art establishments are not permitted to operate on Sunday or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday of each week. 
(Ord. No. 352, § 5, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 15-36. - Term and expiration of licenses. 
    Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 352, § 6, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 15-37. - Licensing fee. 
    An applicant for a license under this article shall pay the City of Watertown a nonrefundable fee in an amount set by city ordinance to cover the costs involved in verifying the license application and to cover the expense of any investigation needed to assure compliance with this article. License fee shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. The license fee is nonrefundable even if the application is denied. The license fee may be amended from time to time by council action. 
(Ord. No. 352, § 7, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 389, 12-8-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 389, adopted Dec. 8, 2015, adopting the city's fee schedule is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. 
Chapter 16 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 411, adopted Jan. 8, 2019, repealed the former ch. 16, §§ 16-1-16-39, and enacted a new ch. 16, as set out herein. The former ch. 16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 264, §§ 1-14, adopted March 8, 2005. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 16-26. - Findings and intent. 
    The city finds that the delivery of cable service and related communications services may contribute significantly to the communication needs and desires of residents of the city, benefit local economic development, and improve public and municipal services. The city's intent in adopting this cable ordinance is to encourage further development of cable service and related communications services in the city, and to ensure that all cable service providers are subject to comparable obligations and burdens. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-27. - Short title. 
    This article will be known and cited as the "Cable Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-28. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meaning given herein. Unless otherwise provided herein, terms, phrases and words contained in this article shall have the meaning ascribed in the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 521, et seq., or if not defined herein or in the Cable Act will have their normal and customary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "must" and "will" are always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not mandatory. 
    Basic cable service has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 522(3). 
    Cable communications system , cable system or system has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 522(7). 
    Cable programming service has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 543(l)(2). 
    Cable service has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 522(6). 
    Channel shall mean a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel. 
    City means the City of Watertown, Minnesota, a municipal corporation, in the State of Minnesota. 
    Commission means the Sherburne/Wright Counties Cable Communications Commission, a municipal joint powers entity consisting of the following municipalities: Big Lake, Buffalo, Cokato, Dassel, Delano, Elk River, Maple Lake, Monticello, Rockford and Watertown. 
    Converter means a customer premises device required to receive cable service. 
    Drop means the cable that connects the ground block at the subscriber's location to the nearest distribution point of the system. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor. 
    Franchise , cable franchise or franchise agreement means an agreement between the city and any provider of cable service pursuant to this article granting authorization to construct, operate and maintain a system and provide cable service in the city. 
    Franchise fee has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 542(g). 
    Grantee is any recipient of a franchise, and its agents and employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees. 
    Gross revenues means all revenues, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), received by a grantee or its affiliates from the operation of a cable system to provide cable service in the city. By way of example and not limitation, gross revenues shall include any advertising revenues received by a grantee or its affiliates in connection with the provision of cable service. Gross revenues shall not include revenues received by a grantee or its affiliates from the provision of telecommunications services or other non-cable services in the city, bad debt, credits, refunds and deposits paid to subscribers, or any taxes, fees or assessments of general applicability collected by a grantee which are imposed directly on a subscriber and which are collected by a grantee for such governmental unit including any PEG capital fees. A franchise fee is not such a tax, fee or assessment. 
    Installation means the connection of a system from a distribution cable to the point of connection, including standard installations and custom installations. 
    Normal business hours has the meaning ascribed in the FCC's rules, 47 C.F.R. 76.309(c)(4). 
    Normal operating conditions has the meaning ascribed in the FCC's rules, 47 C.F.R. 76.309(c)(4). 
    PEG access facilities means public, educational, and governmental programming channels, or any equipment or facilities for use of such channels as required by a franchise. 
    Person has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 522(15). 
    Right-of-way or rights-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which the local government unit has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of local government units. 
    Right-of-way ordinance means an ordinance of general applicability adopted and uniformly applied as to similarly situated ROW occupants by the city establishing requirements regarding regulation, management and use of rights-of-way, including registration and permitting requirements. 
    Standard installation means any residential installation that can be completed using a drop of 125 feet or less. 
    Subscriber means any person who lawfully receives cable service via a system. 
    Telecommunications services shall have the meaning ascribed in 47 U.S.C. § 153(46). 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-29. - Franchises. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  No person may construct, operate, or maintain a cable system or provide cable service in the city unless and until such person is granted a franchise. All franchises must be granted pursuant to the provisions of this article. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, any franchises and this cable ordinance shall at all times be subject to, and without waiving, applicable law. 
(2)  Any franchise granted hereunder will authorize a grantee to deliver cable service and construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the rights-of-way in the city. 
(3)  All franchises shall be nonexclusive and city may grant additional franchises at any time. The city will not grant an additional franchise on terms and conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those in an existing franchise. The city may impose additional terms and conditions in any additional franchise. 
(4)  The city shall comply with subsection 16-41(d) of this article in the event an additional provider is legally authorized to provide cable service. 
(5)  This cable ordinance and franchises granted pursuant hereto are intended to comply with M.S.A. ch. 238. Any applicable requirement established by M.S.A. § 238.084 not expressly incorporated in this cable ordinance or a franchise shall be deemed incorporated by reference in the franchise as though fully set forth therein. 
(b)  Use of rights-of-way. 
(1)  Use of rights-of-way to operate a cable system and provide cable service must not be inconsistent with the terms and conditions by which such rights-of-way were created or dedicated. Use of rights-of-way is subject to all generally applicable legal requirements including any right-of-way ordinance enacted by the city and section 16-30 herein. 
(2)  Upon written request, the city shall have the right to review, subject to the confidentiality protections provided in section 16-36 herein, grantee's system location maps at a mutually agreed upon location. 
(c)  Tree trimming. Subject to applicable law, a grantee is authorized to trim any trees upon and overhanging the rights-of-way, alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with wires and cables of a system. 
(d)  Franchise term. Franchises will be granted for a term established in the franchise agreement. No franchise may be granted for a period exceeding 15 years from the date of acceptance by grantee. 
(e)  Regulation of cable service. Any franchise agreement adopted pursuant to this article will define the contractual rights and obligations of the city and grantee, provided however that a grantee remains subject to the lawful exercise of the city's police power, ordinance-making authority, and power of eminent domain. 
(f)  Initial franchise applications. 
(1)  Upon request or its own initiative, the city may initiate the cable franchise application process required by M.S.A. § 238.081. Any person desiring an initial franchise must file an application with the city. 
(2)  The city will establish an application fee in an amount to offset the costs of processing applications and awarding an initial franchise. Such application fees will not constitute a franchise fee. 
(3)  Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, city staff will prepare a report and recommendations to the city council regarding the application(s). 
(4)  A public hearing concerning applications will be held prior to rejection or acceptance of applications, and award of any initial franchises. 
(g)  Franchise renewal. Franchise renewals will be conducted in accordance with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-30. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Registration, permits and construction codes. 
(1)  Within 90 days of acceptance of an initial franchise, a grantee shall apply for any necessary governmental permits, licenses, certificates, and authorizations to construct, repair, replace, relocate, operate, maintain or reconstruct a system. A grantee must strictly adhere to all state and local laws and building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to location, construction, installation, operation or maintenance of the facilities used to provide cable service in the city. 
(b)  Repair of rights-of-way and property. 
(1)  Consistent with any generally applicable rights-of-way ordinance adopted by the city or applicable law if a city has not adopted a rights-of-way ordinance, any rights-of-way or other property disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of a cable system shall be promptly and fully restored by the grantee performing such work, at its expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to such work. 
(2)  If a grantee fails to promptly perform the restoration required herein, the city shall have the right, following reasonable written notice to grantee, to restore rights-of-way and other public property to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to the grantee's work. The city shall be fully reimbursed by the grantee for its actual costs relating to such restoration. 
(c)  Undergrounding of facilities. 
(1)  In all areas of the city where utility facilities are required to be placed underground, or where all other utility lines are underground, a grantee must construct and install system facilities underground. 
(2)  A grantee must bury new underground drops within a reasonable time period, subject to weather conditions. In the event the ground is frozen, a grantee will be permitted to delay burial until the ground is suitable for burial which in no event must be later than June 30. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-31. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-32. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  A grantee shall at all times keep and maintain the system in good condition, order, and repair so as to avoid endangering the life or property of any person; employ ordinary and reasonable care and common industry practices to avoid causing damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public, and; keep and maintain the system in accordance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations including the National Electric Safety Code. 
(b)  A grantee must install and maintain equipment and facilities in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, any right-of-way ordinance, and the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-33. - System design and extension provisions. 
(a)  System capacity and channels. At a minimum, any franchise granted hereunder shall describe the grantee's network in terms of the total system capacity such as the total number of analog and digital video channels that can be provided. 
(b)  Cable service availability. 
(1)  Each franchise will identify a required service area in which a grantee will be required to offer cable service to all dwellings, homes and businesses, subject to a reasonable density threshold. Any additional franchise will include a service area that is no more favorable or less burdensome than the service area in an existing franchise. 
(2)  Any franchise granted hereunder may establish requirements for the extension of the system and provision of cable service to areas that may be annexed by the city beyond the initially required service area. 
(3)  Cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which such group resides. 
(c)  Non-standard installations. A grantee must provide cable service to any person requesting other than a standard installation except that a grantee may charge for the incremental increase in material and labor costs incurred above the cost of making a standard installation. 
(d)  Technical standards. Any system offering cable service in the city must comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems pursuant to Title 47, Section 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time. 
(e)  System testing. 
(1)  A grantee shall perform all system testing required pursuant to the FCC's technical standards and requirements. 
(2)  Demand for special tests may be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or noncompliance. Such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy or unresolved complaints. The city shall arrange its request for such special testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee or to the subscribers caused by such testing. Before ordering such tests, grantee shall be afforded 30 days to correct problems or complaints upon which tests were ordered. The city shall meet with grantee prior to requiring special tests to discuss the need for such and, if possible, visually inspect those locations which are the focus of concern. If, after such meetings and inspections, city wishes to commence special tests and the 30 days have elapsed without correction of the matter in controversy or unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted by a qualified engineer mutually selected by city and grantee based on a mutually agreed upon scope of work and cost. The parties shall bear their respective costs for the testing, with the city bearing the cost of special testing unless such testing reveal that the source of the technical difficulty is within the grantee's reasonable control, in which case the cost of the testing must be borne by the grantee. 
(f)  FCC reports . The results of tests required to be filed by grantee with the FCC shall also be copied to city. 
(g)  Emergency alert system . A grantee shall comply with 47 U.S.C. 544(g) and all regulations issued pursuant thereto with respect to an Emergency Alert System (EAS). If a grantee provides an EAS, then the city shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the grantee's cable system in any manner that results in inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the cable system. The city shall hold the grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless from any claims or costs arising out of use of the EAS, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-34. - Consumer protection and customer service standards. 
(a)  Regulation of cable service rates. The city may regulate rates for the provision of cable service to the extent allowed under federal and state law(s). A grantee must file a list of current subscriber rates and charges with the city, which lists will be maintained on file with city and will be available for public inspection. For purposes of this section, the availability of this information on a grantee's website shall constitute compliance. A grantee shall comply with applicable law in providing the city and subscribers with notice of any change in a cable service rate or charges. 
(b)  Sales procedures. A grantee may not exercise deceptive sales procedures that violate state laws when marketing any of its cable services within city. A grantee may conduct marketing consistent with local ordinances and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(c)  Telephone inquiries and complaints . A grantee must maintain local, toll-free or collect call telephone access lines which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. A grantee must comply with the FCC's customer service standards, as amended, a current copy of which is attached hereto. 
(d)  Complaint and other service records. 
(1)  Upon written request by the city, and subject to a grantee's obligation to maintain the privacy of certain information, a grantee must prepare and maintain written records of all written complaints received and the resolution of such complaints for a period of three years, including the date of such resolution. 
(2)  Written complaint records for a period of three years must be on file at the office of a grantee. Upon written request by the city, a grantee must provide the city with a written summary of such complaints and their resolution and in a form mutually agreeable to the city and grantee. 
(3)  Upon written request by the city, a grantee must provide detailed compliance reports on a quarterly basis for a period of three years with respect to the objectively measurable service standards required in this section. A grantee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards contained in this section unless a historical record of complaints indicates a failure to comply. 
(e)  Subscriber contracts. A grantee must provide to the city upon request any standard form residential subscriber contract utilized. 
(f)  Video programming. All franchises will comply with 47 U.S.C. § 544(b), regarding the broad categories of video programming provided. Individual programming decisions may be made in the grantee's sole discretion. 
(g)  Billing and subscriber communications. 
(1)  A grantee shall comply with federal law regarding giving the city and subscribers prior notice of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel alignments. 
(2)  Bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
(h)  Refunds and credits. A grantee shall comply with applicable law regarding the issuance of refunds or credits. 
(i)  Additional customer service requirements. The city may adopt additional or modified customer service requirements to address subscriber concerns or complaints to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-35. - Community services. 
(a)  PEG access facilities. Franchises will establish obligations to provide PEG access facilities to meet the community's needs and interests. The city will operate, administer and manage PEG access programming and the city may delegate its PEG access authority and responsibilities to the commission. All franchises must contain equivalent PEG access obligations on any franchised provider of cable services. 
(b)  Service to public or educational institutions. Franchises will establish obligations for the provision of free or reduced cost cable services to identified public or educational institutions. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-36. - Administration provisions. 
(a)  Administration of franchise. The city will have continuing regulatory authority over cable systems, cable services, and franchise compliance. The city may delegate any and all regulatory authority to the commission. A grantee must fully cooperate with the commission in the exercise of regulatory authority delegated by the city. 
(b)  Franchise fee. 
(1)  A grantee must pay to the city a franchise fee in the amount established in the franchise agreement, provided that the city must impose identical franchise fee obligations (including the percentage and gross revenue definition) on all cable service providers in the city. 
(2)  Each franchise fee payment must be accompanied by a report certified by an authorized representative of the grantee, in form reasonably acceptable to city, detailing the computation of the payment. All amounts paid must be subject to audit and recomputation by the city for the statutorily allowed period applicable to assertion of contract claims, and acceptance of any payment must not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount. 
(3)  A grantee may designate that portion of a subscriber's bill attributable to the franchise fee as a separate line item on the bill. 
(c)  Access to records . 
(1)  The city may, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, and subject to the privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., inspect at a mutually convenient location any records of system operations maintained by a grantee that relate to a grantee's compliance with its franchise, including specifically grantee's gross revenue records. A grantee may identify and label documents as confidential trade secret in accordance with subsection 16-29(b) above. 
(2)  A grantee must prepare and furnish to the city such reports as city may reasonably request with respect to operation of the system and provision of cable services in the city. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-37. - Indemnification and insurance. 
(a)  Indemnification of the city. 
(1)  A grantee must indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents from and against any loss or damage to any real or personal property of any person, or for any injury to or death of any person, arising out of or in connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of a system or other facilities used by a grantee to deliver cable service. 
(2)  A grantee must indemnify, defend, and hold the city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, harmless from and against all lawsuits, claims, actions, liability, damages, costs, expenses or penalties incurred as a result of the award or enforcement of its franchise. 
(3)  A grantee shall not be required to provide indemnification or defense for any intentional misconduct, willful neglect or negligence by an indemnified party, for any enforcement action taken by the city against a grantee, for any claim based solely on the city's operation of PEG access facilities, delivery of PEG access programming, or EAS messages originated by the city. Subject to the limitations in M.S.A. ch. 466, the city shall indemnify, defend and hold a grantee harmless from any damage resulting from any intentional misconduct, willful neglect or negligence by the city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, in utilizing PEG access facilities or channels, delivering EAS messages originated by the city, or in connection with work performed on or adjacent to the system. 
(4)  With respect to each claim for indemnification: 
a.  The city must notify the grantee in writing of its duty under this section within ten days of receipt of any suit, claim or proceeding which gives rise to such duty; 
b.  The grantee must afford the city an opportunity to participate in any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any suit, claim or proceeding; and 
c.  The city must cooperate with reasonable requests of the grantee, at grantee's expense, in its participation in a suit, claim or proceeding. 
(b)  Insurance. 
(1)  A grantee must obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, in protection of the grantee, and the city, its officers, elected officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees for damages which may arise as a result of operation of the system or delivery of cable service. 
(2)  The policies of insurance must be in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death of any one person, and $2,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, $500,000.00 for property damage to any one person and $2,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one act or occurrence. 
(3)  The insurance policy must be maintained by grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each policy of insurance must contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of grantee or for other reasons, except after 30 days advance written notice have been provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-38. - Franchise transfer or abandonment. 
(a)  Abandonment of service . A grantee may not discontinue the provision of cable service without having first given three months written notice to the city. 
(b)  System removal after abandonment, termination or forfeiture . 
(1)  In the event of termination or forfeiture of the franchise or abandonment of the system, the city may require the grantee to remove all or any portion of its system from all rights-of-way and public property within the city; provided, however, that the grantee will not be required to remove its system to the extent it lawfully provides non-cable services over the system. 
(2)  If the grantee has failed to commence removal of its system, or such part thereof as was designated by the city, within 120 days after written demand for removal is given, or if the grantee has failed to complete such removal within 12 months after written demand for removal is given, the city may apply funds secured by the franchise toward removal. 
(c)  Sale or transfer of franchise . 
(1)  No sale or transfer of ownership of a grantee or fundamental corporate change in a grantee as defined in M.S.A. § 238.083, nor sale of transfer of a franchise, is permitted without city approval. Any sale or transfer of stock in a grantee creating a new controlling interest constitutes a sale or transfer of ownership. A controlling interest includes majority stock ownership or a lesser amount sufficient to confer actual working control in whatever manner exercised. City approval shall not be required where a grantee grants a security interest in its franchise or system to secure an indebtedness. 
(2)  A grantee must file a written request with the city prior to any transaction described above. The city will approve or deny a transfer request within 120 days of receipt of a written request. The city will not unreasonably withhold its approval. 
(3)  In no event will a transaction be approved unless any proposed new grantee becomes a signatory to, and assumes all rights and obligations under, the franchise. 
(4)  In the event a grantee has received a bona fide offer for purchase of its system, the city shall have the right to purchase the system for the same price and under equivalent conditions which the proposed assignee or transferee agreed to pay. The city will be deemed to have waived its right to purchase the system in the following circumstances: 
a.  The city does not notify the grantee in writing, within 60 days of notice, that it intends to exercise its right of purchase; or 
b.  The city approves the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-39. - Protection of individual rights. 
(a)  Discriminatory practices prohibited . No grantee may deny cable service or otherwise discriminate against citizens or businesses on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, status as to public assistance, affectional preference, or disability. 
(b)  Subscriber privacy. 
(1)  A grantee must comply with the subscriber privacy-related requirements of 47 U.S.C. § 551. 
(2)  No signals of a class IV channel may be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written authorization of the subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-40. - Unauthorized connections and modifications. 
(a)  Unauthorized connections or modifications prohibited. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person, without the express consent of the grantee, to make or possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of a grantee's system. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of a system for any purpose. 
(3)  Any person found guilty of violating this section may be fined not less than $20.00 and the costs of the action nor more than $500.00 and the costs of the action for each and every subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Sec. 16-41. - Enforcement of the cable ordinance or franchise. 
(a)  Violations or other occurrences giving rise to enforcement action . 
(1)  In order to take enforcement action pursuant to this article or a franchise, the city must provide the grantee with written notice of the violation or other occurrence giving rise to the city's action. 
(2)  The grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice to cure the violation or occurrence giving rise to the city's action. Alternatively, the grantee may, within 14 days of receipt of notice from the city, notify city in writing that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has in fact occurred. Such written notice by the grantee to the city shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by grantee and shall toll the running of the timeframes and the accrual of penalties hereunder until completion of the process and issuance of a decision under subsections 16-41(3)-(5) below. 
(3)  In the event a grantee does not timely cure to the city's satisfaction the violation or other occurrence giving rise to the city's action, or timely disputes whether a violation has occurred, the city will schedule a public hearing affording grantee due process. The city will endeavor to schedule the hearing for a date within 90 days of the initial violation notice. Notice of the hearing must be provided to the grantee. 
(4)  At the completion of the hearing, the city will issue written findings of fact and its final determination. 
(5)  In the event city determines that no violation has taken place, the city will rescind the notice of violation in writing. 
(b)  Franchise revocation. 
(1)  In addition to all other rights and remedies that the city possesses pursuant to law, equity and the terms of the franchise agreement, the city may revoke or terminate the franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in accordance with subsection 16-41(d) if the city determines that: 
a.  The grantee has violated any material requirement or provision of the cable ordinance or a franchise and has failed to timely cure; or 
b.  The grantee has attempted to evade any of the material provisions of the cable ordinance or a franchise; or 
c.  The grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon the city or a subscriber; or 
d.  The grantee has filed for bankruptcy. 
(2)  During any revocation proceeding and any appeal period, the franchise will remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires. 
(c)  Compliance with federal, state and local laws. The city and grantee will conform to federal and state laws and rules regarding cable service or the system as they become effective. 
(d)  Equal protection. The city acknowledges that under M.S.A. § 238.08, Subd. 1(b) it may only grant additional franchises to provide cable service within the city on terms and conditions no more favorable or less burdensome than those in any then-current franchise which pertain to: (1) the area served; (2) public, educational, or governmental access requirements; or (3) franchise fees. Additionally, and beyond the requirements of M.S.A. § 238.08, any additional franchises to provide cable service within the city shall not be granted on more favorable or less burdensome conditions than those in any then-current franchise issued pursuant to this article with regard to ROW access and responsibilities, complimentary service to public buildings, penalties and security, sale or transfer of ownership. 
(1)  If any other provider of cable services is lawfully authorized by the city to provide such services using facilities located wholly or partly in the rights-of-way of the city (additional provider(s)), the city shall, within 30 days of a written request from a current franchise holder, use best efforts to modify the current franchise holder's franchise on a mutually acceptable basis to ensure that the obligations imposed by this subsection 16-41(d) have been met. 
(2)  If the city fails to comply with this subsection 16-41(d) or the parties fail to reach agreement under subsection (a) above, a current franchise holder shall have the right to initiate an action in the state or federal district court for breach of contract or other appropriate claims and seek any and all appropriate relief, including specific performance. 
(3)  Nothing in this article shall impair the right of the city or a current franchise holder to seek other remedies available under law. 
(4)  In the event city initiates the franchising process pursuant to M.S.A. § 238.081, the city shall notify all current franchise holders in writing of its intent to initiate the franchising process prior to doing so. 
(5)  A current franchise holder shall have the right to operate its cable system in accordance with applicable state or federal law, as may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  Effective date. This cable ordinance is effective the day after its publication. 
(Ord. No. 411, 1-8-19) 
Chapter 18 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-26. - Adoption of state law. 
    M.S.A. §§ 12.01-12.57, as amended, insofar as it relates to municipalities, is adopted by reference as part of this article as fully as if set forth explicitly in this article. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 1, 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-27. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article or of any regulation adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions or conduct other than official acts of city officers or employees is guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, may be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 10, 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-28. - Prohibited illumination deemed nuisance; abatement. 
    Any illumination within the city contrary to the provisions of this article or any other ordinance pertaining to emergency management or of any regulation adopted thereunder or of any federal or state law, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance. Any regular or auxiliary law enforcement officer or any air-raid warden may abate such nuisance summarily or may take any other action necessary to enforce such provisions, including entry on private property and the use of whatever reasonable force is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 8(1), 4-15-75) 
Secs. 18-29-18-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-41. - Establishment of emergency management agency; director. 
    There is hereby created with the city government an emergency management agency, which shall be under the supervision and control of a director of emergency management (the "director"). The director shall be the city administrator who is appointed by the city council. In a civil emergency, he may be removed by the mayor summarily or suspended; at other times he may be removed by majority vote of the city council for cause after an opportunity to be heard. The director may be compensated at a rate to be determined by the city council and he shall be paid his necessary expenses. The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management agency, subject to the direction and control of the mayor. The emergency management agency shall be organized into such divisions and bureaus, consistent with state and local emergency management plans, as the director deems necessary to provide for the efficient performance of local emergency management functions during a civil emergency. The emergency management agency shall perform emergency management functions within the city and, in addition, shall conduct such functions outside the city as may be required pursuant to the provisions of M.S.A. §§ 12.01-12.57, or this article. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 2(1), 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-42. - Emergency management advisory committee. 
    There is hereby created within the emergency management agency an emergency management advisory committee (the "committee"). Members of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor to represent city departments and other groups concerned with emergency management. The mayor shall be chairman and the director shall be secretary of the committee. The committee shall advise the director and the city council on all matters pertaining to emergency management. Each member shall serve without compensation and shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 2(2), 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-43. - Powers and duties of emergency management director. 
(a)  The emergency management director, with the consent of the mayor, shall represent the city on any regional or state organization for emergency management. The director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions within or outside the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in a civil emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and he shall present such agreements to the council for its action. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency management plan and during a civil emergency it shall be the duty of the emergency management agency and emergency management forces to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements. Any mutual aid arrangement with a political subdivision of another state shall be subject to the approval of the governor. 
(b)  The emergency management director shall make such studies and surveys of the manpower, industries, resources and facilities of the city as he deems necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of a civil emergency. 
(c)  The emergency management director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for the emergency management of the city, and shall present such plan to the council for its approval. When the council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and all emergency management forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency management plan of the federal government and the state correlated with the emergency management plans of other political subdivisions within the state. 
(d)  In accordance with the state and city emergency management plan, the emergency management director shall institute such training programs and public information programs and shall take all other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency management forces in advance of actual disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the city emergency management plan in time of a civil emergency. He may, from time to time, conduct such practice air-raid alerts or other emergency management exercises as he may deem necessary. 
(e)  The emergency management director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the local emergency management agency and to the governor upon request. The head of each department and agency, in cooperation with and under the direction of the director, shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such emergency management activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of his department or agency. 
(f)  The emergency management director shall, in cooperation with existing city departments and agencies affected, organize, recruit and train air-raid wardens, auxiliary police, auxiliary firemen, emergency medical personnel, and any other personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency management plans of the city and the state. To the extent that such emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for civil emergencies, it shall be assigned to such department or agency for purposes of administration and command. The director may dismiss any emergency management volunteer at any time and require him to surrender any equipment and identification furnished by the city. 
(g)  Consistent with the emergency management plan, the emergency management director shall provide and equip emergency hospitals, casualty stations, ambulances, canteens, evacuation centers and other facilities or conveyances for the care of injured or homeless persons. 
(h)  The emergency management director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the governor with reference to emergency management. 
(i)  The emergency management director shall direct and coordinate the general operations of all local emergency management forces during a civil emergency in conformity with controlling regulations and instructions of state emergency management authorities. The heads of departments and agencies shall be governed by his orders in respect thereto. 
(j)  Consistent with the emergency management plan, the emergency management director shall provide and equip at some suitable place in the city a control center and, if required by the state emergency management plan, an auxiliary control center to be used during a civil emergency as headquarters for direction and coordination of emergency management forces. The director shall arrange for representation at the control center by municipal departments and agencies, public utilities and other agencies authorized by federal or state authority to carry on emergency management activities during a civil emergency. He shall arrange for the installation at the control center of necessary facilities for communication with and between heads of emergency management, divisions, the stations and operating units of municipal services and other agencies concerned with emergency management and for communication with other communities and control centers, within the surrounding area and with the federal and state agencies concerned. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3, 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-44. - Emergency management volunteers. 
(a)  Emergency management volunteers shall be called into service only in case of a civil emergency or a natural disaster for which the regular municipal forces are inadequate or for necessary training and preparation for such emergencies. All volunteers shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  Each emergency management volunteer shall be provided with such suitable insignia or other identification as may be required by the director. Such identification shall be in a form and style approved by the federal government. No volunteer shall exercise any authority over the persons or property of others without his identification. No person except an authorized volunteer shall use the identification of a volunteer or otherwise represent himself to be an authorized volunteer. 
(c)  No emergency management volunteer shall carry any firearm while on duty except on written order of the sheriff's department or the county sheriff's deputy assigned to the city or the mayor. 
(d)  Personnel procedures of the city applicable to regular employees shall not apply to volunteer emergency management workers but shall apply to paid employees of the emergency management agency. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 4, 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-45. - Emergency management account. 
    There is hereby established an account in the general fund of the city to be known as the emergency management account. Into this account shall be placed the proceeds of taxes levied for emergency management, money transferred from other funds, gifts and other revenues of the emergency management agency. From it shall be made expenditures for the operation and maintenance of the emergency management agency and other expenditures for emergency management. Regular accounting, disbursement, purchasing, budgeting and other financial procedures of the city shall apply to the emergency management account insofar as practicable; but budgeting requirements and other financial procedures shall not apply to expenditures from the account in any case when their application will prevent compliance with terms and conditions of a federal or state grant of money or property for emergency management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 6(1), 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-46. - Annual report. 
    The emergency management director shall, as soon as possible after the end of each fiscal year, prepare and present to the city council for the information of the council a comprehensive report of the activities of the emergency management agency during the year. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 6(2), 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-47. - Conformity and cooperation with federal and state authority. 
(a)  Every officer and agency of the city shall cooperate with federal and state authorities and with authorized agencies engaged in emergency management to the fullest possible extent consistent with the performance of their other duties. The provisions of this article and of all regulations made thereunder shall be subject to all applicable and controlling provisions of federal and state laws and of regulations and orders issued thereunder and shall be deemed to be suspended and inoperative so far as there is any conflict therewith. 
(b)  The mayor may appoint any qualified person holding a position in any agency created under federal or state authority for emergency management purposes as a special police officer of the city, with such police powers and duties within the city incident to the functions of his position, not exceeding those of a regular police officer of the city, as may be prescribed in the appointment. Every such special police officer shall be subject to the supervision and control of the county sheriff's deputy assigned to the city or the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 7, 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-48. - Participation in labor dispute or politics. 
    The emergency management agency shall not participate in any form of political activity nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a legitimate labor dispute. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 9, 4-15-75) 
Secs. 18-49-18-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-61. - "Emergency" defined. 
    When used in this division, the term "emergency" includes, in addition to the meaning given under state law, disasters caused by fire, flood, windstorm or other natural causes. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 5(1), 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-62. - Proclamation by mayor. 
    Whenever necessary to meet an emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the governor or the city council, the mayor may by proclamation promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulations, respecting: 
(1)  Protection against air raids; 
(2)  The sounding of air raid alarms; 
(3)  The conduct of persons and the use of property during alarms; 
(4)  The repair, maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services; 
(5)  Emergency health, fire and safety regulations, trial drills or practice periods required for preliminary training; and 
(6)  All other matters which are required to protect public safety, health and welfare in civil defense emergencies. 
No regulations governing observation of enemy aircraft, air attack, alarms, or illumination during air attacks shall be adopted or take effect unless approved by the state director of emergency management. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 5(2), 4-15-75) 
Sec. 18-63. - Requirements for proclamations; notice; modification or rescission. 
    Every proclamation of emergency regulations shall be in writing and signed by the mayor, shall be dated, shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the clerk-treasurer, where a copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of such regulation and its availability for inspection at the clerk-treasurer's office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city and at such other places in the affected area as the mayor shall designate in the proclamation. Thereupon, the regulation shall take effect immediately or at such later time as may be specified in the proclamation. By like proclamation the mayor may modify or rescind any such regulation. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 5(3), 4-15-75) 
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured housing, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Alarm and communication systems, M.S.A. § 326.2421 et seq. 

Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any equipment or device which emits an audible, visual or electronic signal upon the detection of a potential burglary, robbery, fire, medical emergency, trespass or property intrusion. The term "alarm system" does not include anti-theft or tampering alarms installed in any motor vehicle. 
    Alarm user means any person in control of any building, structure, facility or tract of land wherein or whereon an alarm system is used or maintained within the city. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety personnel when a situation requiring a response does not exist, and which is caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the owner or lessee of the alarm system or of his employees or agents. False alarms do not include alarms caused by climatic conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or alarm user. 
    Public safety communications center means the central facility used to receive emergency requests for public safety services and general information from the public to be dispatched to public safety personnel. 
    Public safety personnel means all personnel employed by any law enforcement agency, and any firefighting personnel and any ambulance personnel. 
    Sheriff means the county sheriff or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 3, 6-15-82) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-27. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public safety services which serve the city from misuse and to provide for the maximum possible service to alarm users. This article provides regulation for the use of burglary, robbery, fire and medical alarms and establishes a system of administration and an alarm user's fee. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 2, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-28. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall locate, install, construct, alter, repair, use or maintain any alarm system within the city except in full compliance with this article and the standards adopted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 4.01, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-29. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article is guilty of a violation, in addition to being subject to the alarm user's fees imposed by this article. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  Injunctive relief. In the event of a violation or a threat of violation of this article, the city may institute appropriate action or proceedings, including requesting injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation or threatened violation. 
(c)  Civil action. If a person fails to comply with the provisions of this article, the city may recover costs, damages or alarm user fees in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Governmental services lien. In addition to the remedies specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, but in lieu of the remedy specified in subsection (c), the city may certify any unpaid alarm user fees to the county auditor or county finance director as a governmental services lien for collection with the real property taxes imposed on the real property upon which the alarm system is or was located. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 7, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-30. - Registration. 
(a)  All persons using or maintaining any alarm system within the city shall register such alarm system with the sheriff, utilizing registration forms to be furnished by the sheriff, no later than the 30th day after the installation of such alarm system. 
(b)  Any alteration or modification of any previously registered alarm system shall be registered with the sheriff, utilizing registration forms to be furnished by the sheriff, within 30 days of the commencement of such alteration or modification. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 4.03, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-31. - User to respond. 
    If in the judgment of public safety personnel at the scene of an alarm, it is determined that the alarm user should appear at the location of any alarm for the purpose of admitting public safety personnel to the subject premises to investigate any alarm system signal, or for the purposes of deactivating any alarm system signal, or for the purpose of identifying third parties found on the subject premises during the investigation of any alarm system signal, such alarm user shall appear immediately if so requested by the sheriff. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 6.01, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-32. - Audible alarms. 
    All audible alarms shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Every person maintaining an alarm system with an audible alarm signal shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of a person to be notified to render repairs or service to such alarm system during any hour of the day or night upon activation of such alarm system. Such notice shall be posted at the main entrance to such premises or near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building. 
(2)  Alarm systems with audible alarm signals that sound like police or fire sirens are prohibited. 
(3)  All alarm systems with audible alarm signals, except for fire alarms, shall have an automatic shutoff which will silence the audible alarm signal within a period not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 4.02, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-33. - In-house annunciation panel. 
    Financial institutions having an alarm system with a robbery signal feature shall have an on-premises annunciator panel providing specific annunciation of the sensors at a private monitoring location on such premises. When in the judgment of the sheriff no such on-premises monitoring location is feasible, the requirements of this section may be waived by the sheriff. All alarm systems installed in financial institutions after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall have such annunciator panels when installed. All alarm systems currently used by financial institutions shall have the annunciator panels installed within one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 4.04, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-34. - Multiple function alarm systems. 
    Alarm systems that have more than one alarm signal function (burglary, fire, etc.) must report specifically which of the functions has been violated when reporting to the public safety communications center for the purpose of dispatching public safety personnel to the site of the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 4.05, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-35. - Communications center; automatic dialing device prohibited. 
    No alarm system shall connect directly to the public safety communications center except financial institutions and/or public buildings. All other alarms must report to the public safety communications center in some other manner. No automatic telephone dialing device shall be allowed to dial direct or be programmed so that it dials directly into the public safety communications center. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 4.06, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-36. - User fees. 
(a)  Imposed. An alarm user fee is hereby imposed upon any alarm user from whose alarm system emanates more than three false alarms within any 12 consecutive month period. The fees payable under this section may be amended from time to time by council action. The fee schedule is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Public buildings. All federal, state, county and/or municipal buildings and all public schools shall be exempt from the alarm user's fee. 
(2)  New alarm systems. All newly installed alarm systems are hereby granted a 30-day probationary period, commencing on the date of first operational use thereof, during which period false alarms will not be counted for the purpose of computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by this article. 
(3)  Alterations to existing alarm systems. All alarm systems which are altered by the addition of any new alarm feature are hereby granted a 15-day probationary period, commencing on the date of first operational use of such new feature, during which period false alarms will not be counted for the purpose of computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by this article. 
(c)  Notice, payment and disposition of alarm user fees. Subsequent to any false alarm, the sheriff shall notify the affected alarm user in writing of the date of such false alarm, the apparent reason therefor, and the alarm user fee imposed pursuant to this article. It shall be the duty of each alarm user to pay all alarm user fees imposed by this article to the sheriff within 30 days of the date of mailing of the sheriff's fee statement specifying the amount of such alarm user fees. For the purpose of mailing the sheriff's fee statement under this section, such statement shall be mailed to the affected alarm user at his address shown on the registration form required by section 22-30. 
(d)  Use of collected fees. One-half of all alarm user fees collected by the sheriff shall be remitted to the city to defray its administrative and prosecution costs incurred in connection with the enforcement of this article. The other half of such alarm user fees shall be retained by the sheriff to defray his administrative costs incurred in enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 5, 6-15-82; Ord. No. 389, 12-8-15) 
Sec. 22-37. - Remedial action by user. 
    If an alarm user has had more than three false alarms in a 12-month period, such alarm user, upon the written request of the sheriff, shall be required to submit in written form a description of any steps being taken to remedy any problems with false alarms emanating from the alarm user's location. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 6.02, 6-15-82) 
Sec. 22-38. - Administrative rules and regulations. 
    The sheriff shall promulgate such rules and regulations as necessary for the implementation and/or administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 6.03, 6-15-82) 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 27; manufactured housing, ch. 30; parks and recreation, ch. 38; planning, ch. 46.5; solid waste, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 52; utilities, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Dogs or cats running at large or found without a license declared to be a nuisance, § 10-53. 
State Law reference- Local public health act, M.S.A. § 145A.01 et seq.; nuisances, M.S.A. § 561.01 et seq. 

Sec. 26-26. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council has determined that the health, safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public is threatened by certain public nuisances on property within the city limits. It is declared to be the intention of the council to abate these nuisances, and this article is enacted for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 26-27. - Violation of article. 
    Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 10, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 26-28. - Conditions or acts constituting nuisances generally. 
    The following acts or intentional failures to perform a legal duty are public nuisances: 
(1)  Maintaining or permitting a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable numbers of members of the public. 
(2)  Interference with or obstruction of or endangering passage on any public highway or right-of-way or waters used by the public. 
(3)  Any other act or omission declared by law or this article to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 2, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 26-29. - Public nuisances affecting health. 
    The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public health: 
(1)  All diseased animals running at large. 
(2)  Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Garbage not stored in rodent-free or flytight containers, or garbage stored so as to emit foul or disagreeable odors, or garbage stored so as to constitute a hazard to public health. 
(4)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in unreasonable quantities. 
(5)  Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris. 
(6)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage, waste or other substance. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 3, 9-10-91) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; weeds and other harmful vegetation, § 26-101 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 50; sanitary sewer regulations, § 58-26 et seq. 
Sec. 26-30. - Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. 
    The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety: 
(1)  All dirt, rubbish, snow or ice not removed from public sidewalks 12 hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall. 
(2)  All trees, hedges, signs, fences or other obstructions which prevent people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection. 
(3)  All wires, limbs of trees, shrubs, hedges, signage or awnings which are deteriorated or so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles. 
(4)  Operation of construction equipment or machinery emitting noise onto adjacent property prior to 6:30 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(5)  All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations, including machinery operated without a proper muffler. 
(6)  Use of illegal fireworks or other pyrotechnic devices without permits required by law. 
(7)  Accumulation of junk, construction materials not on a temporary job site, unused furniture, appliances, household items, machinery, automobile bodies or parts, or any other material that may become harborage for rats, snakes or vermin, or that creates a visual blight, or which may be conducive to fire, or that endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(8)  Barbed wire or electric fencing which is not being used for agricultural or commercial use, and not marked with reflectorized devices or proper signage. 
(9)  Any use of property abutting a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes a crowd of people to gather and loiter, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk. 
(10)  All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private property as to attract the public. 
(11)  Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties. 
(12)  Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such other condition as to constitute a hazard to any person coming on the premises where it is located. 
(13)  Obstruction of the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash or other materials. 
(14)  The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over such substance. 
(15)  Impermissible animal noise. No person owning, operating, having charge of, or occupying any building or premises shall keep or allow to be kept any animal which shall, by any noise, unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of any person in the vicinity. The phrase "unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet" shall include, but is not limited to, the creation of any noise by any animal which can be heard by any person, including a law enforcement officer or animal control officer, from a location outside of the building or premises where the animal is being kept and which animal noise occurs repeatedly over at least a five-minute period of time with one minute or less lapse of time between each animal noise during the five-minute period. 
(16)  Repair of motor vehicles or tires on a public right-of-way or public property, excepting only emergency repair when it will not unduly impede or interfere with traffic. 
(17)  The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property. 
(18)  Radio aerials or television antennas erected or maintained in a dangerous manner. 
(19)  All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or property of anyone. 
(20)  Structures. 
a.  Unfit structure. The structure or part of any structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
b.  Vacant structure. Any vacant dwelling, garage, or other outbuilding that is not kept securely locked, or its windows are not glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals. 
c.  Hazardous building. "Hazardous building" shall be defined as any home, shop, barn, building, structure or other improvement to real estate that would constitute a fire hazard or hazard to public safety or health by which reason of its: 
1.  Defective construction, 
2.  Deterioration, 
3.  Dilapidation, 
4.  Partial or complete destruction, 
5.  Condition constituting a fire menace, 
6.  Violation of fire regulations, 
7.  Violation of State Building Code, 
8.  Unsafe or unsanitary condition, 
9.  Unlawful or improper use, 
10.  Instability rendering it likely to fall, 
11.  Emission of obnoxious fumes and odors, constitutes a present danger and peril to life, limb or property, 
12.  Any other structure that would be considered hazardous under M.S.A. ch. 463. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 1, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 186, § 4, 9-10-91; Ord. No. 359, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 26-56 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned vehicles, § 26-66 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 
Sec. 26-31. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Duties of city officers. The city administrator or other officer as designated by the city council and all law enforcement officers employed or contracted by the city shall enforce the provisions of this article relating to nuisances. Such officers shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. 
(b)  Abatement of nuisances under this chapter shall be handled as provided for in this chapter. In addition, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. All subsequent offenses shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 5, 9-10-91; Ord. No. 359, § 2, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 26-32. - General abatement procedures. 
(a)  Service of notice. Unless otherwise required, any one or more of the following methods of service shall be adequate: 
(1)  By personal service; or 
(2)  By mail, unless it is a written order which gives three days or less for the completion of any act, notice shall also be provided per section (1) or (3); or 
(3)  If the appropriate party or address cannot be determined after reasonable effort, by posting a copy of the order in a conspicuous place on the property. 
    If a mailed order or notice is returned by the United States Postal Service, a good faith effort shall be made to determine the correct address, unless the order or notice orders abatement and that abatement has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 2, 6-14-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 359, § 2, adopted June 14, 2011, in effect repealed former §§ 26-32-26-35, and enacted a new §§ 26-32-26-36 as set out herein. The former §§ 26-32-26-35 pertained to abatement notices; emergency procedure; summary enforcement; immediate abatement and recovery of costs, respectively and derived from Ord. No. 139, adopted February 15, 1983 and Ord. No. 186, adopted September 10, 1991. 
Sec. 26-33. - Abatement procedure. 
    Unless the nuisance is subject to special procedures described in state law or elsewhere in this Code, in which case those procedures shall be followed, the city may abate a nuisance by the procedure described below: 
(1)  Order. The enforcement officer or his or her authorized representative shall serve a written notice to the owner of the premises at such address as shown on the records of Carver County. The notice shall contain the following: 
a.  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
b.  A description and location of the nuisance and the remedial action required to abate the nuisance; 
c.  The abatement deadline to be determined by the enforcement officer to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public; 
d.  A statement that the order may be appealed and a hearing before the city council obtained by filing a written request with the city administrator before the abatement deadline designated in the order; and 
e.  A statement that if the remedial action is not taken nor a request for a public hearing filed with the city administrator within the time specified, the city shall abate the nuisance and charge all costs incurred therein against the real estate as a special assessment to be collected in the same manner as property taxes. 
(2)  Setting a hearing date. In the event that an appeal is filed with the city administrator, the city council shall schedule the matter for a public hearing at the next scheduled city council meeting. 
(3)  Notice. The enforcement officer shall provide 24 hours prior written notice of the date, time, place, and subject of the hearing either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be served by posting it on the premises and mailing a copy of the notice to the owner of the premises and at such address as shown on the records of Carver County. 
(4)  Hearing. At the time of the public hearing, the city council shall hear from the enforcement officer, his or her authorized representative(s), and any other parties who wish to be heard. After the hearing, the city council may confirm or modify the order of the enforcement officer. The council may, in the form of a resolution, declare there exists upon privately owned lands and premises a public nuisance and shall in the resolution, fix a time within which the nuisance shall be abated and shall provide that if corrective action is not taken within the time specified, the city may abate the nuisance. The city administrator or his or her designee shall mail a copy of this resolution to the same parties required to be notified in this section. 
(5)  City abatement. If the remedial action is not taken nor an appeal filed within the time specified, the city may abate the nuisance and the costs thereof shall be assessed against the premises in the manner provided by law for levying and collection of other special assessments 
(Ord. No. 359, § 2, 6-14-11) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following section 26-32. 
Sec. 26-34. - Substantial abatement procedure. 
(a)  When the enforcement officer or an authorized representative(s) determines that a nuisance exists on a property and the abatement requires demolition of a building other than a structure accessory to a residential building, except in the case of an emergency as provided for in section 26-35, the city shall abate the nuisance by the procedure described above with the addition of the foregoing: 
(b)  Notice. Written notice of the time, date, place and subject of the hearing shall be given as set forth in the section. 
(1)  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city administrator shall mail a notice to all property owners of record within 300 feet of the property in violation of the Code provision. 
(2)  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city administrator shall notify the owner and all interested parties by personal service of the notice upon the owner or any duly authorized representative. If, after reasonable effort personal service cannot be made, either of the following methods of notice shall be considered adequate: 
a.  Confirmed mail service which shall be either certified mail with signs receipt returned or first class mail confirmed by written response; 
b.  Mailing the notice to the last known address and publishing the notice once a week for two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the building or property. 
c.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city administrator shall mail a notice to any responsible party known to the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 2, 6-14-11) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following section 26-32. 
Sec. 26-35. - Emergency abatement procedure. 
    When the enforcement officer and an authorized representative determines that a nuisance exists on a property and the nuisance constitutes an immediate danger or hazard which if not immediately abated shall endanger the health or safety of the public and there shall not exist sufficient time to follow the procedures of sections 26-33 or 26-34, the city may abate the nuisance by the procedure described below: 
(1)  Order by mayor. The city shall order emergency abatement by an administrative order to be signed by the mayor. A good faith effort shall be made to inform the owner that the action is being taken. 
(2)  Notice of the abatement. Following an emergency abatement, as soon as the costs incurred are known, the enforcement officer shall serve written notice upon the owner. The notice shall contain: 
a.  A description of the nuisance; 
b.  The action taken by the city; 
c.  The reasons for immediate action; 
d.  The costs incurred in abating the nuisance and a statement that these costs may be charged as a special assessment against the property and collected in the same manner as property taxes; and 
e.  A statement that the owner may obtain a hearing before the city council to review the actions taken by the city by filing a written request with the city administrator within ten working days of the date of the notice. 
(3)  Setting hearing date. In the event that the owner files a request for a review of the action with the city administrator, the city council shall as soon as possible fix a date for a public hearing. 
(4)  Notice. The city administrator shall notify the owner of the date, time, place, and subject of the hearing. 
(5)  Hearing. At the time of the hearing, the city council shall hear from the enforcement officer, any authorized representative(s) and any other parties who wish to be heard. After the hearing, the city council may adopt a resolution levying an assessment for all or a portion of the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 2, 6-14-11) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following section 26-32. 
Sec. 26-36. - Recovery of costs. 
(a)  Personal liability. The owner of the premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative and legal costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the city shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the clerk-treasurer. The city may recover by civil action against the owner and/or the person who committed or maintained the nuisance for all costs and expenditures, including attorney's fees and a civil penalty, incurred by the city in abating or enjoining the nuisance or the city may assess such costs against the property as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Assessment. If the city is not fully reimbursed for all of its reasonable costs incurred in the abatement or enjoinment of the nuisance or enforcement of this article, all such unpaid costs, charges and fees may be assessed against each lot or parcel of property to which such costs, charges and fees are attributable. The city council may direct that the costs, charges and fees be certified to the county auditor for collection along with the current real estate taxes for the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding five years, as the council may determine in each case. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 2, 6-14-11) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following section 26-32. 
Secs. 26-37-26-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Accumulation of junk, construction material, automobile parts and bodies, declared public nuisances, § 26-30. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-56-26-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 204, §§ 1-15, adopted Jan. 23, 1996, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 26-66-26-77, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 108, §§ 1-12, adopted Feb. 6, 1979. 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, M.S.A. § 168B.01 et seq. 

Sec. 26-66. - Declaration of purpose and public nuisance. 
    The existence, accumulation, and storage of abandoned, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, or inoperative vehicles constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city in that such vehicles can invite vandalism, create traffic hazards, harbor noxious diseases, furnish shelter and breeding places for vermin, constitute an attractive nuisance and present physical dangers to the safety and well-being of children and others. The accumulation and outside storage of such vehicles create an unsightly condition and constitute a blight on the landscape and a detriment to the environment and tend to reduce the value of private property. Therefore, the accumulation and storage of such vehicles on public or private property is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as provided in this division or as provided under any other ordinance of the city or by the laws of the state. It is the intention of this division to prevent, reduce or eliminate the abandonment and improper storage of vehicles as defined in this division. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 1, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means a vehicle: 
(1)  Not properly or currently licensed; 
(2)  Which is in an inoperable condition, including vehicles with pioneer, classic car, collector or street rod license plates; 
(3)  Lacking vital component parts including vehicles with pioneer, classic car, collector or street rod license plates; 
(4)  Which has remained on public property for a period of more than 48 hours; 
(5)  Which has remained on private property for a period of more than 48 hours without the consent of the person in control of such property; 
(6)  To which the last registered owner of record has relinquished dominion of waived all rights to possession; or 
(7)  Voluntarily surrendered by the owner and accepted by the city. 
    City means the City of Watertown. 
    Inoperative vehicle means any vehicle which cannot be driven or propelled under its own power in its existing condition or which cannot be driven or propelled under its own power in a safe manner because of its wrecked, junked or partially dismantled condition. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
    Public property means any street, alley, parking lot, right-of-way, or other public property or facility. 
    Sheriff's department means the Carver County Sheriff's Department. 
    Vehicle means any machine as defined under M.S.A. §§ 168.11 or 169.01, including automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles and other self-propelled machinery. 
    Vital component parts means those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 2, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-68. - Exceptions. 
    A vehicle shall not be considered an abandoned vehicle as defined in this division if the vehicle is kept: 
(1)  Completely enclosed within a building; 
(2)  On the premises of a vehicle repair business which is maintained and licensed in accordance with state law and conforms with this Code. The vehicle must be actively in the process of repair and must be maintained in an area screened from public view by an opaque fence at least six feet high; or 
(3)  In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained or authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 3, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-69. - Parking and storage prohibited. 
    No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing or leaving of an abandoned vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any property, public or private, within the city for a period of more than 48 hours. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 4, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-70. - Prohibition on city streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to abandon a vehicle in the right-of-way of highways, roads and streets within the city. No person shall park or leave any vehicle in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperative condition in a right-of-way of any street, provided that a reasonable time, not to exceed 24 hours from the time of disability, is permitted for the removal or servicing of a disabled vehicle in an emergency caused by an accident or sudden breakdown of the vehicle. However, this shall not prohibit the city or sheriff's department from immediately removing a vehicle which is blocking, hindering or otherwise endangering traffic. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 5, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-71. - Failure to remove abandoned or inoperative vehicle. 
    Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private property without the consent of the person in control of such property, or any person who fails, neglects or refuses to remove the abandoned, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperative vehicle or to house such vehicle and abate such nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a violation. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 6, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-72. - Removal and impoundment. 
    If the registered owner of any vehicle which is in violation of this division, or if the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property upon which such vehicle is located, shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove or house such vehicle in accordance with this division, the city or the sheriff's department may remove, take into custody, and impound such vehicle and dispose of such vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 7, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-73. - Entry upon private property for removal or abatement. 
    Any person, at the direction of an authorized representative of the city or the sheriff's department, is hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 8, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-74. - Immediate sale. 
    When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in this state or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction pursuant to section 26-77, and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation, or title provisions of sections 26-75 and 26-76. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 9, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-75. - Notice. 
(a)  When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the provisions of section 26-74, the city or sheriff's department shall give notice of the taking within ten days. The notice shall (1) set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle if such information can be reasonably obtained and the place where the vehicle is being held, (2) inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under section 26-76, and (3) state that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the sale of the vehicle and contents at a public auction pursuant to section 26-77. 
(b)  The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was abandoned. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 10, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-76. - Right to reclaim. 
(a)  The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned motor vehicle entitled to notice shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the city or sheriff's department upon payment of all tickets, towing, preservation, storage, and administration charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the date of the notice required by section 26-75. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of the state, or the right of a lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, "garagekeeper" is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 11, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-77. - Public sale. 
(a)  An abandoned vehicle and its contents taken into custody and not reclaimed under section 26-76 shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale ten days following published notice thereof in the legal newspaper of the city. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles, which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check. 
(b)  From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for all costs and expenses incurred in the removal and disposal of the vehicle including towing, preservation, storage, notices, publication, administration costs and legal fees. Any proceeds remaining from a sale shall be held for the owner of a vehicle or entitled lienholder for a period of 90 days, and if not claimed shall thereafter be deposited in the city treasury. 
(c)  The city shall have the right under this division to bid on any abandoned or inoperative vehicle and its contents sold at public auction or, in the event that no bids are received, to claim title to any such vehicle and contents. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 12, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-78. - Assessments. 
    Any costs or expenses incurred in the removal and disposal of an abandoned vehicle pursuant to this division and not fully recovered or paid may be assessed against the real property of the property owner on which the violation occurred. Such assessment shall be made according to law and filed with the county auditor for collection with the following year's real estate taxes. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 13, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 26-79. - Violation. 
    Any person violating any provision of this division shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13 of this Code. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 204, § 14, 1-23-96) 
Secs. 26-80-26-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEEDS AND OTHER HARMFUL VEGETATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Public nuisances affecting health, § 26-29. 

Sec. 26-101. - Cutting and removal of grass, weeds and other poisonous, noxious or harmful vegetation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant, having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or land or any part thereof in the city to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to such lot or land between the property line and the curb or for 15 feet outside the property line if there is no curb, or up to the middle of an unimproved alley or street, any growth of weeds, grass or brush to a greater height than eight inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. It shall also be unlawful for any such person to cause, permit or maintain poison ivy, ragweed, noxious or other poisonous plants, or plants detrimental to health, to grow or exist on any such lot or land in the city. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 1, 7-2-85) 
Sec. 26-102. - Duty of owner, lessee or occupant. 
    It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or land in the city to remove or cause to be removed all such weeds, grass, brush or other poisonous, noxious or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of section 26-101; provided that, except for poisonous, noxious or harmful vegetation, if the cutting of weeds, grass or other vegetation has been and will be undertaken for agriculturally related purposes, the cutting of such vegetation may be done at least once every 35 days between May 1 and October 1 and shall be deemed to be in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 2, 7-2-85) 
Sec. 26-103. - Removal by city; collection of costs. 
    If the provisions of sections 26-101 and 26-102 are not complied with, the zoning administrator shall serve written notice upon the owner, lessee or occupant or any person having the care or control of any such lot or land to comply with the provisions of this article. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to cut and remove or to cause to be cut and removed such weeds, grass, brush or other poisonous, noxious or harmful vegetation within seven days after receipt of such notice, or if no person can be found in the city who either is or claims to be the owner of such lot or land, or who either represents or claims to represent such owner, the clerk-treasurer shall cause such weeds, grass, brush and other poisonous, noxious or harmful vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed and the cost of inspection and such cutting and removal, plus other additional costs in connection therewith, shall be certified by the clerk-treasurer to the county auditor and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the property on which such weeds, grass, brush and other poisonous, noxious or harmful vegetation were located and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 3, 7-2-85) 
Sec. 26-104. - Violation of article; penalty. 
    Any person who shall neglect to cut and remove weeds, grass, brush or other poisonous, noxious, or harmful vegetation as directed in this article, or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice provided in this article, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or who shall resist or obstruct the clerk-treasurer or the city's employees in the cutting and removal of weeds, grass, brush and other poisonous, noxious or harmful vegetation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 4, 7-2-85) 
Secs. 26-105-26-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 26-121. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to regulate the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and shrubs in the city by implementing the following: 
(1)  Establishing a shade tree board which is the agency responsible for prescribing regulations relating to the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and shrubs in public places; 
(2)  Providing for the issuance of permits for the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and shrubs in public places; and 
(3)  Providing for the pruning and removal of trees on public property which endanger public safety. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 1, 9-29-94) 
Sec. 26-122. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
    City shall mean the City of Watertown, County of Carver, State of Minnesota. 
    City forester shall mean the city planner, or other qualified designated official of the city. The city forester will be assigned to carry out the enforcement of this article. 
    Forestry department shall mean the department of planning and zoning. 
    Large trees shall mean those attaining a height of 45 feet or more. 
    Medium trees shall mean those attaining a height of 30 feet to 45 feet. 
    Park shall include all city parks having individual names. 
    Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Principal thoroughfare shall mean any street upon which trucks are not permitted. 
    Property line shall mean the outer edge of a street or highway right-of-way. This area includes the area between the curb and the platted lot line. 
    Property owner shall mean the person owning such property as shown by the County Auditor's Plat of Carver County, State of Minnesota. 
    Public place shall include all other grounds owned by the city. 
    Public trees shall include all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any street or any public areas where otherwise indicated. 
    Small trees shall mean those attaining a height of 20 to 30 feet. 
    Street or highway shall mean the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    Treelawn shall mean that part of a street or highway, not covered by a sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line right-of-way, and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 3, 9-29-94) 
Sec. 26-123. - Tree board. 
(a)  Creation and establishment. There is hereby created and established a city tree board, which shall consist of the parks and recreation commission. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. The duties of the city tree board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To study the problems and determine the needs of the city, in connection with its tree planting program; 
(2)  To recommend to the city council the type and kind of trees to be planted upon such municipal streets or in parks as is designated; 
(3)  To assist the city council and the citizens of the city in the dissemination of news and information regarding the selection, planting, preservation and maintenance of trees, whether the same is on private or public property, and to make such recommendations from time to time to the city council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the municipality. 
(4)  To provide regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees insofar as it relates to the municipality may be discussed by the members of the city tree board, officers and personnel of the municipality and its several divisions, and all others interested in the city tree program. 
(c)  Operation. The board shall operate within the rules set forth by the resolution establishing the parks and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 200, §§ 4-6, 9-29-94) 
Sec. 26-124. - City forester. 
(a)  Appointment. The city forester shall be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Authority. The authority of the city forester shall be in accordance with the city forester job description. 
(Ord. No. 200, §§ 7, 8, 9-29-94) 
Sec. 26-125. - Permits required. 
(a)  Planting maintenance or removal. No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground, or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or municipal-owned property without first obtaining a permit from the city forester or otherwise specified municipal authority. 
(b)  Planting. 
(1)  Application data. The application required herein shall state the number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information as the city forester shall find reasonably necessary to determine whether a permit should be issued. 
(2)  Improper planting. Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the city forester to remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of assessments. 
(c)  Maintenance; application data. The application required herein shall state the number and kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned, protected, or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of the material to be applied; and other information as the city forester shall find necessary to determine whether a permit should be issued. 
(d)  Removal, replanting and replacement. No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason without first filing an application and obtaining a permit from the city forester, and without replacing the removed tree or trees. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed from private property and 50 percent of the removal cost of all boulevard trees. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 9, 9-29-94) 
Sec. 26-126. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, remove, or perform any other arborcultural practices as decided necessary within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. No other planting may be done without consent of the city forester. 
(b)  The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. The tree board shall notify affected property owners of removal or trimming to be done and give the property owner the option to complete the work by contract with a city-approved tree contractor. Under certain conditions (i.e., emergency situations), the city may complete the work without prior notification to the property owner. 
(c)  Every tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall be pruned so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Dead, diseased or dangerous trees, broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public shall be removed. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(d)  The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion of 12 feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares which shall have a clearance of 16 feet. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 10, 9-29-94) 
Sec. 26-127. - Abuse or mutilation of public trees. 
(a)  Unless specifically authorized by the city forester, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree, allow an gaseous liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(b)  It shall be an unlawful practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property without authorization from the city forester. 
(c)  Topping can be defined as severe cutting back of a branch to a stub. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 11, 9-29-94) 
Sec. 26-128. - Protection of trees. 
    A tree preservation plan is to be submitted by all developers and/or builders in accordance with Ordinance No. 183, regulating subdivisions in the city. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 12, 9-29-94) 
Sec. 26-129. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 13, 9-29-94) 
Secs. 26-130-26-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RECREATIONAL FIRES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 236, § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2002, set out provisions pertaining to recreational fires intended for use as § 26-130. To reserve room for expansion of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been redesignated as § 26-151. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 27. 

Sec. 26-151. - Recreational fires permitted. 
    Recreational fires within the City of Watertown shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 
(1)  Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of any building, structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a building or structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
(2)  Recreational fires shall be conducted within a fire pit or surrounded completely by noncombustible and non-smoke or odor producing material such as rock, cement, brick, tile, or metal. 
(3)  Recreational fires shall be conducted using only wood or charcoal. No rubbish, yard waste, or construction debris shall be burned. 
(4)  Recreational fires shall not exceed three feet in diameter or three feet in height. 
(5)  Recreational fires shall not last longer than 12 consecutive hours. 
(6)  Fire extinguishing equipment such as a fire extinguisher, garden hose connected to a water supply, shovel, or water buckets shall be readily available for use at a recreational fire. 
(7)  Recreational fires shall be constantly attended by a person knowledgeable in the use of fire extinguishing equipment. An attendant shall supervise a recreational fire until the fire has been extinguished. 
(8)  Any officer of the Watertown Fire Department, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or Carver County Deputy Sheriff is authorized to require that recreational fires be immediately discontinued if such fires are determined to constitute a hazardous situation or the requirements of this section are not followed. 
(9)  Recreational fires are not permitted when the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or fire chief has declared a burning ban or air quality alert. 
(Ord. No. 236, § 1, 10-8-02) 
Secs. 26-152-26-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NOISE 

Sec. 26-176. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Watertown or any representative of the department of building, planning, and public works or any other representative of the city as designated by the city administrator or city council. 
    Dynamic braking device means any device, primarily used on trucks, for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. Also commonly referred to as Jacobs brakes, Jake brakes, engine brakes, or compression brakes. 
    L10 level means the noise level, expressed in decibels (dBA), which is exceeded ten percent of the time within a one hour period, as measured by test procedures approved by the city using a sound level meter having characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
    L50 level means the noise level, expressed in decibels (dBA), which is exceeded 50 percent of the time within a one hour period, as measured by test procedures approved by the city using a sound level meter having characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
    NAC means noise area classification, based upon the land use activity at the location of the receiver and determines the noise standards that are applicable to the particular land use activity. 
    Noise means any sound not occurring in the natural environment, which shall include, but is not limited to, sounds produced by persons, aircraft, highways, motor vehicles, and/or emanating from residential, commercial, and industrial sources. 
    Noise pollution means the existence or combination of noises in such a quantity and/or at such levels, or of such nature or duration, that under these conditions could be potentially injurious or hazardous to human health, safety, welfare, or property, and which interferes with the enjoyment of life or property. 
    Obscene noise means any noise that in the opinion of the city is excessively and exceptionally injurious and detrimental to the public due to language used, manner of communication or the time of day. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee, association, the state and its agencies and subdivisions, or any body of persons whether incorporated or not and, with respect to acts prohibited or required herein, "person" shall include employees and licensees. 
    Receiving land use districts means the property, which contains the person, building, business, or activity being affected by the noise or noise pollution. 
    Sound level (noise level) means a weighted sound pressure level, expressed in decibels (dBA), obtained through the use of a sound level meter having characteristics as specified in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specifications for Sound Level Meters. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 1, 6-28-05) 
Sec. 26-177. - Noises prohibited. 
(1)  General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made a distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property's value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restriction of the following subsections of this section. 
(2)  Motor vehicles. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the city limits in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits established by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, pursuant to M.S.A. § 169.693. 
(3)  Horns, audible signaling devices, etc. No person shall sound any audible signaling device on any vehicle except as a warning of danger, pursuant to M.S.A. § 169.68. 
(4)  Exhaust. No person shall discharge the exhaust, or permit the discharge of exhaust from any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, or snowmobile except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises and complies with all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(5)  Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall operate any vehicle out of repair or loaded to such an extent that the vehicle creates loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or any other noise. 
(6)  Radios, phonographs, paging systems, etc. No person shall use, operate, or permit the use of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be evidence of violation of this section. 
(7)  Participation in noisy parties or gatherings. No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise, disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. If a police officer determines that such a gathering is creating a noise disturbance, the police officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to leave immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by the police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make a reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is stopped. 
(8)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, etc. No person shall operate or permit the use or operation of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other device for the production or reproduction of sound on a street or other public place for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any commercial establishment or vehicle. 
(9)  Animals. No person owning, operating, having charge of, or occupying any building or premises shall keep or allow to be kept any animal which shall, by any noise, unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of any person in the vicinity. The phrase "unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet" shall include, but is not limited to, the creation of any noise by any animal which can be heard by any person, including a law enforcement officer or animal control officer, from a location outside of the building or premises where the animal is being kept and which animal noise occurs repeatedly over at least a five-minute period of time with one minute or less lapse of time between animal noise during the five minute period. 
(10)  Schools, churches, hospitals, etc. No person shall create any excessive noise on any street, alley, or public place adjacent to any school, institution, church, or hospital if the noises unreasonably interfere with the working of the institution and disturbs or unduly annoys its occupants or residents or when posted signs indicate the presence of such institutions. 
(11)  Dynamic braking devices. No person shall use motor vehicle brakes that are in any way operated or activated by the compression of the engine in any motor vehicle upon any public ways located within the city limits of Watertown, including, but not limited to, highways, streets, alleys, easements, or right-of-ways. An affirmative defense to prosecution under this subdivision shall demonstrate that the compression brakes were applied in an emergency situation or were considered necessary to prevent immediate or unanticipated danger to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 2, 6-28-05) 
Sec. 26-178. - Hourly restriction on certain operations. 
(1)  Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power hedge, clipper, chainsaw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. Snow removal and street sweeping equipment is exempt from this subsection. 
(2)  Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in any residential district except between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. 
(3)  Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or gas powered machine or other power equipment, manual tools, movement of equipment, and other activities except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 3, 6-28-05) 
Sec. 26-179. - Receiving land use standards. 
(1)  Maximum noise levels by receiving land use districts. No person shall operate, cause, or permit to be operated any source of noise in such a manner as to create a noise level, which exceeds those limits set in Table 1 for the receiving land use category specified when measured at a point of normal human activity for the receiving land use district. The sound level within any particular zoning district shall be the responsibility of the person who owns, operates, or contributes to the sound level, regardless of the zoning district in question. 
Table 1: Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts 
Day 
(7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m.) Night 
(10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m.) Land Use 
Districts L10 L50 L10 L50 Residential 65 60 55 50 Commercial 70 65 70 65 Industrial 80 75 80 75  
(2)  Exemptions. The levels prescribed in subsection (1), Table 1 of this section, do not apply to noise which is generated by railroads or motor vehicles traveling on state or county highways, but such noise shall be subject to other applicable sections of this article. 
(3)  Measurement of noise level. Sound level requirements shall apply at the area of human activity or at the property or zoning lines of the receiving land use district. Measurements shall also be taken at any location within the receiving land use district for the purpose of evaluation and to enforce other sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 4, 6-28-05) 
Sec. 26-180. - Exception for emergency work. 
    Noise created exclusively for the performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety, or welfare, or in the performance of emergency work necessary to restore a public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. Persons responsible for performing such emergency work shall inform the city of the need to initiate the work or if the work is commenced during non-business hours of the city, then at the beginning of business hours for the city on the next business day. Any person responsible for such emergency work shall take all reasonable actions to minimize the amount of noise or noise pollution. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 5, 6-28-05) 
Sec. 26-181. - Power and duties of the city. 
(1)  Administering officer. The city and its related departments shall administer the noise control program established by this article. 
(2)  Testing procedures. The city shall adopt guidelines establishing the testing procedures and the specific instrumentation to be used to enforce the provisions established within this article. A copy of these guidelines shall be kept on file at city hall and shall be made available for review by the public during office hours. 
(a)  Measurement methodology. The city shall enforce the rules and procedures established by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, pursuant to Minnesota Rules chapter 7030.0060, as a guide for the enforcement of the noise provisions as established within this article. 
1.  Measurement location. The measurement of sound shall be made at or within the applicable noise area classification (NAC) at the point of human activity that is nearest to the noise source. All measurements must be made outdoors. 
2.  Equipment specifications. All sound level measuring devices shall meet Type O, I, II, or S specifications as established by the American National Standards Institute S1.4-1983. 
3.  Calibration. All sound level measuring devices shall, at a minimum, be externally field calibrated both before and after monitoring using a calibration device of known frequency and sound pressure level. 
4.  Measurement procedures. The following procedures shall be used to obtain representative sound level measurements: 
a.  Measurements shall be made at least three feet off the ground or surface and away from natural of artificial structures that would result in an inaccurate measurement. 
b.  Measurements shall be made using the A-weighting and fast response characteristics of the sound measuring device as specified by the American National Standards Institute S1.4-1983. 
c.  Measurements shall not be made in sustained winds or in precipitation that results in a difference of less than ten decibels between the background noise level and the noise source being measured. 
d.  Measurements shall be made using a microphone that is protected from ambient conditions that would prevent an accurate measurement. 
5.  Data documentation. A summary sheet for all sound level measurements shall be completed and signed by the person making the measurements. At a minimum, the summary sheet shall include: 
a.  Date; 
b.  Time; 
c.  Location; 
d.  Noise source; 
e.  Wind speed and direction; 
f.  Temperature; 
g.  Humidity; 
h.  Make, model, and serial number of measuring equipment; 
i.  Field calibration results; 
j.  Monitored levels; and 
k.  Site sketch indicating noise source, measurement location, directions, distances, and obstructions. 
(3)  Studies and inspections. The city shall conduct research, monitoring, and other studies related to sound as are necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. A city official shall inspect existing or potential noise or noise pollution as frequently as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this article. Upon request of the city, the person responsible for any noise or noise pollution shall permit access to the area at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection and monitoring of the site. The city shall be allowed access to all records and documents relating to the noise or noise pollution as necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(4)  Noise impact statements. The city may require noise impact statements in association with, but not limited to, a change in zoning classification; or for a permit or license for any structure, operation, process, installation, alteration, or project that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement. The city shall evaluate each statement and make recommendations to the city council either in favor or against the license or permit for which the applicant is requesting. 
(5)  Other powers and duties. The city shall exercise the right to perform other such duties that are considered reasonable and necessary in order to enforce this article. If the established testing procedures and the specific instrumentation to be used to enforce the provisions established within this article are not readily available upon the receiving of a complaint, the sheriff's department or its members shall use their discretion when enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 6, 6-28-05) 
Sec. 26-182. - Variances. 
(1)  Authority. The city shall have the power and authority to grant variances from the requirements as established within this article. 
(2)  Application. 
(a)  Required. A variance is required in order to create temporary noise conditions, which may exceed the requirements established within section 26-181 of this article. A person seeking a variance shall submit an application to the city. The application shall state the dates during which the variance is proposed, the location of the noise source, the reasons why the variance is sought, the steps that will be taken to minimize the noise level to adjacent areas, and any other information requested by the city that is considered pertinent to the granting of such variance. If the application for the variance is for more than one day, additional information may be required. Once a complete application has been filed, the city shall notify all residences within 500 feet of the subject area. The notification shall indicate a date, time, and place for a public hearing in which the request will be heard. 
(b)  Exception. City street and utility maintenance and construction do not require a variance. City council approved functions, including, but not limited to festivals, concerts and sporting events do not require a variance 
(3)  Action on application. A public hearing will be held on the requested variance. At such time, all persons affected shall be given the opportunity to be heard. The city shall either approve or deny the application within 30 days of receipt. In determining whether to approve or deny the application, the city shall find that full compliance with the requirements as stated within the ordinance would constitute an unreasonable hardship for the applicant or the surrounding community. The hardship of the applicant shall be balanced against the potential adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the persons affected, the surrounding properties, and all other possible adverse effects of granting the variance. A variance may be granted subject to specific conditions, which may include, but are not limited to, time limits. 
(4)  Grounds for denial. A variance request may be denied if a history of complaints has been filed for excessive noise in violation of this article or if conditions to minimize the adverse effects upon the community or surrounding neighborhood have not been met as established under any previous variance request. 
(5)  Duration. A variance application shall not exceed six events and may be renewed upon request by the original applicant for a period not to exceed three additional events. Renewal shall be subsequent to review and approval by the city. 
(6)  Violation. If the holder of a variance should violate the terms and/or conditions of the granted variance, the variance shall be revoked without any prior written notice. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 7, 6-28-05) 
Sec. 26-183. - Enforcement. 
(1)  Notice of violations. If the city should determine that a noise exceeds the maximum sound level permitted within this article, written notice of the violation shall be sent to the owner or occupant of the premises where the noise or noise pollution originates. Such person shall be given a reasonable amount of time in which to correct or remove the violation. Failure to correct or remove the violation within the specified time period constitutes a violation of this article. 
a.  Notwithstanding the above, the city, upon determination of an obscene noise violation, may choose to issue a citation without a prior written warning. 
(2)  Enforcement duties. The Carver County Sheriff, by contract with the city, shall enforce this article. 
(3)  General penalty. Every person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-13 of this Code, plus the costs of prosecution. Each act of violation and each day a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 8, 6-28-05) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PREDATORY OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTION 

Sec. 26-184. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  Repeat predatory offenders present a threat to the public safety of the community as a whole, especially children. Predatory offenders assigned a risk level III under the risk assessment scale established by the Minnesota Commissioner of Corrections are more likely than other classifications of offenders to use physical violence, to repeat their offenses, to have committed multiple offenses, to have more victims than are ever reported, and, as a result, to be prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. The cost of predatory offender victimization to society at large, while not precisely calculable, is steep. 
(b)  As expressed in M.S.A. § 412.221, Subd. 32, the city has power to provide for the prevention of crime, the benefit of residence, and the promotion of health, safety, order, convenience, and the general welfare, as it deems necessary and expedient. 
(c)  The city has a compelling interest in promoting, protecting, and improving the health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens, and specifically has a compelling interest to protect against the serious threat to children posed by predatory offenders, including the risk of recidivism and harm that released sex offenders, assessed at a risk level III due to their high risk of re-offense, will pose to this community. 
(d)  By this section, the city prohibits certain predatory offenders of risk level III from establishing temporary or permanent residence in certain locations where children are known to regularly congregate in concentrated numbers. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 26-185. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Child: Any person under the age of 18. 
(2)  Child care facility: A facility licensed by the Minnesota Department of Human Services, or Carver County to provide child care, including facilities having programs for children known as nursery schools, day nurseries, child care centers, day care centers, cooperative day care centers, and Head Start programs. 
(3)  Designated offender: Any person who has been categorized as a level III predatory offender under M.S.A. § 244.052, a successor statute, or a similar statute from another state in which that person's risk assessment indicates a high risk of re-offense. 
(4)  Permanent residence: A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
(5)  Public park: A public recreation center or area, created, established, designated, maintained, provided, or set aside by the city, county, or state, for the purposes of public rest, recreation, and enjoyment, and all buildings, facilities, and structures located thereon. 
(6)  Public playground: A city, county, or state-owned public improved outdoor area designed, equipped, and set aside for children's play, including a school building playground, a child care building playground, a play area of a public park, or an area that contains permanent play equipment open to the public. 
(7)  Temporary residence: A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent residence, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(8)  School: Any public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 26-186. - Residence prohibition. 
(a)  Prohibited location of residence: It is unlawful for any designated offender to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any school, public park, or public playground, or 500 feet of any child care facility. 
(b)  Measurement of distance: For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation required by subsection (a), the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence of the designated offender to the nearest outer property line of the school, child care facility, public park, or public playground. 
(c)  Official map: The city clerk shall maintain an official map showing prohibited locations as defined by this section. The clerk shall update the map annually to reflect any changes in the location of prohibited zones. The map shall not be deemed conclusive or all encompassing, or relieve any person subject to this ordinance from their duty to comply with the prohibitions herein, since prohibited zones change from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 26-187. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. Each day that a designated offender maintains a permanent or temporary residence in violation of this Code shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 26-188. - Exemptions. 
    A designated offender residing within the prohibited area as described in section 26-186 does not commit a violation of that section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The designated offender established the permanent or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S.A. §§ 243.166 and 243.167 or a successor statute, prior to July 15, 2016. 
(2)  The designated offender was a minor when he or she committed the offense and he or she was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The designated offender is a minor. 
(4)  The school, public park, or public playground within 1,000 feet of the designated offender's permanent residence or temporary residence or the child care facility within 500 feet of the designated offender's permanent residence or temporary residence was opened after the designated offender established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S.A. §§ 243.166 and 243.167 or a successor statute. 
(5)  The designated offender's permanent or temporary residence is also the primary residence of the designated offender's parent(s), grandparent(s), sibling(s), spouse, or child(ren). 
(6)  The designated offender's permanent or temporary residence is property purchased, leased, or contracted with and licensed by the Minnesota Department of Corrections prior to July 15, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-28-16) 
Chapter 27 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch.14; civil emergencies, ch. 18; emergency services, ch. 22; recreational fires, § 26-151; environment, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 34; zoning ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 27-1-27-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 360, § 13, adopted August 9, 2011 and Ord. No. 361, § 1, adopted August 23, 2011, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 27-26-27-30, and Ord. No. 360 enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 261, adopted September 28, 2004. 

Sec. 27-26. - Fire code-Adopted. 
(a)  The 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code, as adopted pursuant to the authority of M.S.A. § 299F.011, including appendix chapter D, is hereby adopted by reference as the fire code for the City of Watertown. Such code, except as hereinafter amended or modified, is incorporated in this ordinance as completely as if set out in full and includes Minnesota Rules Chapter 7510, and all amendments and changes adopted thereto. One copy of this Code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. 
(b)  The 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code incorporates the 2006 edition of the International Fire Code as promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc. and made part of Minnesota Rules. 
(c)  This article is adopted for the purpose of regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Watertown and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations. 
(d)  If there is a conflict between or among any of the provisions or policies of the stated codes, standards or policies, the following orders of precedence shall apply: 
(1)  City of Watertown Fire Code. 
(2)  Minnesota State Fire Code. 
(3)  Standards of the National Fire Protection Association or other nationally recognized fire-safety standards as are approved by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 27-27. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Board of appeals means the Watertown City Council. 
    Chief means the fire chief of the City of Watertown Fire Department. 
    City means the City of Watertown 
    Code official means the fire chief, fire marshal, code enforcement officer, or other designated authority charged by the Watertown City Council or the Minnesota State Building Code with the duties of administration and enforcement of this Code, or a duly authorized representative. For purposes of enforcing this Code it also includes the state fire marshal and the state fire marshal's representatives. 
    Jurisdiction means municipal limits of the City of Watertown. 
    This code means the code adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 2, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 27-28. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code or standards hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein or therein, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as a misdemeanor for each and every such violation and non-compliance respectively. 
(b)  Notice of violations shall be given in writing and shall contain a reasonable time to comply as well as a statement explaining the right to appeal. 
(c)  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The application of the above penalties shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 3, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 27-29. - Enforcement. 
    The fire chief or the code official or their representatives or other authority designated by the city is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 4, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 27-30. - Amendments. 
(a)  Negligent fires. 
Section 305.4 of the Minnesota State Fire Code is hereby deleted and replaced with the following: 
It shall be an offense punishable as a misdemeanor to negligently or carelessly start or cause to be started a fire which endangers the property of another or to negligently or carelessly allow a fire to extend beyond the limits of one's property or property within one's control. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
(b)  Permits. 
Section 105.6 of the 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code is hereby clarified with the following required operational permits: 
(a) Permit required. No person shall engage in any activity, operation, practice or function listed below within the corporate city limits of Watertown without first having obtained a permit from the fire chief or his representative: 
(1) Installation, modification, changing and/or removal of all fire protection systems. 
(2) Installation and removal of underground or aboveground tanks for the storage or use of flammable or combustible liquids, or gas or any hazardous material. 
(3) Spray booths or spray areas involving spraying or dipping operations utilizing flammable or combustible liquids. Spray booths involving the application of powders by powder spray guns, electrostatic powder spray guns, fluidized beds, or electrostatic fluidized beds. 
(4) Refinishing and resurfacing operations utilizing flammable and combustible liquids. 
(5) Tents, canopies, and temporary membrane structures. A permit is required for the public use or the use in public areas of tents and membrane structures having an area over 400 square feet, and canopies in excess of 600 square feet, or when heat sources, cooking equipment, spark/ember producing processes or open flame are contained within or near the tent, canopy, or structure. 
(6) Carnivals, fairs, and other special events open to the public. 
(7) Smoke removal systems as required by the fire code. 
(8) Storage of explosives, black powder, and blasting agents. 
(9) An application for the use explosives shall require a permit initially made at the city's designated police services. 
(i) Exception: Police and Fire Departments are not required to apply for a permit. 
(10) Sale of fireworks, fireworks displays and pyrotechnic special effects material. 
(11) Commercial, industrial, institutional, residential buildings built under the International Building Code or properties undergoing any of the following shall be required to install an approved fire department key box: 
a. new construction; or 
b. change of occupancy classification; or 
c. change of ownership; or 
d. any alterations requiring a permit; or 
e. as determined by the fire chief to be necessary. 
The box shall be: 
a. of a design and make approved by the fire chief, and 
b. installed in a location approved by the fire chief. 
The box shall contain all keys deemed necessary by the fire chief to access any or all portions of a building, facility or property. 
Keys shall be maintained as useable. Any re-keying of locks, installation of new locks, or mechanisms requiring keys, shall be brought to the immediate attention of the fire chief. 
(b) The fees for such permits shall be in an amount established by the city council by resolution or ordinance. 
(c)  Appeals. 
Section 108 of the 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code is hereby deleted in its entirety and is replaced to read as follows: 
(a) Whenever the code official shall disapprove or refuse to grant a permit, or issue an order or notice as provided in the Minnesota State Fire Code, or when it is claimed that the Minnesota State Fire Code has been wrongly applied or interpreted, the aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the code official as provided in this section. 
(b) The aggrieved person must first request the code official to reconsider his decision. The request to reconsider must be made within ten (10) days from the date of the code official's initial decision and must submit in writing the reasons for the request for reconsideration. 
(c) A person aggrieved by the final decision of the code official may appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals. The appeal must be in writing and made within ten (10) days of the date of the final decision of the code official. 
(d) A person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal to the state fire marshal in accordance with M.S.A. § 299F.011, Subd. 5. 
(e) All requests and appeals specified in this section shall be made in writing. An aggrieved party who does not appeal within the time limits specified shall be deemed to have waived his right to appeal and shall be bound by the latest decision in the appeal process. 
(d)  Fire or barbecues on balconies or patios. 
Section 308.3.1 of the Minnesota State Fire Code shall hereby read as follows: 
(a) In any structure containing three (3) or more residential units, no person shall kindle, maintain, cause, or use any fire, open flame or electric heating element on any balcony or deck above the ground; nor shall such activity occur under a deck or overhang nor on any patio set in and level with the ground unless such activity occurs at least 15 feet from all portions of all such units in such a structure. 
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall keep or use any charcoal, nor any lighter fluid, natural gas, fuel, torch, barbecue grill or other similar heating or lighting chemical or device in any place, structure, property, lot, or premises that is any part of a location where fire, open flame or electric heating element is prohibited in subsection (a) above. Charcoal barbecue grills devoid of all flammable materials may be kept in a garage. 
(c) Barbecue grills that burn natural gas are prohibited in any place where prohibited in subsections (a) and (b) above unless such a grill is permanently mounted, plumbed to the structure's natural gas supply, and set at lease six feet at all points from all combustibles and all portions of all such residential units. 
(d) It shall be a violation of this section for a person to conduct or allow any of the activities prohibited therein. The term "person" shall include, but not be limited to, the owner of real property described in subsections (a) through (b) above, the owner's agent, and any tenant of such real property. 
(e) Vehicles, vehicles containing any type of fuel, flammable or combustible liquids, or hazardous materials or liquids, regardless if stored in an approved container, shall not be located on any balcony or patio regardless if the balcony or patio is constructed of non-combustible materials or is protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system. 
(e)  Premises identification. 
Section 505.1 of the Minnesota State Fire Code is deleted and replaced with the following: 
(a) Address numbers. 
(1) New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers, or approved building identification placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch. 
(2) Buildings which have a range of addresses for one building shall display the range of numbers or addresses from the lowest to the highest. 
(3) Buildings with multiple tenants/addresses shall place approved numbers or addresses on front and rear doors identifying each address in the manner required in this section. 
(4) Dwellings that are remote/auxiliary from the main dwelling shall display approved numbers or addresses on each dwelling in the manner required in this section and in such a manner as to be visible from either direction of travel on the road or street fronting the property. 
(5) If any dwelling, business, or building as required, is too remote from the fronting road or street to make it unreasonable to be seen from the fronting road or street, a sign or post with visible and legible approved numbers or addresses, or range of numbers or addresses from lowest to highest, shall be placed at the driveway entrance in such a manner that the numbers or addresses are visible from either direction of travel on said road or street. 
(6) Addressing of residential and commercial properties that do not fall under the provisions of subsection 5 above, and as such, are visible from the roadway they are fronting shall conform to the following: 
Building Setback Minimum Address Size 0 feet to 40 feet 4 inches minimum height 41 feet to 60 feet 6 inches minimum height 61 feet or greater 8 inches minimum height  
(7) Approved numbers of addresses shall be placed on all construction sites in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. 
(b) Street or Road Signs. 
(1) Streets and roads shall be identified with approved signs. Temporary signs shall be installed at each street intersection when construction of new roadways allows passage by vehicles. Signs shall be of an approved size, weather resistant and be maintained until replaced be permanent signs. 
(c) Fire Lanes. 
(1) When fire lanes are required and/or established; the lanes shall be posted as mandated by MSFC sections D103.6.1 and D103.6.2, as adopted by this ordinance. 
a. Posting shall be by signage and by the painting of the curb, gutter, or pavement as required by the fire chief for the entire length of the fire lane. 
b. Fire lane paint color shall be established by the fire chief. 
c. Signs shall be required at intervals not to exceed 75 feet. 
d. Signs shall meet the requirements of MSFC section D103.6. 
(f)  Fire hydrants. 
Section 508.5.1 of the Minnesota State Fire Code is deleted and replaced with the following: 
Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 150 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the code official. 
(a) For buildings equipped throughout with an approved fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R, the distance requirement shall be one fire hydrant within 100 feet of the fire department connection and 600 feet for all other fire hydrants. 
(b) In buildings with high piled combustible storage or buildings that are inherently hazardous in nature because of hazardous processes or which store, use, or handle flammable, combustible or hazardous materials, additional fire hydrants may be required by the code official. 
Exceptions: 
(1) For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirements shall be 300 feet. 
(2) For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the distance requirement shall be 600 feet. 
(g)  HYDRANTS. 
Section 508.5.5 of the Minnesota State Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Clear space around Hydrants. A six (6) foot clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise required or approved. An approved accessible route to the hydrant from a public access shall be provided and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 360, §§ 6-12, 8-9-11) 
Chapter 28 - LANDSCAPING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 232 adopted June 11, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as chapter 65. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as chapter 28. 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 52; zoning, ch. 62; trees and shrubs, §§ 26-121-26-129. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Title. 
    This chapter of the City of Watertown Code of Ordinances, providing for the administration and enforcement of landscaping regulations, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Landscaping Ordinance of the City of Watertown, Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-2. - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the preservation, installation, and maintenance of landscape plantings and landscaped open space in residential, commercial and industrial districts, to utilize landscaping and landscaping open space as an effective means of energy conservation, to preserve open space, to improve property values, and to maintain the aesthetic quality of the city, thereby promoting the health and general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 28-3-28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 28-21. - Landscaping regulations-General provisions. 
(a)  Landscaping plantings shall not be placed so as to interfere with site drainage. 
(b)  Landscape plantings shall not be placed in any public utility easement unless specifically permitted on the approved site plan. 
(c)  Plantings shall not be placed where they may interfere with the maintenance of sanitary or storm structures, fire hydrants, or water valves, or any other public utility. 
(d)  Landscape planting may not be placed within the public street right-of-way unless previously approved by the city council. 
(e)  The vision clearance triangle shall be maintained at all times. 
(f)  All disturbed areas shall be restored with sod or seed, unless specifically approved otherwise. In residential districts or uses, the entire front yard, side yard, and rear yard to the building setback line shall be sodded. In all districts, the adjacent right-of-way shall be sodded. 
(g)  In sites where vegetation existed and was retained during development, the required minimum quantity of planting may be reduced with two existing plantings equivalent to one required planting. No more than 50 percent of the required plants may be waived in this manner. Plants to be exchanged shall meet minimum size requirements as established herein. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-22. - Design standards. 
    The provisions below represent the minimum standards required for compliance with this chapter. These regulations are not intended to suppress creative design concepts or the use of variety in the landscape plan. Whenever practical, existing trees and vegetation should be preserved and incorporated into the overall design and layout of the site. 
(1)  Minimum size. The minimum size for required plantings, other than those in required buffers, shall be as follows: 
a.  Deciduous over-story trees shall be a minimum size of two-inch caliper. 
b.  Evergreen trees shall be a minimum height of six feet. 
c.  Ornamental trees shall be a minimum 1 1/2-inch caliper in size. 
(2)  Minimum quantity. The minimum number of plantings per site shall be as follows: 
a.  A minimum of 50 percent of all required trees shall be over-story shade trees. 
b.  For all uses except one- and two-family residential dwellings, a minimum of 25 percent of all required trees shall be evergreen trees. 
c.  For single-family residential, 1/2 of the tree requirement shall be provided in the rear yard. 
Residential P-2, C-1, C-2, Industrial Planting requirement Two trees per dwelling unit (does not include street trees) 1 tree per 1,000 square feet of provided open space.  
Values expressed in table above are in addition to plantings required in buffer, screening, or parking lot plantings. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-23. - Slopes and walls. 
(a)  In no case shall a maintained slope be greater than 3:1. If a slope is greater than 3:1 appropriate maintenance free landscaping, ground cover, and/or rip-rap shall be required. 
(b)  Retaining walls: In cases where the use and construction of a retaining wall is required to preserve slope or provide additional developable land, such retaining wall shall be designed and constructed in such a way as to preserve a residential scale and character. 
(c)  All retaining walls above a height of four feet shall be tiered to allow the provision of landscaping to soften the wall. Walls with a height greater than four feet shall require a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-24. - Buffers. 
(a)  It shall be recognized that the transition from one district to another district of contrasting and conflicting uses is across a line in theory, not in existence. Therefore, it shall be the intent of this chapter to require the actual provision of a physical barrier so as to reduce possible harmful or detrimental influence one zoning district use may have to an abutting and contrasting or conflicting zoning district use. 
(b)  Conditions requiring a buffer: 
(1)  Any lot in any residential or industrial district platted after the effective date of this chapter, having both its front and rear lot lines abutting a public thoroughfare shall require a 30-foot buffer along and measured from the rear lot line. Lot depth should be increased appropriately to provide equivalent usable open space. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided in width in accordance to table below: 
R-1, -2, R-3, -4 C-1, -2, I R-1, -2, - 40 50 65 R-3, -4 40 - 50 65 C-1, -2, 50 50 - 50 I 65 65 50 -  
(c)  The more intense use shall provide the buffer required above. In an instance where adjacent property is down-zoned, thereby requiring additional buffer, the newly zoned property shall provide the additional required buffer. 
(d)  Buffer requirements. 
(1)  A permanent earthen berm shall be provided were a buffer is required. Such berm shall be the minimum height as provided below. In no case shall a berm slope exceed 3:1. 
40-foot buffer depth Three (3) to five (5) feet 50-foot buffer depth Six (6) to eight (8) feet 65-foot buffer depth Seven (7) to ten (10) feet  
Berms should be of natural design, with undulating heights and variety of landscape material. 
(2)  The following shall be the minimum requirement. Additional buffer plantings may be required by the city council. All buffers shall provide the plantings as prescribed below. 
Buffer Material Requirements Per Thirty Lineal Feet of Buffer 40 feet depth 1 Over-story 2 Evergreen 1 Ornamental 50 feet depth 1 Over-story 3 Evergreen 3 Ornamental 65 feet depth 2 Over-story 4 Evergreen 2 Ornamental  
(3)  Minimum buffer planting size shall be as follows: 
a.  Deciduous overstory 2-1/4 inches 
b.  Evergreen six feet in height 
c.  Ornamental 1-3/4 inches 
(4)  In addition to the required permanent landscape buffer, the city council may require a fence to provide additional screening. Such fence shall be constructed of substantial support elements, including, but not limited to brick, poured concrete, and stone. In this case, steel or wood posts shall not be considered as substantial. 
(5)  Required yards shall be measured from the lot lines. Buffer yards may be included in yards required by this ordinance. No building, parking, or structures shall be permitted within any buffer, unless authorized by the city council. 
(6)  In a residential subdivision, the developer of the subdivision shall be required to install the buffer improvements as required by this chapter. The owner of the property on which the buffer is located shall maintain the buffer in perpetuity. 
(7)  In a situation where landscape requirements other than buffer requirements are required, those buffer requirements shall be in addition to all other requirements. 
(8)  The need to establish a buffer as an easement shall be reviewed and identified during the development review process. Easements shall generally be required between different zoning districts and for buffering requirements of residential districts. 
(9)  For single-family residential subdivisions, the landscape buffer shall be submitted for review and approval as public improvements, at the same time as the preliminary plat. For any type of development that requires a site plan review, the buffer plans shall be submitted as a part of the site plan submittal. 
(e)  The city council may reduce the required buffer under the following conditions: 
(1)  Where the boundary line abuts permanent natural features which function as a buffer, including, but not limited to: ponds, severe grades, or mature woodlands. The city council may reduce the requirement in proportions that the natural features fulfill the requirement. 
(2)  In those areas where the property abuts undeveloped property that is shown on the comprehensive plan as the same or a more intensive use. 
(3)  The abutting property has provided a portion or the entire required buffer. 
(4)  On lots that have been platted or zoned prior to the adoption date of this chapter that can present evidence that the required buffer would render the property unbuildable, the council may permit the construction of a substantial fence, as defined herein, not less than six feet in height. Landscaping provisions to soften the visual appearance of the fence shall be required. 
(5)  In those areas that abut a public park, the buffer area for that portion of the boundary may be reduced to 50 percent of the requirement. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-25. - Street trees. 
(a)  Along every development street trees shall be provided, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Commercial/industrial lots shall provide one overstory shade tree per 40 lineal feet of lot frontage. Such trees shall be of specie approved by the city council. Such trees shall be located within the street right-of-way. 
(2)  Residential developments shall provide one overstory shade tree per 40 lineal feet of street frontage. Such trees shall be of specie approved by the city council at the time of preliminary plat. Such trees shall be located within the street right-of-way. 
(3)  In any development requiring more than 20 trees, no specie selected for planting shall exceed 20 percent of the overall total of trees being planted. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-26. - Parking lots. 
    In any off-street parking and loading area that contains more than 20 parking spaces, a minimum of ten percent of the total hard surface area shall be utilized for landscaping, screening, and/or open space. The minimum requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  All rows of parking spaces shall be provided a terminal island to protect parked vehicles, define driveways, confine moving traffic to driveways, and provide space for landscaping. 
(2)  There shall be provided within each row of parking spaces, landscaped islands located so as to prevent more than 12 vehicles from being parked side-by-side in an abutting configuration. 
(3)  One overstory shade tree shall be provided per 12 parking spaces. Such tree shall be located as to impact the visual effect of the parking surface. 
(4)  Each shade tree shall be allocated a minimum landscape impervious surface area of 200 square feet, exclusive of other shade trees. 
(5)  All interior landscaped areas not dedicated to trees or to preservation of existing vegetation shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, shrubs, or other appropriate landscaping treatment. Pavement, gravel, or similar treatment shall not be considered appropriate landscape treatment. 
(6)  All parking spaces along the perimeter of the parking area will be screened from general public view so as to shield and control automobile lighting by incorporating the natural landscape and topography with the introduction of permanent earth berming of approximately 30 inches in height. Additional landscape planting as needed to provide adequate screening may be required. 
(7)  The use of larger landscape islands is preferable. Fewer large landscape islands will more adequately sustain healthy trees than numerous, small islands. The flow of pedestrians, especially in large lots, shall be channeled through a clear hierarchy of routes that bring pedestrians to the main entrance. 
(8)  Parking lot planting areas shall be designed to accommodate winter snow storage. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-27. - Open space. 
(a)  Intent. The extensive and excessive congestion of land may become hazardous to the general health and welfare of the community. Therefore, the intent of this chapter shall be to require not less than that private open space which is necessary to preserve and provide the basic qualities and beauty of nature. 
(b)  Open space requirements. 
(1)  A percentage of open space shall be provided for each site in each district as outlined below: 
R-3 R-4 C-1 C-2 I-1 10 10 10 10 10  
(2)  The calculation of required open space shall include the entire limits of the lot, exclusive of the required buffer area. Provided open space shall not include required buffer areas. 
(c)  Maintenance of open space. All open space and common areas shall be under single management or control, and shall be maintained and preserved in accordance with the site plan requirements. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-28. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Landscaping as approved by a site plan shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance at all times. Landscaping shall be maintained to minimize property damage and public safety hazards, including the removal/replacement of dead or decaying plant material, removal of low hanging branches and those obstructing street lighting and maintenance of sight distance standards as set forth. Landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Landscaping shall be kept visually free of insects and disease; 
(2)  Landscaping areas shall be kept free from weeds and other volunteer plants; and 
(3)  Irrigation systems shall be maintained so as to eliminate water loss due to damaged, missing, or improperly operating sprinkler system components. 
(b)  In the event a tree, shrub, or other plant causes damage to streets, sidewalks, trails, or other public improvements, the public works director shall order the removal and replacement of the offending plants. 
(c)  All dead or diseased landscape plantings shall be replaced by the property owner with equivalent material in a timely fashion, or within 30 days, following written notice from the city. 
(d)  If any landscaping is removed in violation of an approved site plan or plat, the property owner shall plant three times such amount, of equal quality and size, on such site or plat. 
    If it is impractical to replace such landscaping with an equal size, then several smaller sized plantings, totaling, in aggregate, three times the size of the improperly removed landscaping, shall be required. If it is deemed unfeasible to plant all the required plantings on the site, the City may require that portions of this requirement be planted on public property. 
    Failure to maintain landscaping in accordance with the approved site plan shall constitute a violation of the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 232, 6-11-02) 
Cross reference- Site plan review, §§ 62-611-62-672. 
Chapter 30 - MANUFACTURED HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; alarm systems, § 22-26 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; mailboxes prohibited in public right-of-way, § 34-2; requirements for building sewers and connections to sanitary sewer system, § 58-41. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOMES AND PARKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-61 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official means the legally designated building official of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
    Dependent mobile home means a mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower. 
    Independent mobile home means a mobile home which has a flush toilet and a bath or shower. 
    Mobile home means a structure having 500 square feet or more of floor space and which is so constructed as to provide facilities for persons to eat and sleep, has provisions for connecting to a central utility system when ready for occupancy, and the principal structure of which has a width not greater than 14 feet and having no foundation other than wheels or removal jack, except that one mobile home with a principal structure, or combination of two mobile homes, which is or are greater than 14 feet in width may be permitted for each multiple of 25 mobile home spaces in the mobile home park, and the definition of mobile home stand in this section shall not apply in such case. 
    Mobile home park means any plot of land which is planned and developed to accommodate 50 or more mobile homes and having a permit issued by the city. 
    Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Mobile home stand means that portion of the mobile home space in which the mobile home's enclosed living space is situated, and shall include enclosed patios, etc., but such space shall not exceed 18 by 70 feet in dimension and does not include unenclosed patios, cabanas, ramadas, carports, etc. 
    Service building means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men and women with laundry facilities and such other facilities as may be required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 1, 4-9-70) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-27. - Violation of article; penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any provisions of any regulation adopted by the building official pursuant to authority granted by this article, shall upon conviction be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 12, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-28. - Adoption of regulations by the building official. 
    The building official is hereby authorized to make and, after public hearing, to adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article. Such regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this article, and the penalty for violations of the provisions thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 10, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-29. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the city, the provision which, in the judgment of the building official, establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this article which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 13, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-30. - Structure requirements; inspections. 
(a)  Every mobile home structure shall be developed and maintained in a safe, approved and substantial manner. The exterior of such structures shall be kept in good repair and shall be repainted or refinished when directed by the city. 
(b)  Mobile homes shall be prohibited that: 
(1)  Do not conform to the requirements of the laws of the state or this article. 
(2)  Are in an insanitary condition or having an exterior in bad repair. 
(3)  Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants against all elements. 
(c)  Periodic inspection of the mobile home by health, police, building official, and other public personnel may be required. 
(d)  No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes inspection of the mobile home, plumbing, electrical facilities, and related equipment. The area beneath a mobile home shall be enclosed except that such enclosure must be openable for inspection. 
(e)  No person shall erect, place, construct, reconstruct, relocate, alter, use or occupy a cabana or structure in a mobile home park without the written consent of the owner or operator of the mobile home park, and the same shall require a building permit. 
(f)  A plan shall be submitted with the application for uniform "skirting" of the mobile home, or of depressing the undercarriage so that the principal structure is not supported by wheels or removable jacks. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 5, 4-9-70) 
Secs. 30-31-30-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOBILE HOME PARK 

Sec. 30-41. - Permits. 
(a)  Required; transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate any mobile home park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued annually by the city in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. All applications for permits shall be made to the city administrator, who shall issue a permit upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this article and of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, and of any other applicable legal requirements. No permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall file notice in writing to the city administrator at least 30 days prior to selling, transferring, giving away or otherwise disposing of any interest in or control of any mobile home park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person intended to succeed to the ownership or control of such mobile home park. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  Applications for a mobile home park permit shall be in writing on application forms as provided by the city, signed by the applicant, and accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the data contained therein. 
(2)  Each application for a mobile home park permit shall be accompanied by five copies of a plat plan drawn to scale. 
(3)  With each mobile home park application shall be submitted proposed rules and regulations promulgated by the owner/operator setting forth the obligation of the owner/operator to the tenants and of the tenants to the owner/operator, which shall be approved by the city prior to occupancy of the mobile home park and which shall be incorporated into the permit. 
(c)  Approval. Procedures for approval or disapproval of a mobile home park application shall be the same as provided for plats under any subdivision ordinance of the city. If the city has no subdivision ordinance at the time of application, then such application shall be submitted to the city council and shall be considered and acted upon by the city council and the city planning commission in such manner as the council shall direct. Permits shall not be granted to any mobile home park containing or making provisions for any dependent mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 2, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-42. - Compliance; supervision. 
    The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall at all times operate the park in compliance with this article and regulations issued thereunder, and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 11, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-43. - Location requirements. 
(a)  No mobile home shall be permitted except in a mobile home park located in any area designated and zoned for such purpose or as may be otherwise approved by the city council. 
(b)  Mobile home parks shall be located only in such areas as will provide adequate access to a thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 3, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-44. - Site requirements. 
(a)  Each mobile home park shall have a maximum area density of five mobile home spaces per acre or less. 
(b)  The mobile home stand shall not exceed 30 percent of the total area of a mobile home space. 
(c)  Each mobile home space shall have paved off-street parking space for two automobiles. The yards shall be landscaped except for driveways and sidewalks as shown on the approved plan. 
(d)  Each mobile home space shall have the following features: 
(1)  Frontage on an approved roadway. 
(2)  A sidewalk along the entire frontage except as provided in section 30-45(r), with a sidewalk connecting from the trailer entrance to the frontage sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be concrete. 
(3)  Each site shall be properly landscaped with at least one tree, hedge, grass, fences, windbreaks, and the like. 
(4)  No mobile home shall be parked closer than five feet to the side lot line or closer than 20 feet to the front lot line, or within 15 feet of the rear lot line. 
(5)  There shall be an open space of at least ten feet between the sides of adjacent mobile homes. 
(e)  The source of fuel for cooking, heating or other purposes at each mobile home space shall be as approved by the city and shall be underground. 
(f)  All mobile homes and permanent buildings must be connected to the public water and sanitary sewer system. 
(g)  Plans for disposal of surface water or stormwater at the mobile home park site must be approved by the city. 
(h)  No mobile home, off-street parking space or building shall be located within 20 feet of the exterior boundary of any mobile home park. 
(i)  Laundry and clothes at the mobile home park site shall be hung to dry only on lines located in approved areas established and maintained exclusively for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 4, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-45. - General requirements. 
(a)  Objective. Excellence of design, development and maintenance of the mobile home park is the desired objective, to create a home-like atmosphere. 
(b)  Recreation areas. All mobile home parks shall have at least 20 percent of the land area developed for recreational and park purposes, together with necessary play and recreational equipment, developed and maintained at the owner/operator's expense. 
(c)  Outside maintenance. All land areas of the mobile home park shall be properly maintained, adequately drained, free from dust, clean and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris. 
(d)  Conditional use permits. 
(1)  The requirements of a conditional use permit for a mobile home park shall prevail over any and all other requirements, standards or conditions. 
(2)  A conditional or special use permit for a mobile home park may be reviewed once each year and revoked if development and maintenance is not in full compliance therewith. 
(e)  Screening. A compact hedge, redwood fence, or landscaped area, as approved by the city, shall be installed around each mobile home park and shall be maintained in first class condition at all times as approved. 
(f)  Advertising. Advertising for the mobile home park shall be limited to one nameplate not to exceed 12 square feet, with lighting, height and location as approved by the city, and have a 15-foot setback from the front lot line. 
(g)  Office; 24-hour supervision. Each mobile home park shall have an office for the use of the operator distinctly marked "Office," and such marking shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness. A responsible adult must be on duty in or about the mobile home park at all times. 
(h)  Registry. The operator of every mobile home park shall maintain a registry in the office of the mobile home park showing: 
(1)  The name and address of each guest or permanent resident. 
(2)  Make, type and license number of each mobile home. 
(i)  Map, display. A map of the mobile home park shall be displayed at the mobile home park office and shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness. 
(j)  Numbering of sites. The corners of each mobile home space shall be clearly marked and each site shall be numbered. 
(k)  Lighting. The mobile home park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the city from sunset to sunrise. 
(l)  Utilities. 
(1)  All utility installations to the mobile home park site and individual mobile home spaces shall be as approved by the city. 
(2)  All utilities shall be underground; there shall be no overhead wires or supporting poles except those essential for street or other lighting purposes as determined by the city. 
(m)  Garbage disposal. The proposed method of garbage, waste, and trash disposal at the mobile home park shall be as approved by the city. 
(n)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants in the mobile home park should be located within 300 feet of any unit. 
(o)  Animals. Dogs and animals shall not be permitted to run at large within the mobile home park. 
(p)  Public address systems prohibited. No outdoor address or loudspeaker system shall be permitted in the mobile home park. 
(q)  Outdoor storage. No outside storage of lawnmowers, garden tools, toys and other equipment of this nature or trailers, boats, motors, snowmobiles or other vehicles except automobiles regularly used shall be permitted on the mobile home space. 
(r)  Parking lot. Each mobile home park shall maintain a paved off-street parking lot for guests of occupants in the amount of one space for each of three mobile home spaces located within 300 feet of the unit to be served, if the paved portion of the private road is less than 32 feet in width. 
(s)  Roadways (public or private). 
(1)  All roads in the mobile home park shall be paved in such manner as is approved by the city council. 
(2)  All roads in the mobile home park shall have concrete curb and sidewalk along both sides with the exception of driveways and common areas not containing pad sites. 
(3)  Access drives off roads to all parking spaces and mobile home spaces shall be paved. 
(4)  All streets in the mobile home park shall be developed as approved by the city. 
(5)  Access to mobile home parks shall be as approved by the city. 
(t)  Service buildings. Each mobile home park shall provide a minimum of one service building which shall be conveniently located with adequate off-street parking. Such building or buildings shall be of permanent construction and shall have central heating and be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, and an artificial light shall be maintained thereat during all hours of darkness. 
(u)  Mobile home sales. 
(1)  No mobile home owner or prospective mobile home owner shall be required to purchase a mobile home from the owner of the mobile home park in which such owner desires to locate or from someone designated by such owner of the mobile home park. This provision, however, shall not prevent the owner of the mobile home park from establishing certain minimal standards and conditions of quality and design as to mobile homes permitted in the mobile home park owned by him. 
(2)  No mobile home sales lot shall be permitted in any mobile home park. This provision shall not, however, prohibit the owner of a mobile home park from selling a mobile home which is affixed to a mobile home stand and otherwise complies with all of the provisions of this article. 
(v)  Temporary occupancy. No mobile home may be permitted in any mobile home park unless it is the bona fide intent of the owner thereof to remain thereat for a period of at least 30 days. 
(w)  Accommodation for children. The mobile home park shall be designed so that it will accommodate both mobile home areas with children and without children. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 6, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-46. - Inspections; access. 
(a)  The building official is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of mobile home parks located within the city in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of occupants of mobile home parks and of the general public. 
(b)  The building official shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property in a mobile home park for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article or of regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(c)  The building official or his authorized representative shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants and their ages using the mobile home park. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks, and mobile homes contained therein, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the building official free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article, or with any lawful regulations adopted thereunder, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 8, 4-9-70) 
Sec. 30-47. - Notices, hearings and orders. 
(a)  Whenever the building official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this article, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit was issued, as provided in this section. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this state; 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article and with regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this article, or any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the building official, provided that such person shall file in the office of the building official a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after the day the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued under subsection (e) of this section. Upon receipt of such petition, the building official shall set a time and place for such hearing, and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided, that upon application of the petitioner, the building official may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when in his judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such postponement. 
(c)  After the hearing under this section, the building official shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this article and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as provided in subsection (a)(4) of this section. Upon a failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the mobile home park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(d)  The proceedings at any hearing under this section, including the findings and decision of the building official, and together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public record in the office of the building official, but the transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is sought as provided by this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the building official may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state. 
(e)  Whenever the building official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the mobile home park permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the building official, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 9, 4-9-70) 
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 34-1. - Discharge of weapons. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
    Bow and arrow means and includes all hand bows, foot bows, long bows or crossbows. 
    Firearm means and includes all rifles, shotguns, handguns, weapons using smokeless or blackpowder, or projecting pellets, and other weapons, whether gas, pneumatic or spring powered. 
    Weapon means and includes all firearms, bows and arrows, slingshots, boomerangs or any other type of propelled weapon. 
(b)  Regulated. No person shall discharge at any time a firearm, bow and arrow or other weapon upon or onto lands within the corporate limits of the city except as provided in this section. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following activities are specifically excepted from the restrictions set out in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Persons duly authorized to act as law enforcement officers or members of the military forces of the United States or this state in discharge of their lawful duty. 
(2)  Persons acting in self defense, when the use of firearms or weapons as defined in this section would not be unlawful under the laws of the state. 
(3)  Duly authorized persons engaged in the United States military, and veterans' organizations, or other organizations engaged in civic promotion, and firing blank salutes for the purpose of honoring military personnel and for other public purposes. 
(4)  Persons acting under authority of the city or in conjunction with the state department of natural resources in controlling nuisance animals, provided that such activities are given express approval by the city council. 
(5)  Civil liability. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize the use of any firearm or weapon in a manner which will endanger any person or property hereunder shall in any manner relieve the person acting thereunder from any civil liability for any resulting injury or damage. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any violation of this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 181, §§ 1-3, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 256, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 366, §§ 1-3, 1-10-12) 
State Law reference- Discharge of weapons, M.S.A. § 609.60. 
Sec. 34-2. - Mailboxes in public right-of-way. 
    The installation and maintenance of mailboxes or receptacles for the receiving and sending of mail by residents of the City of Watertown is permitted within the right-of-way of the public streets in the City of Watertown, subject to the standards and regulations of the United States Postal Service and such standards and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the City of Watertown not otherwise set forth in this section. 
(1)  The use of street mail receptacles is not required. Residents may continue to use post office boxes at the Watertown Post Office. 
(2)  The mailbox must be installed along the side of the street and in such a manner as to not interfere with or impede the normal flow of vehicle traffic. 
(3)  All existing mailboxes on old rural routes within the city will be considered out of compliance with this ordinance upon its adoption and publication. Such mailboxes must be moved to the location of the user of the mailbox or to a location on the line of travel of mail delivery. After publication of this ordinance, such mailboxes must be removed and the immediate area restored within 45 days of notification to the user of the mailbox. 
(4)  All residents wishing curbside delivery and those on old rural routes within city must apply for an extension of mail service with the United States Postal Service. Mailboxes cannot be installed unless extension is approved by United States Postal Service. 
(5)  Installation of mail receptacles in the city must comply to United States Postal Service standards regulations with final approval to be determined by the Watertown City Council. 
(6)  It is the responsibility of each resident user to maintain the mailbox in such a manner that it functions properly according to United States Postal Service standards. 
(7)  Pursuant to United States Postal Service regulations, mail delivery is not allowed to individual locations within culs-de-sac at the end of streets. Mail delivery for these locations will be made only to mailboxes that are located at the entrance or exit of the cul-de-sac to be served. Mailboxes serving such culs-de-sac shall be grouped together in a manner approved by the city and at a location determined by the United States Postal Service and the city. 
(8)  One additional receptacle for deliveries such as newspapers and advertisements is allowed but must be installed directly underneath mail box. 
(9)  The city may establish regulations by resolution for the use of a certain type or design of mail receptacle in order to be uniform throughout the city. 
(10)  The city shall not be responsible or liable for any damages to the mail receptacles for any reason, including snowplowing or other city activities. 
(11)  The city is not responsible for snow removal on or around the mail receptacle. It is the responsibility of each resident user of the mail receptacle to remove snow or other obstructions from or around the mail receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 64, §§ 1, 2, 4-7-70; Ord. No. 212, § 1, 4-28-98) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured housing, ch. 30. 
Sec. 34-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 338, § 1, adopted June 23, 2009, repealed § 34-3, which pertained to minors under the age of seventeen years and derived from Ord. No. 196, adopted May 24, 1994.) 
Sec. 34-4. - Regulation of tobacco products. 
(a)  Purpose. Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco-related devices, and such sales, possession and use are violations of both state and federal laws, and because studies, which the city hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of 18 years and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking, and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government, this section shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices and to further the official public policy of the State of Minnesota in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in M.S.A. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time. In making these findings, the city council accepts the conclusions and recommendations for Center for Disease Control in their study "Selected Cigarette Smoking Initiation and Quitting Behaviors Among High School Students, United States, 1997," and of the following medical professionals in these medical journals: Khuder SA, et al., "Age of Smoking Onset and its Effect on Smoking Cessation," Addictive Behavior 24(5): 673-7, September-October 1999; D'Avanzo B, et al., "Age at Starting Smoking and Number of Cigarettes Smoked," Annals of Epidemiology 4(6):455-59, November 1994; Chen, J & Miller, WJ, "Age of Smoking Initiation: Implications for Quitting," Health Reports 9(4): 39-46, Spring 1998; Everett SA, et al., "Initiation of Cigarette Smoking and Subsequent Smoking Behavior Among U.S. High School Students," Preventive Medicine , 29(5): 327-33, November 1999, copies of which are adopted by reference. 
(b)  Definitions and interpretations. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Compliance checks shall mean the system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices are following and complying with the requirements of this section. Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this section. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices. 
    Individually packaged shall mean the practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this subsection shall not be considered individually packaged. 
    Indoor area shall mean all the space between a floor and ceiling that is bounded by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50 percent of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. 
    Loosies shall mean the common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette. 
    Minor shall mean any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years. 
    Moveable place of business shall refer to any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions. 
    Nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall mean any product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a product, that is not tobacco as defined in this section, not including any product that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco use cessation, harm reduction, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
    Retail establishment shall mean any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices are available for sale to the general public. Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores and restaurants. 
    Sale shall mean any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration. 
    Self-service merchandising shall mean open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising shall not include vending machines. 
    Smoking shall mean inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product. Smoking also includes carrying a lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation. 
    Tobacco or tobacco products shall include cigarettes and any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product; cigars, cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, shorts, plug and twist tobaccos, fine cut and other chewing tobaccos, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco. Tobacco excludes any tobacco product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
    Tobacco related devices shall mean any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, ashtray, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products. 
    Vending machine shall mean any mechanical, electric or electronic or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device. 
(c)  License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices without first having obtained a license to do so from the City of Watertown. 
(1)  Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall be made by a person at least 21 years of age on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, the city administrator shall forward the application to the city council for consideration. If the city administrator shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete. 
(2)  Action. The council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the council shall approve the license, the city administrator shall issue the license to the applicant. If the council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the council's decision. 
(3)  Term. All licenses issued under this section shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which the license is issued. 
(4)  Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this section may be revoked or suspended as provided in the violations and penalties [subsections (m) and (n)] of this section. 
(5)  Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the council. 
(6)  Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this section. 
(7)  Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premise. 
(8)  Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license issued under this section shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license. 
(9)  Training program. Every licensee requesting a license under this section shall implement a training program for employees regarding laws relating to the sale of tobacco products. Every licensee shall certify on his or her annual tobacco license application that all employees have been trained to comply with state laws regarding the sale of tobacco products. 
(10)  Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license issued under this section shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license. 
(11)  Smoking. Smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke within the indoor area of any establishment with a retail tobacco license. Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco and tobacco related products is prohibited. 
(d)  Fees. No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full. No license fee shall be refunded. The fee for a license under this section shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be made a part of a general fee schedule adopted from time to time by the city. 
(e)  Basis for denial of license. The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this section; however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this section: 
(1)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products or tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices. 
(3)  The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application. 
(4)  The applicant fails to provide all information required on the application or provides false or misleading information. 
(5)  The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance or other regulation from holding such a license. 
(f)  Prohibited sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices: 
(1)  To any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this section. 
(3)  By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices between the licensee or the licensee's employee and the customer. 
(4)  By means of loosies as defined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(5)  Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. 
(6)  By any other means, to any other person or in any other manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision or other regulation. 
(g)  Vending machines. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this section to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all times prohibited from entering the licensed establishment. 
(h)  Self-service sales. It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this section to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to such items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices at the time this section is adopted shall comply with this section within 90 days following the effective date of this section. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(j)  Responsibility. All licensees under this section shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the employee to whatever penalties are appropriate under this section, state or federal law or other applicable law or regulation. 
(k)  Compliance checks and inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or Carver County Sheriff's Department or other authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15 years, but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of the unlawful purchase or attempted purchase, nor the unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices when such items are obtained or attempted to be obtained as part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research or training purposes or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law. 
(l)  Other illegal acts. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this section: 
(1)  Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device to any minor. 
(2)  Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device. This subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check. 
(3)  Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device. 
(4)  Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device and it shall be a violation of this section for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device. This subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check. 
(5)  Use of false identification. It shall be a violation [of] this section for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person. 
(m)  Violations. 
(1)  Notice. A person violating this chapter may be issued, either personally or by mail, a notice or citation that sets forth the alleged violation and proposed penalty and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right to request a hearing on the alleged violation. The citation shall provide notice that a hearing must be requested within ten business days of receipt and that hearing rights shall be terminated if a hearing is not promptly requested. The citation shall provide information on how and where a hearing may be requested, including a contact address and phone number. 
(2)  Hearings. A person denied a license or accused of violating this section may request a hearing. A request for hearing shall be made in writing and delivered to the city administrator within ten days of receipt of a denial of an application for a license or notice of violation of this section. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the city council may hold the hearing, appoint a committee of the council to hold the hearing or designate a hearing officer to hear the matter. Written notice of the hearing time and place shall be mailed or delivered to the accused violator at least ten business days prior to the hearing. Failure to request a hearing within ten business days of the issuance of the citation will terminate the person's right to a hearing. 
(3)  Decision and findings. If, after the hearing, the applicant is found ineligible for a license or the alleged violator is found to be in violation of this section, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for the decision and the penalty to be imposed, shall be recorded in writing and a copy provided to the applicant or accused violator. 
(4)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision under this section may have the decision reviewed in the First Judicial District Court as provided by law. 
(5)  Default. If the applicant has been issued written notice of the denial of an application for a license or a person has been issued a citation for an alleged violation of this section and if no request for a hearing is filed with the city administrator within ten days of such notice or citation, then the denial, penalty, suspension and/or revocation imposed pursuant to this section shall take effect by default. The Carver County Sheriff's Office shall investigate compliance with the suspension or revocation. 
(6)  Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this section. The city shall also have the right to seek prosecution as set forth in M.S.A. ch. 609 and any other applicable state criminal statutes. 
(7)  Continued violation. Each violation and every day in which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(8)  Failure to pay fine. Failure to pay a duly imposed fine within ten days of issuance of the citation or within ten days after notice of a decision has been issued when a hearing was requested shall result in a suspension of the license until such fine is paid. 
(n)  Penalties. 
(1)  Licensees. If a licensee or employee of a licensee violates any provision of this section, the licensee shall be charged an administrative fine of $100.00 for a first violation of this section, $200.00 for a second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-hour month period and $300.00 for a third or subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-hour month period. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven days. A fourth offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period shall require revocation of the license for a period not to exceed one year. 
(2)  Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated by subsection (n)(3) [below], found to be in violation of this section shall be charged an administrative fee of $50.00. 
(3)  Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall be issued an administrative fine, or may be subject to tobacco-related education classes, diversion programs, community services, or another penalty that the city believes will be appropriate and effective. The administrative fine or other penalty may also be established from time to time by the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  Misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this section. 
(5)  Statutory penalties. If the administrative penalties authorized to be imposed by M.S.A. § 461.12, as may be amended from time to time, are greater than those established in this section, the statutory penalties shall prevail. 
(o)  Exceptions and defenses. Nothing in this section shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this section for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law. 
(p)  Severability. If any section or provision of this section is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other sections or provisions which can be given force and effect without the invalidated section or provision. 
(Ord. No. 202, §§ 1-7, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 213, § 1, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 367, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 202, § 8, adopted Mar. 25, 1995, repealed Ord. No. 199, adopted Aug. 23, 1994, from which the original tobacco products provisions had derived. 
Sec. 34-5. - Lawful gambling. 
(a)  Purpose. The city council recognizes that, although lawful gambling as authorized by M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.22 may not appeal to all members of society, it is an activity that is engaged in by a significant portion of the population and the financial profits therefrom may or may not be used for the benefit of society without the enforcement provisions of said Minnesota Statutes. 
    The city council further recognizes that fraternal, religious, veterans and other nonprofit organizations provide a much needed and useful service to mankind and the city council is especially appreciative of the goals and objectives of such organizations established within the City of Watertown. The council commends these organizations for their contributions to worthy causes within and without the City of Watertown, and, accordingly, the council supports the purposes for which M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.22 were adopted. 
    The ability to obtain a license under M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.22 to conduct lawful gambling within the City of Watertown is a privilege granted by the State of Minnesota and the City of Watertown and not a right guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States of America or the State of Minnesota. Accordingly, in addition to the purposes for which M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.22 were adopted, the purpose of this section is to ensure that licenses to conduct lawful gambling within the City of Watertown are issued only to organizations who can be expected to expend the profits from such gambling for lawful purposes within the City of Watertown or to benefit residents of the city and its immediate surrounding area. 
(b)  Adoption of Minnesota Statutes pertaining to lawful gambling. M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.22 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as completely as if said statutes were fully set forth herein. 
(c)  Restrictions on gambling sites. No more than one licensed organization may conduct lawful gambling on any premises at which there is a gambling site at any one time. All leases pertaining to lawful gambling shall state the days of the week and times during which a licensee may conduct lawful gambling on the premises. This prohibition shall, however, not apply to the conducting of raffles. 
(d)  Restrictions on location of lawful gambling. Lawful gambling consisting of the use of paddlewheels, tipboards and pull-tabs may only be conducted by a licensed organization on premises owned by such organization or on premises leased by such organization and which premises has a valid "on-sale" liquor license issued by the City of Watertown pursuant to chapter 6 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(e)  Organizations qualified for lawful gambling licenses. Approval of applications for lawful gambling licenses pursuant to M.S.A. §§ 349.11-349.22 shall be granted by the City of Watertown only to organizations qualified under Minnesota Statutes and in which either 50 percent or more of the active members of such organization reside within the City of Watertown or in which such organization meets regularly at least once per month and at least 90 percent of such regularly scheduled meetings are conducted within the City of Watertown. 
(f)  Requirement for expenditure of gross profits. A licensed organization conducting lawful gambling on premises within the City of Watertown shall expend at least 50 percent of its gross profits derived from such lawful gambling on lawful purposes conducted or located within the City of Watertown trade area. For purposes of this section, the City of Watertown's trade area is defined as the corporate limits of the City of Watertown. 
(g)  Reports. Each licensee shall annually, at least 60 days prior to the close of each annual licensing period, file a report with the City of Watertown in such form as prescribed the city, showing how the profits derived from lawful gambling conducted by such licensee have been spent for lawful purposes as defined by M.S.A. § 349.12, Subd. 25. 
(Ord. No. 211, §§ 1-7, 4-28-98) 
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Park commission, § 2-79 et seq.; possession of open containers while on any street or other public right-of-way or park prohibited, § 6-5; environment, ch. 26. 

Sec. 38-1. - Park hours. 
(a)  Prohibited hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in or upon any public park, playground or recreational area within the city limits of the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  Exception. Notwithstanding subsection (a), such presence in a public park, playground or recreational area during such times shall be lawful only if such person is in attendance at or is part of an official function sponsored by a city-recognized organization, society, club or group which has obtained express written permission from the city council or the city administrator, as the council may direct, for such function, and in that event, such presence shall not exceed one-half hour after the completion, ending or adjournment of such function. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 73, §§ 1-3, 9-18-73) 
Chapter 39 - PAWNBROKERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 228, adopted Dec. 11, 2001, repealed the former Chapter 39 and enacted a new Chapter 39 as set out herein. The former Chapter 39 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 205 adopted Jan. 28, 1997. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 39-1. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that pawnbrokers potentially provide an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their concealment because such businesses have the ability to receive and transfer stolen property easily and quickly. The city council also finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving pawnbrokers. The purpose of this chapter is therefore to prevent pawnbroking businesses from being used as facilities for commission of crimes and to assure that such businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Watertown. 
    To help the Carver County Sheriff better regulate current and future pawn businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the pawn industry, and increase identification of criminal activities in the pawn industry through the timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction information, this chapter also implements and establishes the required use of the automated pawn system (APS). 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Billable transaction means every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker except renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in the licensee's possession is a billable transaction. 
    City means the City of Watertown, Carver County, Minnesota. 
    Law enforcement agency. See sheriff. 
    Licensee means the person or entity issued a license pursuant to this chapter. The term "licensee" and "pawnbroker" may be used interchangeably in this chapter. 
    Minor means any natural person under the age of 18 years. 
    Pawnbroker means any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as principal, or agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker's business includes buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or selling it on consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable. 
    The following are exempt from the definition of "pawnbroker": any bank regulated by the State of Minnesota, the comptroller of the currency of the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System or any other federal or state authority and their affiliates; any bank or savings association whose deposits or accounts are eligible for insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any successor to it and all affiliates of those banks and savings associations; any state or federally chartered credit union; and any industrial loan and thrift company or regulated lender subject to licensing and regulation by the department of commerce. 
    Pawnshop means the location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business. 
    Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity, however organized. 
    Pledged goods means tangible personal property other than chooses in action, securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, that are purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. 
    Police means Carver County Sheriff. See sheriff. 
    Reportable transaction means every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, is reportable except: 
(1)  The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of such purchase or consignment which describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record. 
(2)  Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have expired. 
    Sheriff means Carver County Sheriff, Carver County Sheriff's Department, Carver County Sheriff's Office, local police department or any law enforcement agency established by the city or contracted with by the city for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, and any of its deputies. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 39-3-39-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 39-26. - License required and restrictions regarding transfer of license. 
(a)  No person shall exercise, carry-on, or be engaged in the trade or business of pawnbroker or the operating of a pawnshop business within the city unless such person is currently licensed under this chapter. Persons engaged in the business of pawnbroker or in the operating of a pawnshop business on the effective date of this chapter must receive a license within 60 days or cease doing business. Any pawn transaction made without benefit of a license is void. 
(b)  Each license under this chapter shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable or assignable to any other person. No licensee shall loan, sell, give, or assign a license to another person. A separate license is required for each place of business. Issuance of a license under this chapter shall not relieve the licensee from obtaining any other licenses required to conduct business at the same or any other locations. 
(c)  No expiration, revocation, suspension or surrender of any license shall impair or affect the obligation of any preexisting lawful contract between the licensee and any pledgor. 
(d)  The Carver County Sheriff shall be notified by the municipality of any licensee whose license has expired or been surrendered, suspended, or revoked as provided by this chapter. 
(e)  Any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed pawnshop shall require the application for a new license and the new owner must satisfy all current eligibility requirements. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-27. - Application; content. 
    Any person desiring a pawnbroker license shall file an application with the city. In addition to any information that may be required by the county pursuant to M.S.A. § 471.924, every application for a license under this chapter shall be made on a form supplied by the City of Watertown and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is a natural person: 
a.  The name, place, and date of birth, street resident address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
b.  Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a resident alien; 
c.  Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places where used; 
d.  The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S.A. § 333.01; 
e.  The street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five years; 
f.  The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s) if any, for the preceding five years; 
g.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for which convictions were had; 
h.  The physical description of the applicant; 
i.  A recent photograph of the applicant; 
j.  If the applicant is married: 
1.  The name, place, and date of birth, and street address of the applicant's current spouse; 
2.  The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant's current spouse has been engaged during the preceding five years; 
3.  The names and addresses of the employers or partners of the applicant's current spouse for the preceding five years; 
4.  Whether the applicant's current spouse has ever been convicted of any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for which convictions were had. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership: 
a.  The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and all information concerning each general partner required in subpart (1) of this section; 
b.  The name(s) of managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the pawnbroker business; 
c.  A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S.A. § 333.01, a certified copy of such certificate shall be attached to the application. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation or other organization: 
a.  The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation; 
b.  A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation, or association agreement, and by-laws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as required by M.S.A. § 303.06, shall be attached; 
c.  The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent required in subpart (1) of this section; 
d.  A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of five percent in such organization or business form or who are officers of the corporation or business form and all information concerning said persons required in subpart (1) above. 
(4)  For all applicants: 
a.  Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker license from any other governmental unit and whether the applicant is licensed under M.S.A. § 471.924; 
b.  Whether the applicant has previously been denied a pawnbroker license from any other governmental unit; 
c.  The names, street resident addresses, and business addresses of three residents of Hennepin, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, McLeod, Sibley or Wright County, who are of good moral character and who are not related to the applicant or not holding any ownership in the premises or business, who may be referred to as to the applicant's and or manager's character; 
d.  The street address of the business to be licensed; 
e.  The legal description of the premises to be licensed; 
f.  Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid; 
g.  If the application is for premises either planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be licensed. If the plans or design are on file with the City of Watertown Building/Inspections Department, no plans need be submitted with the application; and 
h.  Such other information as the city or city council may require. 
(5)  New manager. If a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee must complete and submit the appropriate application, on forms provided by the city within 14 days. The application must include all appropriate information required in section 39-4. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-28. - Application; execution. 
    All applications for a license under this chapter shall be signed and sworn. If the application is that of a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. 
    Any falsification on a license application shall result in the denial of a license. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-29. - Application; verification. 
    All applications shall be referred to the Carver County Sheriff for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The Carver County Sheriff shall make a written report and recommendation to the city council as to issuance or non-issuance of the license. The city council may order and conduct such additional investigation as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-30. - Application; consideration. 
(a)  The city council shall conduct a hearing on the license application within a reasonable period following receipt of the Carver County Sheriff's report and recommendation regarding the application. At least ten days in advance of the city council hearing on an application, the issuing authority shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the city, setting forth the day, time, and place of the hearing; the name of the applicant; the premises where the business is to be conducted; and the type of license which is sought. At the hearing, opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. Additional hearings on the application may be held if the city council deems additional hearings necessary. After the hearing or hearings on the application, the city council may, in its discretion, grant or deny the application. 
(b)  If an application is granted for a location where a building is under construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed praises. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-31. - Renewal application. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective until the end of the calendar year from the date of approval by the city council. An application for the renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 30 days prior to the end of the calendar year and shall be made in such form as the city requires. If, in the judgment of the city council, good and sufficient cause is shown by the applicant for the applicant's failure to submit a renewal application before the expiration of the existing license, the city council may, if the other provisions of this section are complied with, grant the renewal application. 
(b)  A license under this section may not be renewed: 
(1)  If the city council determines that the licensee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter in preceding license years; 
(2)  If the licensee or, if the licensee does not manage the establishment, the manager of the licensed premises is not a resident of Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Hennepin, McLeod, Scott, Sibley or Wright Counties on the date the renewal takes effect; 
(3)  If in the case of a partnership, the managing partner or other person who manages the establishment is not a resident of Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Hennepin, McLeod, Scott, Sibley or Wright Counties on the date the renewal takes effect; 
(4)  If in the case of a corporation, or other organization, the manager, a proprietor, or agent in charge of the licensed premises is not a resident of Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Hennepin, McLeod, Scott, Sibley or Wright Counties on the date the renewal takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-32. - Fees. 
(a)  Application fee. 
(1)  The application fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  The license application fee shall be paid in full before the application for a license shall be accepted. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of any application before city council approval, the license fee shall be refunded in full to the applicant except where rejection is for a willful misstatement in the license application. 
(3)  When the license is for premises where the building is not ready for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the license fee for the initial license period shall be 90 days after approval of the license by the city council or upon the date the building is ready for occupancy, whichever is sooner. 
(4)  When a new license application is submitted as a result of incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership, control, and interest in the license are unchanged, no additional fee shall be required. 
(b)  Investigation fee. An applicant for any license under this chapter shall pay the City of Watertown at the time an original application is submitted, a nonrefundable fee at a rate set by city council resolution to cover the costs involved in verifying the license application and to cover the expense of any investigation needed to assure compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  Annual license fee. 
(1)  The license fee shall be paid annually, at the time of application for renewal. 
(2)  The annual license fee shall be set by city council resolution. The application fee shall be credited to the first annual license fee, if the application is approved. 
(d)  Billable transaction license fee. 
(1)  The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of processing modem transactions and other related regulatory expenses as determined by the city council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary, at least every six months. Licensees shall be notified in writing 30 days before any adjustment is implemented. 
(2)  Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within 30 days. Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-33. - Persons ineligible for a license. 
(a)  No license under this chapter shall be issued to an applicant who is a natural person if such applicant: 
(1)  Is a minor at the time the application is filed; 
(2)  Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S.A. § 364.03, Subd. 2, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by M.S.A. § 364.03, Subd. 3; 
(3)  Is not of good moral character or repute; 
(4)  Holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City of Watertown; or 
(5)  Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien. 
(b)  No license under this chapter shall be issued to an applicant that is a partnership if such applicant has any general partner or managing partner: 
(1)  Who is a minor at the time the application is filed; 
(2)  Who has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S.A. § 364.03, Subd. 2, and who has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by M.S.A. § 364.03, Subd. 3; 
(3)  Who is not of good moral character or repute; or 
(4)  Who holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City of Watertown; or 
(5)  Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien. 
(c)  No license under this chapter shall be issued to an applicant that is a corporation or other organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business to be licensed: 
(1)  Who is a minor at the time the application is filed; 
(2)  Who has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S.A. § 364.03, Subd. 2, and who has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by M.S.A. § 364.03, Subd. 3; 
(3)  Who is not of good moral character or repute; 
(4)  Who holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City of Watertown; or 
(5)  Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-34. - General license restrictions and requirements. 
(a)  Records required. At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the Carver County Sheriff. 
(1)  A complete and accurate description of the item of property including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such item; 
(2)  The date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee's records; 
(3)  The amount of money advanced or paid; 
(4)  The maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount due; 
(5)  The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges; 
(6)  The full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date of birth, and reasonably accurate description of the person from whom the item of property was received, including sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair; 
(7)  The identification number and state of issue from one of the following forms of identification of the seller or pledgor: 
a.  Current valid Minnesota driver's license; 
b.  Current valid Minnesota identification card; 
c.  Current valid photo identification issued by another state or a province of Canada and one other form of identification; 
(8)  The signature of the person pledging or selling the item; 
(9)  The information required by this subsection (a) shall be retained by the licensee for at least four years. 
    The licensee shall display a sign, in a conspicuous place in the premises and of a sufficient size, which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Carver County Sheriff. 
(b)  Camera surveillance. Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Carver County Sheriff of acceptable video standards the licensee must also take a color video recording of: 
(1)  Each customer involved in a billable transaction. 
(2)  Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial identification number permanently engraved or affixed. 
(3)  The video recording shall be made in the following manner: 
a.  The video camera must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an identifiable close-up of that person's face. Items photographed by video must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date so that they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being videotaped orally and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for 60 days. Licensee must surrender the exposed video tape to the sheriff immediately upon request. 
(4)  If the video recording is temporarily inoperable, a still color photograph must be taken. Such photograph shall be: 
a.  At least two inches in length by two inches in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the sheriff or the sheriff's designee upon request. The major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable front facial close up of the person who pawned or sold the item. The items photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being photographed orally and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the photographs for 60 days. Licensee must surrender the exposed film, photographs and negatives to the sheriff immediately upon request. 
(c)  Digitized photographs. Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the county sheriff, licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in section 39-11(b) by submitting them as digital images, in a format specified by the sheriff, electronically cross-referenced to the reportable transaction they are associated with. Notwithstanding that digital images may be captured from required video recordings, this provision does not altar or amend the requirements in subsection (b). 
(d)  Renewals, extensions and redemptions. For renewals, extensions and redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction. 
(e)  Inspection of records. The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the county sheriff, his deputies or designees. Date entries shall be retained for at least three years from the date of transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days. 
(f)  Daily reports to police. 
(1)  Method. Licensees must provide to the sheriff the information required in section 39-11-A in writing, on forms approved by the sheriff, by 12:00 noon the first business day following the date of the transaction. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, and in a conspicuous place in the premises, so as to inform all patrons that all transactions are reported to the sheriff daily. Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the sheriff, but no sooner than 90 days after the sheriff provides licensees with computerized record standards, licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the sheriff daily in the following manner: 
a.  Licensees must provide to the sheriff the information required in Section 39-11(a)(1) through (7) by transferring it from the computer to the automated pawn system via modem. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards and procedures established by the sheriff. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the sheriff daily. 
(2)  Billable transaction fees. Licensees will be charged for each billable transactions reported to the police department. 
a.  If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the licensee must provide the sheriff printed copies of all reportable transactions along with the video tape(s) for that date, by 12:00 noon the next business day. 
b.  If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and is not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the licensee must provide the required reports as detailed in Section 39-11(f)(1)a., and must be charged a fifty-dollar reporting failure penalty, daily, until the error is corrected. 
c.  If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system, the licensee must provide the required reports in section 39-11(f)(1)a., and resubmit all such transactions via modem when the error is corrected. 
d.  If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in section 39-11(b) and (c), the licensee must immediately take all required photographs with a still camera, cross-reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and make the pictures available to the sheriff upon request. 
e.  Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problem that prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable transaction from every business day the problem had existed. 
f.  Section 39-11(f)(2)a. through e. notwithstanding, the sheriff may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting penalty. 
(g)  Receipt required. Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three years. The receipt must include at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business. 
(2)  The date and the time the item was received by the licensee. 
(3)  Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction. 
(4)  An accurate description of each item received including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item. 
(5)  The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the transaction. 
(6)  The amount advanced or paid. 
(7)  The monthly and annual interest rates, include all pawn fees and charges. 
(8)  The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the pledgor without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date. 
(9)  The full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, and date of birth of the pledgor or seller. 
(10)  The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller: 
a.  Current valid Minnesota driver's license. 
b.  Current valid Minnesota identification card. 
c.  Current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by another state or a province of Canada and one other form of identification. 
(11)  Description of the pledgor or seller including sex, approximate height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair. 
(12)  The signature of the pledgor or seller. 
(13)  All printed statements as required by M.S.A. § 325J.04 Subd. 2, or any other applicable statutes. 
(h)  Printed pawn ticket. The following shall be printed on all pawn tickets: 
(1)  The statement that "Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a period of not less than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension; no further notice is necessary. There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged goods." 
(2)  The statement that "The pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the item." 
(3)  The statement that "This item is redeemable only by the pledgor to whom the receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained along with the original transaction record." 
(4)  A blank line for the pledgor's signature. 
(i)  Label required. Licensees must attached a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to the Sheriff's department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be re-used. 
(j)  Police order to hold property. Whenever the Carver County Sheriff, upon reasonable suspicion that an item received by the pawnbroker may have been stolen, notifies the pawnbroker not to sell an item, the item shall not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Carver County Sheriff or a period of 30 days, whichever is less. Oral notification to hold property shall be confirmed in writing by the Carver County Sheriff. 
(k)  Holding. 
(1)  Any item purchased by the pawnbroker for which a report is required under subpart (a) of this section, shall not be sold or otherwise transferred for 30 days after the date of such report to the Carver County Sheriff. However, an individual may redeem an item pawned 72 hours after the item was received on deposit by the pawnbroker excluding Sundays and legal holidays. 
(2)  Any item pledged to the pawnbroker for which a report is required under subpart (a) of this section shall not be sold or otherwise transferred for a period of not less than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction or any renewal or extension. 
    The Carver County Sheriff may remove items believed to be stolen from the pawnbroker's business and hold them in the sheriff's property room until it is determined whether or not they are stolen. If the item is stolen, it shall be returned to the proper owner after disposition of a criminal charge or juvenile delinquency proceeding against the offender(s). Unless the pawnbroker knew or had reason to know that the item was stolen, the sheriff's department and county attorney's office shall extend to the pawnbroker the rights of a crime victim under M.S.A. ch. 611A.51 et seq., including the right to an opportunity to request restitution. If the item is determined not to be stolen, it shall be returned to the pawnbroker within 90 days. 
(l)  Hours of operation. The pawnbroker business shall not be open for the transaction of business on any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(m)  Transactions involving minors and others. A pawnbroker shall not purchase or receive personal property of any kind on deposit or pledge from a minor or from any person who is or appears to be of unsound mind, incompetent, or under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(n)  Inspection of items. A pawnbroker shall, at all times during the term of the license, allow the Carver County Sheriff and other law enforcement authorities associated with the Carver County Sheriff to enter the premises where the pawnbroker business is located during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, wares, and merchandise and records therein for the purpose of locating items suspected or alleged to have been stolen or otherwise improperly disposed of. 
(o)  License display. A license issued under this chapter must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used. The license issued is only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved license application. 
(p)  Maintenance of order. A licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain conditions of order. 
(q)  Gambling. No licensee under this chapter may keep, possess, or operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed premises of dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punchboards, blackjack tables, or pinball machines which return coins or slugs, chips, or tokens of any kind, which are redeemable in merchandise or cash. No gambling equipment authorized under M.S.A. ch. 349, may be kept or operated and no raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises and/or adjoining rooms. The purchase of lottery tickets may take place on the licensed premises as authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to M.S.A. ch. 349A. 
(r)  Prohibited goods. No licensee under this chapter shall accept any item of property knowing or having reason to know that the permanent serial number, permanent distinguishing number or manufacturer's identification number of such item has been removed or altered. 
(s)  Redemption period. Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an article for security shall have a minimum of 30 days from the date when the loan or pledge becomes due and payable to redeem the article before the article becomes forfeitable. The date by which an item of property that has been pawned must be redeemed by the pledgor without risk that the item will be sold must be a day on which the pawnbroker is open for regular business. 
(t)  Restrictions on sale. A pawnbroker shall suspend for one year, business transactions with any person who has sold and/or forfeited on six previous occasions articles for which the person received $100.00 or more per transaction within a single six-month period. 
(u)  Premises. All property deposited, left, pledged, pawned, or held for sale must be stored in an enclosed facility and may not be stored outside of the premises. The city may, however, permit the licensee to designate one off-premises locked and secured facility in which the licensee may store only cars, boats, and other motorized vehicles. The licensee shall permit immediate inspection of the facility at any time during business hours by the city or Carver County Sheriff. All provisions in this section regarding record keeping and reporting shall apply to oversized items. All property shall be stored in compliance with zoning and/or fire regulations and in an orderly manner subject to inspection by the fire department. All premises securing property shall be equipped with an operational security alarm. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-35. - Effect of non-redemption. 
(a)  A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or make any payment on a pawn transaction. Pledged goods not redeemed within at least 60 days of the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension shall automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker, and qualified right, title, and interest in and to the goods shall automatically vest in the pawnbroker. 
(b)  The pawnbroker's right, title and interest in the pledged goods under paragraph (a) is qualified only by the pledgor's right, while the pledged goods remain in possession of the pawnbroker and not sold to a third party, to redeem the goods by paying the loan plus fees and/or interest accrued up to the date of redemption. 
(c)  A pawn transaction that involves holding only the title to property is subject to M.S.A. chs. 168A or 336. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-36. - Records; prohibitions. 
(a)  A pawnbroker and any clerk, agent or employee of a pawnbroker shall not: 
(1)  Make any false entry in the records of pawn transactions; 
(2)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from the place of business the records, books or accounts relating to the licensee's pawn transactions; 
(3)  Refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency, the attorney general, or any other duly authorized state or federal law enforcement officer to inspect the pawn records or any pawn goods in the pawnbroker's possession during the ordinary hours of business or other times acceptable to both parties; 
(4)  Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for three years; 
(5)  Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the age of 18 years; 
(6)  Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or seller, or waiving any provision of this section, or providing for a maturity date less than one month after the date of the pawn transaction; 
(7)  Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or provide compensation as set forth in section 39-14, upon payment of the full amount due the pawnbroker unless either the date of redemption is more than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal or extension and the pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods pursuant to section 39-12, or the pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or agency; 
(8)  Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or purchased goods back to the pledgor or seller in the same, or a related, transaction; 
(9)  Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a pawn transaction; or 
(10)  Remove pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or other storage place approved by a municipality at any time before unredeemed, pledged goods are sold pursuant to section 39-12. 
(b)  No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property not their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with permission or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest; with any licensee. 
(c)  No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name; nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out of date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered identification, or the identification of another nor give false information about any article of property; to any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-37. - Redemption; risk of loss. 
    Any person to whom the receipt for pledged goods was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the pledged goods identified in the receipt, or any person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledgor shall be entitled to redeem or repurchase the pledged goods described on the ticket. In the event the goods are lost or damaged while in possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the pledgor, in cash or replacement goods acceptable to the pledgor, for the fair market value of the lost or damaged goods. Proof of compensation shall be a defense to any prosecution or civil action. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-38. - Motor vehicle title pawn transactions; special provisions. 
(a)  In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a pawnbroker who holds a title to a motor vehicle as part of a pawn transaction shall: 
(1)  Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under M.S.A. § 168.27, and post such license on the pawnshop premises; 
(2)  Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against the motor vehicle with the department of public safety; and 
(3)  Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the motor vehicle as required by law. 
(b)  A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn transaction until 90 days after recovery of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-39. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  The city council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter upon a finding of a violation of: 
(1)  Any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Any state statute regulating pawnbrokers; or 
(3)  Any state or local law relating to moral character and repute. 
(b)  A revocation or suspension by the city council shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice shall give at least ten days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee personally or by United States mail addressed to the most recent address of the business in the license application. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Sec. 39-40. - Penalty for violation. 
    A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 228, 12-11-01) 
Chapter 42 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, M.S.A. §§ 329.06, 437.02. 

Sec. 42-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever, or offering or showing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. 
    Solicitor means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sales of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for service to be performed in the future, including orders for the performance of maintenance or repair service on homes or places of business, whether or not such individual has, carries or shows for sale a sample of the subject of such order or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such order. Such definition includes any person who, for himself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel or motel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, street, alley, vacant lot or other place within the city for the purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. Such definition includes any person who solicits in such person's name money, donations of money or property, or financial assistance of any kind, or sells or distributes any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged, or solicits from persons other than members of such person's organization upon the streets, in office or business buildings, by house to house canvass, or in public places for a charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose. 
    Transient merchant means and includes any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever, within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel or motel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any street, alley, vacant lot or other place within the city for exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 1, 8-11-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-27. - Exemptions from article. 
    This article does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Sales of goods, merchandise or services to business, commercial or industrial users at their usual place of business. 
(2)  Deliveries of previously sold goods or services in the regular course of business, or deliveries or sales made as a part of a regular established route to preexisting customers. 
(3)  Vendors who make an uninvited call upon the occupant of a residence as a preliminary step to the establishment of regular route services for the sale and delivery of commodities and services to regular customers, such as vendors of milk, groceries and other perishable commodities; soft water service; laundry and dry cleaning pickup and delivery and newspapers. 
(4)  Any sale under court order. 
(5)  Any bona fide auction sale by a city resident. 
(6)  Sidewalk sales authorized by the city council. 
(7)  Garage sales or rummage sales when conducted by a nonprofit organization, or when conducted upon the premises of the owner of the articles being offered for sale, provided that such sales do not last longer than 72 hours, and provided that no more than three sales be conducted on any given location within one year. 
(8)  Sale of admissions by local school students to a school function or by local bona fide civic or nonprofit organizations for entertainment functions sponsored by such organizations. 
(9)  Sales allowed by state law which prohibit local licensing or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 3, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-28. - Prohibited practices. 
    It is unlawful and a violation of this article for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant to: 
(1)  Engage in solicitation for any unlawful business or organizational purpose or activity. 
(2)  Engage in harassment, intimidation or deception, or to exert pressure or threaten, or engage in any other unlawful practice during the course of solicitation or sale. 
(3)  Refuse to leave the premises when requested by the owner, lessee, person in charge thereof, or the person being solicited. 
(4)  Call attention to the business or activity by crying out, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, or making any loud or unusual noise. 
(5)  Display merchandise or make sales or solicitations directly from vehicles or trailers on city streets or alleys. 
(6)  Engage in business after the hour of 8:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m., unless a previous appointment has been made for a different time. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 12, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-29. - Permission of property owner required. 
    No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever within the city from a stationary location on public or private property without first obtaining the written consent of the property owner or authorized occupant. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 14, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-30. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 17, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-31. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant to engage in any business, solicitation or activities as described in section 42-26 within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 2, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-32. - Application. 
    Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the city administrator a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city, which will give the following information: 
(1)  The name and permanent home and business address of the applicant and all persons to be associated with the applicant in the business or activity. 
(2)  A brief description of the nature of the business or the purpose or cause for which the permit is sought. 
(3)  If the permit is sought to be issued in the name of an organization or other business entity, the names and addresses of the principal officers and directors of the organization, the address and phone number of the main office or headquarters of the organization conducting or sponsoring the activity, and the names and addresses of the persons directly supervising and responsible for the business, solicitation or activity to be conducted. 
(4)  In the case of transient merchants, the place where the business is to be carried on, the length of time for which the permit is sought, and a general description of the goods or merchandise to be sold. 
(5)  A list of the last three municipalities, if any, where the applicant carried on a business or activity similar to the one for which the permit is sought. 
(6)  The names and addresses of at least three references who will substantiate the applicant's moral character and business responsibility, or other evidence of the character and responsibility of the applicant. 
(7)  The applicant's state sales tax permit number, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 4, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-33. - Investigation of applicant; issuance. 
    Upon receipt of a completed application for a permit under this article, the city administrator, or such other person as may be designated by the city council, shall institute such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. Such investigation may include referral to and a report made by the city police or county sheriff's office. The completed application and report, if any, shall be submitted as soon as practical to the city council for its consideration. If the application is approved by the council, the permit will be issued by the city administrator and a notice thereof published in the Carver County News. If the permit is denied by the council, the applicant shall be notified together with the reasons for the denial and the applicant may appeal to the council for reconsideration at the next regular council meeting. Such appeal must be in writing and the applicant or applicant's representative must appear in person at the council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 5, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-34. - Form of permit and published notice. 
    The form of the permit to be issued under this article and the notice to be published in the newspaper shall be as determined appropriate by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 6, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-35. - Fees. 
    The fee for any permit to be issued under this article shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be payable at the time of the filing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 9, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-36. - Fee exemption. 
    No fee shall be required under this article from any bona fide charitable, religious, civic, educational or political organization, provided the proceeds of any sale or solicitation are being used for the legitimate purposes of such organization. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 10, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-37. - Permits to be carried and exhibited upon request. 
    Permits issued under this article shall be carried by the permittee or conspicuously posted in such permittee's place of business, and the permit shall be exhibited to any officer or citizen upon request. In the case where more than one individual shall be involved in the activity or solicitation, the applicant shall make sufficient copies of the permit to be made available to each peddler or solicitor acting on behalf of the group, organization or legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 7, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-38. - Expiration of permit. 
    All annual permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire at midnight on December 31 in the year when issued. Other than annual licenses shall expire at midnight on the date specified on the license. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 8, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-39. - Permit not transferable. 
    All permits issued under this article shall be nontransferable. No refund shall be made on unused portions of permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 11, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-40. - Use of streets. 
(a)  No permittee under this article shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets or alleys of the city, nor shall any such permittee be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor shall any such permittee be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such streets or alleys. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a law enforcement officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(b)  No permit under this article shall be issued for sales or displays from any location which does not have sufficient parking for customers and for areas where customer parking would interfere with normal traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 13, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-41. - Revocation. 
(a)  Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the application for the permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on the business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor. 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as the case may be, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit under this article shall be given by the city administrator in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address or at the address set forth on his application at least seven days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a law enforcement officer in the same manner as a summons at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 15, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 42-42. - Reapplication. 
    No permittee whose permit under this article has been revoked shall make further application until at least six months have elapsed since the last previous revocation. 
(Ord. No. 189, § 16, 8-11-92) 
Chapter 46 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-86 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-31-46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISCIPLINE 

Sec. 46-61. - Causes for disciplinary action. 
    Appropriate disciplinary action may be taken for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetency, inefficiency or negligence in the performance of duty. 
(2)  Activity which has been determined to be incompatible with employment as provided in the personnel policies and procedures of the city. 
(3)  Chronic physical or mental incapacity to perform the work of the position. 
(4)  Insubordination, constituting a serious breach of discipline. 
(5)  Notoriously disgraceful conduct. 
(6)  Unauthorized absence or abuse of leave privileges. 
(7)  Acceptance of any valuable consideration given to influence the employee in the performance of his duty. 
(8)  Falsification of an application or of any city record. 
(9)  Use of official position for personal advantage. 
(10)  Political activity as described in the personnel policy and procedures of the city. 
(11)  Violation of provisions of law or the personnel policies and procedures of the city. 
(12)  Violation of written city or departmental rules. 
(13)  Late for work without prior notice to supervisor. Taking more than the allotted break or lunchtime without supervisor approval. 
(14)  Exhibiting behavior which interferes with the efficient and orderly operation of the city government. 
(15)  Possession, consumption, sale, transfer, or "being under the influence" of alcoholic or illegal drugs during employment. 
(16)  Stealing of city property. An employee who has been caught stealing or been found with stolen city property shall be subject to dismissal without any other intermediate disciplinary steps. 
(17)  Sleeping on the job. An employee who has been found to be sleeping on the job shall be subject to dismissal without any other intermediate disciplinary steps. 
Sec. 46-62. - Appeals and hearings. 
(a)  An employee who has a grievance may avail himself of the grievance procedure in this section. Such employee must submit his appeal in the following sequence: 
(1)  First: His department head. 
(2)  Second: The city administrator. 
(3)  Third: The city council. 
(b)  An appeal shall be in writing. 
(c)  Employees shall be entitled to representation of their own choosing in appealing any grievance. Employees shall be entitled to one representative at the first step in the grievance procedure and any reasonable number of representatives thereafter. When necessary in investigating and settling a grievance, employees and their representatives shall be released from work without loss of pay for a reasonable amount of time, provided department directors or supervisors are given sufficient advance notice to adjust work schedules. 
(d)  The decision in an appeal shall be made as follows (except that failure to receive a decision shall entitle the employee to appeal at the next step): 
(1)  The decision in the first step shall be rendered within five working days of presenting the grievance at the first step level. The employee may appeal the first step decision by filing an appeal with the city administrator within ten working days after the first step hearing date. 
(2)  The decision in the second step shall be rendered within five working days of presenting the grievance at the second step level. The employee may appeal the second step decision by filing an appeal with the city administrator within ten working days after the second step hearing date. 
(3)  The decision in the third step shall be rendered within ten working days of presenting the grievance at the third step level. 
Sec. 46-63. - Warning and reprimand. 
    Whenever an employee's performance falls below the required level or when an employee's conduct falls under one of the causes for action listed in section 46-61, his supervisor shall inform him promptly and specifically of such lapses. If appropriate and justified, following a discussion of the matter, a reasonable time for improvement or correction may be allowed before any further disciplinary action is initiated. In situations where an oral warning has not resulted in the correction of the condition or where more severe initial action is warranted, a written reprimand shall be sent to the employee and a copy placed in the employee's personnel folder in the personnel office. 
Sec. 46-64. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city administrator may suspend any employee with pay pending completion of an investigation which may result in suspension or dismissal when the city administrator believes such action is in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  The city administrator may suspend an employee without pay for up to 30 calendar days in any one calendar year for any causes listed in section 46-61. 
Sec. 46-65. - Demotion and dismissal. 
    When other forms of disciplinary action have proved ineffective, or when the seriousness of the offense or conditions warrants it, the city administrator may recommend to the city council to demote or dismiss the employee for any of the causes listed in section 46-61. 
Secs. 46-66-46-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS 

Sec. 46-81. - Applicants for city employment. 
    The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's Computerized Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks for the positions described in section 46-82. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 46-82. - Criminal history employment background investigations. 
    The city's designated law enforcement agency is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following positions within the city, unless the city's hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed: 
    Employment positions: All regular part-time or full-time employees of the City of Watertown, paid on call firefighters of the Watertown Fire Department, and other positions that work with children or vulnerable adults. 
    In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment applicants, the city's designated law enforcement agency is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the sheriff's office under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be released by the city's designated law enforcement agency to the hiring authority, including the city council, the city administrator, or other city staff involved in the hiring process. 
    Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the city's designated law enforcement agency by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S.A. ch. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S.A. § 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: 
(1)  The grounds and reasons for the denial. 
(2)  The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S.A. § 364.06. 
(3)  The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment. 
(4)  That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 2, 1-22-13) 
Chapter 46.5 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 52; traffic and vehicles, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46.5-1. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Adequate Public Facilities Ordinance of the City of Watertown, Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 01, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The planning commission and city council of the City of Watertown have determined that it is in the best interest and general welfare of the city that adequate public facilities and related services deemed necessary to support and enhance new development be available concurrently as such new developments are constructed. Such public facilities include, but are not limited to roads, streets, trails, sewage disposal systems, schools, water supply and distribution systems, storm and surface water drainage systems, warning systems and parks. In furthering this intent and purpose, total costs and expense of such public facilities shall be born by the development generating or requiring such public facilities and related services. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 02, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-3. - Administration of article. 
    The city planning commission and city council may not approve new development unless there exists adequate public facilities as required by this article or the developer agrees to construct the necessary public facilities or improvements for the purpose of complying with this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent the planning commission and city council from approving portions of subdivisions or site plans of new developments if the portions of the subdivision or site plan comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 03, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-4. - Jurisdiction. 
    This article applies to land within the municipal limits of the City of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 04, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-5. - New development. 
    This article applies to all new subdivisions and site plans for new construction received for approval by the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Except as may otherwise be provided in this article, all new development shall meet the requirements set forth in this article prior to final approval. If the city council determines that a site plan contains minor additions to an existing development, the site plan is not subject to the requirements of this article. 
    Where development is proposed for property not contiguous to land already served by public facilities, such services shall be extended or provided to the property at total cost to the developer or property owner, including all costs necessary for oversizing, land acquisition, engineering, etc. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 05, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-6. - Denial. 
    New development not meeting the requirements for adequate public facilities contained within this article shall not be recommended for approval by the planning commission except pursuant to sections 46.5-8 or 46.5-23. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 06, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-7. - Minor subdivisions exempt. 
    Subdivisions which can be approved by the minor subdivision procedure described in the City of Watertown Subdivision Ordinance are not subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 07, 2-11-03) 
Cross reference- Minor subdivision approval, § 52-46. 
Sec. 46.5-8. - Variance. 
    The planning commission may recommend and the city council may grant a variance from the requirements of this article only if the variance meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Granting the variance would observe the spirit of this article and secure public safety and welfare; and 
(2)  The physical features and characteristics of the proposed plat or site plan are such that a waiver would not impair the intent and purpose of the requirement; and 
(3)  The variance will not endanger or present a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; and 
(4)  The requirements imposed by this article would result in extraordinary hardship. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 08, 2-11-03) 
Secs. 46.5-9-46.5-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROADS/TRAILS 

Sec. 46.5-31. - Generally. 
    All new development shall be served by an adequate network of existing and proposed new roads and trails. 
(Ord. No. 243, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-32. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The city council may exempt from the terms of this article the subdivision of land used solely for agricultural purposes, provided: 
(1)  No more than four lots shall be created; and 
(2)  There exists in the original tract of land ten acres per each lot subdivided; and 
(3)  The road in front of each lot to be subdivided has been constructed to or will be constructed to city design standards. 
(b)  The city council may exempt from the terms of this article the subdivision of land used for agricultural purposes solely for transfer to a member of the immediate family of the owner(s) of the original tract of land. Any such subdivision shall provide a declaration, signed by the owner, that: 
(1)  Certifies the intent of the owner to transfer the land only to a member of the immediate family; and 
(2)  Expressly warrants that no conveyance of the lot will be made to anyone not a member of the immediate family for a period of ten years, except as may be required to satisfy a mortgage in case of loan foreclosure. 
(3)  Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardship will result from strict compliance with this article because of alteration to existing historic structures, including bridges, as determined by the National Register of Historic Places, the planning commission may recommend and the city council may approve a subdivision so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 09, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-33. - New public roads. 
(a)  New public roads required to be built as part of the new development shall be constructed to the standards adopted by the city, at the expense of the owner or developer. 
(b)  The city engineer may require a traffic impact study for proposed development to be provided by the developer in order to determine existing road capacities and construction standards applicable to the new development. 
(c)  The type and location of roads to be built or improved shall be based on the projected volume of traffic that will be generated by the new development in accordance with the adopted standards by the city, or as determined by the county engineer and/or the MNDOT depending on the jurisdiction of the roadway in question. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 10, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-34. - Existing public roads. 
(a)  Existing public roads proposed to serve the new development shall meet the standards adopted by the city. Where an existing road is a county or state highway, such roads are to meet all applicable standards as established by appropriate jurisdiction. 
(b)  Adequate roads shall provide safe and efficient access to, from, and within a new development. Such access shall include access to adjacent commercial, industrial, and recreational properties. Adequate roads shall be extended to property lines, as required by the city. Where a property is adjacent to or has frontage on an unimproved road, such road shall be improved to applicable design standards. The portion of the existing roads required to be adequate for the proposed new development shall be those that meet the intent of this section and provide access to and from the development to the nearest designated intersection with a road to be adequate to support the projected traffic volume generated by the development, as recommended by the city engineer. 
(c)  In evaluating the adequacy of the existing roads or the improvements necessary to make the existing roads adequate, the following shall be considered, but not be limited to by the planning commission and city council: 
(1)  Existing traffic. 
(2)  Traffic projected to be generated by the development. 
(3)  Traffic projected to be generated by other approved but not constructed development, including potential development outlined by the comprehensive plan or applicable area plans. 
(4)  Improvements scheduled or approved by the City of Watertown, Carver County, and MNDOT to take place within two years from the anticipated date of final plat approval. 
(5)  Traffic studies that may be required by the city engineer and county engineer and/or the MNDOT. 
(6)  Any other information that may reasonably be required by the city engineer, county engineer, MNDOT, planning commission, or city council to effectively evaluate the road network or information supplied by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 11, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-35. - Inadequacy determined. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, if an existing road is determined by the planning commission and city council to be inadequate to accommodate the traffic flow projected to be generated from the new development when combined with existing traffic flow, the new development shall not be approved. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 12, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-36. - Trails. 
    Trails shall be provided in accordance with the comprehensive trail plan transportation plan and as directed by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 13, 2-11-03) 
Cross reference- Trails, §§ 52-134, 52-135. 
Secs. 46.5-37-46.5-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SCHOOLS 

Sec. 46.5-61. - Generally. 
    New residential developments will be approved by the city council only when it can be reasonably expected that adequate public school facilities will be available to accommodate such developments. 
(Ord. No. 243, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-62. - Adequacy determined. 
    The Watertown-Mayer School Board may review all subdivision plans as required by this article, and forward a recommendation within 30 days to the planning commission based on the adequacy of the current or proposed facilities. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 14, 2-11-03) 
Secs. 46.5-63-46.5-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 46.5-86. - Generally. 
    All new development shall be served by adequate sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 01, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-87. - Adequacy determined. 
(a)  In evaluating the adequacy of any sewage disposal system (other than a private, individual, on-site system), all parts of the system affected by the projected flow generated from the new development shall be considered including, but not limited to, laterals, interceptors, pumping stations, force mains, points of discharge, flow meters and rights-of-way. 
(b)  In evaluating the adequacy of sewage disposal systems, the following may be considered, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Design capacity. 
(2)  Available capacity. 
(3)  The city's adopted standards, guidelines, policies, and procedures. 
(4)  The projected flow to be generated by the new development. 
(5)  Other proposed or expected connections to the system reasonably probable of fruition. 
(6)  Other variables found to have an effect on the systems ability to accept the projected flow. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 15, 2-11-03) 
Cross reference- Sanitary sewer, § 52-137. 
Sec. 46.5-88. - Determination of expected flow. 
    The projected flow for the proposed development shall be evaluated by a Minnesota Registered Professional Engineer and a complete report submitted to the city for review. Adequacy of the system shall then be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 16, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-89. - Inadequacy determined. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, if the city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer, determines that the sewage disposal system is inadequate to accommodate the sewage disposal needs of the new development when considered together with existing development and development which is reasonably probable of fruition, the new development shall not be approved. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 17, 2-11-03) 
Secs. 46.5-90-46.5-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 46.5-111. - Generally. 
    All new development shall be served by an adequate water supply and distribution system which provides sufficient water and service pressure for domestic consumption and fire protection. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 17, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-112. - Adequacy determined. 
(a)  The adequacy of the water supply distribution system shall be evaluated by a Minnesota Registered Professional Engineer and a complete report submitted to the city for review. Adequacy of the system shall then be determined by the city council. 
(b)  When evaluating the adequacy of any water supply and distribution system for domestic consumption and fire protection other than a private, individual on site water supply (well), all parts of the system affected by the projected water needs of the new development shall be considered, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The system's design capacity. 
(2)  The system's water supply source. 
(3)  The system's available capacity. 
(4)  The adopted guidelines, standards, procedures and policies regarding water service. 
(5)  The projected water needs of the proposed development including domestic consumption and fire protection. 
(6)  Other proposed or expected connections to the system reasonably probable of fruition. 
(7)  The evaluations and recommendations of the fire department. 
(8)  Other variables found to have an effect on the ability of the water system to deliver the projected water needs of the development. 
(9)  Existing storage, treatment, and pumping facilities affected by the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 18, 2-11-03) 
Cross reference- Water supply, § 52-136. 
Sec. 46.5-113. - Inadequacy determined. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, if the city, upon recommendation from the city engineer, determines that the community or multi-use water supply and distribution system is inadequate to accommodate the projected needs of the new development, or will result in an unreasonable drop of water pressure, the development shall not be approved. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 19, 2-11-03) 
Secs. 46.5-114-46.5-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PARKS 

Sec. 46.5-136. - Generally. 
    All new development shall be served by an adequate system of active and passive parks which provide sufficient opportunity for recreation activities. 
(Ord. No. 243, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-137. - New parkland. 
    New parkland and park improvements shall be provided in accordance with the Watertown Subdivision Code, the Watertown Park Improvement 2002 study, which is a proportional improvement of the park system based on the proposed or potential increase of new residents and park users, and other studies the city council may deem necessary from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 20, 2-11-03) 
Cross reference- Parks, § 52-166. 
Sec. 46.5-138. - Adequacy determined. 
    New residential developments will be approved by the city council only when it can be shown that adequate parkland is available to accommodate the new development. The city may require a study to ascertain the location and type of parkland required based on the size and type of the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 21, 2-11-03) 
Secs. 46.5-139-46.5-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WARNING SYSTEMS 

Sec. 46.5-161. - Generally. 
    All new development shall be served with adequate civil and weather warning systems. 
(Ord. No. 243, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-162. - Adequacy determined. 
    The adequacy of the existing and proposed warning system shall be determined by the city upon recommendations made by the city engineer, fire chief, and Carver County Emergency Management. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 22, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 46.5-163. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing under the terms of this article shall prohibit or prevent the city from reaching an agreement with a property owner or developer concerning the construction of the necessary improvements for the purpose of ensuring that public facilities are adequate as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 23, 2-11-03) 
Chapter 47 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 326, § 1, adopted September 10, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 47, §§ 47-1-47-5, 47-21-47-29 and 47-51-47-55, and Ord. No. 327, adopted September 10, 2008, enacted a new Ch. 47 as set out herein. The former Ch. 47 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 207, adopted April 22, 1997. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 47-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this provision of the Watertown City Code is to prescribe requirements for adult use establishments in order to protect and promote the health, safety, morals, decency and general welfare of residents in the city. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-2. - Findings of the city council. 
    The city council of Watertown makes the following findings regarding the effects that adult use establishments have on the character of the City of Watertown's neighborhoods. In making these findings, the city council accepts the recommendations and conclusions of the "Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses," (Humphrey III, June 6, 1989), "Adult Entertainment Report," (Olmstead County Planning Department, March 2, 1988), "A 40-Acre Study," (St. Paul Division of Planning, 1967), hereafter collectively referred to as "reports," which are on file at city hall. 
(1)  Sexually oriented business can contribute to an increase in criminal activity in the area in which such businesses are located, increasing the demands on city crime-prevention programs and law enforcement services. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses can be used as fronts for prostitution and other criminal activity. The experience of other cities indicates that proper management and operation of such businesses can minimize this risk. 
(3)  Sexually oriented businesses can increase the risk of exposure to communicable diseases, including, but not limited to, acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), for which there is currently no cure. Experiences of other cities indicate that such businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of the design and use of the premises, endangering not only the patrons of such establishments but also the general public. 
(4)  Sexually oriented businesses can cause or contribute to public health problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food and/or drink on the same premises. 
(5)  The risk of criminal activity and/or public health problems can be minimized though a licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed in this chapter herein. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-3. - Conclusions. 
    In direct furtherance of the substantial goals of public health, safety and welfare, the city council adopts the following licensing regulations, recognizing that it has great interest in the promotion of health and the prevention of criminal activity. It is not the intent of this chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of this chapter to restrict or deny adults, as defined by this section, access to communicative materials including adult-content materials that do not meet the legal definition of obscenity according to M.S.A. § 617.241 and as protected by the First Amendment, or to deny adults as defined by this section access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment to their intended markets. Instead, this section represents a balancing of competing interest: reduced criminal activity through the regulation of adult use establishments or businesses and their patrons. Thus, this chapter is designed to alleviate undesirable social problems that accompany adult-use establishments and businesses without curtailing constitutionally protected expression. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult in this section pertains to any reference, exhibition or conduct of which are sexual, obscene or prurient in nature or depict sexual, obscene and/or prurient themes and/or exude or intend to exude sexual characteristics with an emphasis on specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined in this chapter. 
    Adult(s) in this section refers to an individual person or persons of whom is considered a legal adult by law or legally emancipated and not a minor. 
    Adult use establishment(s ) means and includes any business, establishment, place or venue or other premises or enterprise open to some or all members of the public but which excludes minors by reason of age and which devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade or floor area (exclusive of storerooms, stock areas, or any other storage area not open to the public, but inclusive of an Adult Content Warehouse as defined in this chapter) to material or content that is sexual in nature and/or publicly displays adult merchandise, or generates or substantiates its revenues from the sale of items, merchandise, materials or other matter including the dissemination of information that emphasize, depict, simulate, describe and/or expose Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas as defined in this chapter and/or sexual content or themes. Activities classified as obscene as defined by M.S.A. § 617.241, as may be amended, are not included. Such adult establishments or businesses described herein include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Adult content bookstores. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides, disseminates, offers, or that derives significant revenue from the sale, barter or rental of materials, items, merchandise or matter including but not limited to printed and electronic information, pictures, slides, records, audio tapes, videotapes, movies, video discs, motion pictures, films, or any delivered medium that is adult or sexual in nature, or that depict, expose, simulate, describe or suggest specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  Adult motion picture theaters. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age and that presents or provides to the public sexually-oriented or adult content or themes for observation through motion picture medium, regardless of frequency or volume of clientele. 
(3)  Adult motion picture sales/rentals. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and to which the adult public is invited and/or permitted to rent, buy, trade or barter electronic or mechanic formats of motion pictures, including but not limited to electronically-, electrically-, or mechanically-controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, movies, electronic discs, or other image-written or image-producing item that is used to convey images that emphasize, distinguish, characterize, depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this chapter. 
(4)  Adult massage parlors. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and that offers, provides and/or derives a substantial or significant portion of its revenue from the service of massage or health maintenance distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this chapter. 
(5)  Adult steam room/bath house/sauna facilities. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and that offers, provides and/or derives a substantial or significant portion of its revenue from health or sports club service(s), steam bath, sauna, heat bathing or relaxation service that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this chapter. 
(6)  Adult companionship establishments/escort agency. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides the service of engaging a person or persons in the discussion, conversation, listening, communication or companionship with another person or persons, characterized by an emphasis on adult themes, sexually-oriented activities or content, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this chapter, occurring or to occur on the premises or elsewhere, including electronic formats. 
(7)  Adult rap/conversation parlors. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides the service of engaging in the listening, discussion, conversation, talk, or communication thereof characterized by an emphasis on adult themes, content, information, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this chapter, occurring or to occur on the premises or elsewhere, including electronic formats. 
(8)  Adult health/sport clubs. Any business, establishment, place or venue that provides the service of health maintenance, or a sport or athletic club that excludes minors by reason of age, and that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this chapter, occurring or to occur on the premises or elsewhere. 
(9)  Adult cabarets. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides some or all members of the adult public with live entertainment or dancing that presents nudity and/or depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or that presents, displays, depicts or provides matter that is meant to evoke sexual feelings, behavior, or to arouse or excite patrons in a sexually-oriented way and with sexually-oriented themes or content. 
(10)  Adult novelty businesses. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides, disseminates, offers, or that derives significant revenue from the sale, barter or rental of materials, items, objects, merchandise or matter characterized by an emphasis of depicting, describing or conveying sexually-oriented themes or content characterized by specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this chapter. 
(11)  Adult motion picture arcades. Any business, establishment, place or venue to which adult members of the public are invited or permitted, which excludes minors by reason of age, to use or operate electronic, electrical, or mechanical equipment, machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices to display or show still or motion pictures, images or displays that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing or conveying sexually-oriented content, adult themes, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(12)  Adult modeling studios. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise reproduced or depicted by image. 
(13)  Adult hotels/motels. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age and that provides hotel or motel services and offers or presents adult or sexually-oriented themes or content or material with an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(14)  Adult body painting studios. Any business, establishment, place or venue that excludes minors by reason of age and that provides the service of applying paint, ink, or other substance(s), whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is nude or clad in a manner that exposes any portion of specified anatomical areas as defined in this chapter. 
(15)  Adult content warehouse. Any business, establishment, place, venue or premises that houses, provides the services of storage space, stockroom(s), or warehousing, including that of a distribution center, for merchandise or material containing or depicting adult content or themes, from which premises such adult merchandise or material are intended for dissemination and delivery to either the adult public, a wholesaler, or to a third-party vendor or dealer, whether via electronically, through the Internet, telephone, fax, or via catalog, magazine or by post. 
    Adult use establishment(s), accessory: 
(1)  Means adult use establishment as defined in this chapter; and 
(2)  Comprise ten percent or less of the floor area of the establishment of which is open to the adult public, exclusive of storerooms and/or stockrooms; or 
(3)  Derive 20 percent or less of the gross receipts of the entire business operation; or 
(4)  Not involve or include any activity other than the sale, barter or rental of adult merchandise or items. 
    Adult use establishment(s), principal: 
(1)  Means adult use establishment as defined in this chapter; and 
(2)  Comprise more than ten percent of the floor area of the establishment of which is open to the adult public, exclusive of storerooms and/or stockrooms; or 
(3)  Derive more than 20 percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation. 
    City administrator means the city administrator of the City of Watertown and/or his/her designee(s) acting on behalf of the city administrator. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented use business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Premises means the real property and all building and structures located on the real property. 
    Retail-oriented adult use establishment(s) means the offering of goods and/or services of which are characterized by an emphasis on adult content or themes and used as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment, including but not limited to the following classification of uses as defined in this chapter: 
(1)  Adult bookstore; 
(2)  Adult novelty business; 
(3)  Adult motion picture sales/rentals. 
    Service-oriented adult use establishment(s) means the offering of goods and/or services of which are characterized by an emphasis on adult content or themes and used as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment, including but not limited to the following classification of uses as defined in this chapter: 
(1)  Adult motion picture theater/arcade; 
(2)  Adult steam room/bath house/sauna facility; 
(3)  Adult companionship establishment; 
(4)  Adult rap/conversation parlor; 
(5)  Adult health/sport club; 
(6)  Adult cabaret; 
(7)  Adult body painting studio; 
(8)  Adult hotel or motel; 
(9)  Adult massage parlor; 
(10)  Adult modeling studio. 
    Specified anatomical areas: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, including oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital intercourse, bestiality in regards to any type of sexual intercourse between a human being and an animal, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Exhibitions of depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence, including any explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ whether clothed, unclothed or opaquely sheathed; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; 
(5)  Sadomasochistic situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, abuse, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
    Substantial enlargement of an adult use establishment means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 20 percent, as the floor area existed on the effective date of this chapter. 
    Substantial or significant portion means an amount which is more than exactly 20 percent, or where otherwise defined in this chapter. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of an adult use establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sub-lease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-5. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13 of Watertown Municipal Code. 
(b)  A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult use establishment without a valid license or in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-10-08) 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 47-6. - Generally. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  No person, firm, or corporation shall operate an adult use establishment, without formal review of the application by city council in the form of a public hearing. 
(2)  No person, firm, or corporation shall operate an adult use establishment without having first secured a license as herein provided. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following shall not require a license or review by the city council under this chapter: 
(1)  Material with significant literary content or social commentary; 
(2)  A business where sexually oriented materials are sold, bartered, distributed, leased, furnished, or otherwise provided for off-site use or entertainment, if the sexually oriented material on each item is sufficiently and completely blocked from view as required by M.S.A. § 617.293, as it may be amended from time to time, and each item is in an area accessible only to an employee or the business; 
(3)  A person or organization exempted under M.S.A. § 617.295; 
(4)  Activity regulated under M.S.A. § 617.251; 
(5)  Displaying works of art showing specified anatomical areas, so long as sexually oriented materials are for not sale, and the business does not have a liquor license; 
(6)  Movies rated G, PG, PG-13, NC-17 or R; 
(7)  A person appearing in a state of nudity for the purpose of a modeling class operated: 
a.  By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
b.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
c.  In a structure: 
1.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
3.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(c)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a drawing, sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The drawing, sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with market dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one inch. 
(d)  In order for a license to issue, the applicant must comply with Watertown Municipal Code and state law, including, but not limited to, the applicant being qualified according to the provisions of Watertown Municipal Code and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the fire department and building official. 
(e)  If a person who wishes to operate an adult use establishment is an individual party, the individual must sign the application for a license as applicant. If the applicant party consists of more than one individual, then each individual who has an interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 47-7 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-7. - Issuance. 
(a)  All adult use establishment applicants shall adhere to M.S.A. § 617.242, Subd. 2. 
(b)  An applicant wishing to operate an adult use establishment at a location where this type of establishment was not previously located must notify the city at least 60 days before submitting a permit application for the adult use establishment. This notice shall be sent by certified mail to the city administrator. Upon signed receipt of the applicant's notice by certified mail, the city shall be allowed a 60-day review period of the application prior to presenting the application to the city council for review and public hearing. 
(c)  The city council shall approve the issuance of a license for an adult use establishment applicant within 60 days after the date of the required public hearing unless the city council reasonably deems it necessary to hold subsequent hearings on the matter, or if the city council finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  The applicant is a minor at the time the application is submitted. 
(2)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the license application. 
(3)  The applicant failed to supply all information and materials deemed necessary by the city administrator. 
(4)  The applicant is delinquent in his or her payment to the city or another city within the State of Minnesota involving taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to an adult use establishment or another business or establishment for which more than any portion of the gross receipts of the business operation are derived from the sale, rental, barter, or services characterized by an emphasis on adult content or themes. 
(5)  The applicant gave false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the license application and/or with the materials submitted with the application. 
(6)  The applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within five years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(7)  The applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate an adult use establishment or business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate an adult use establishment or business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(8)  The premises to be used for the adult use establishment or business have not been approved by the fire department and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(9)  The license application fee and investigation fee required by this chapter have not been paid. 
(10)  The applicant has been employed in an adult use establishment or business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 24 months and has demonstrated that he or she is unable to operate or manage the adult use establishment or business premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(11)  The applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with this Code. 
(12)  Fewer than five complete years from the date of discharge have passed since an applicant or his or her spouse, companion, partner or roommate, with whom he or she resides, or a business partner, agent or employee has been convicted of a felony or a gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses. Such offenses include but are not limited to: 
a.  Prostitution under M.S.A. §§ 609.321; 609.324; or 609.3242. 
b.  Criminal sexual conduct under M.S.A. §§ 609.342 to 609.3451. 
c.  Solicitation of children under M.S.A. § 609.352. 
d.  Indecent exposure under M.S.A. § 617.23. 
e.  Distribution or exhibition of obscene materials and performances under M.S.A. § 617.241. 
f.  Use of a minor in a sexual performance under M.S.A. § 617.246. 
g.  Possession of pornographic work involving minors under M.S.A. § 617.247. 
(13)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or his or her spouse, companion, partner or room mate, with whom he or she resides, or a business partner, agent or employee. 
(14)  The premises to be licensed as an adult use establishment is currently licensed by the city as a tanning facility, tattoo establishment, pawn shop, therapeutic massage enterprise, or an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(15)  The license, if granted, shall state the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the adult use establishment or business. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-8. - License fees; investigation fees. 
    All applications shall be accompanied by a license fee, investigation fee and an annual license renewal fee. The initial license fee for an adult use establishment license shall be set by the city council. The investigation fee for the purpose of issuing a license shall be set by the city council. The annual license renewal fee shall be set by the city council. In the event that the license is denied upon application and review by city council, the license fee shall be refunded; however, no part of the license investigation fee shall be returned to the applicant. No part of the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-9. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Carver County sheriff's department, fire department, and building inspection division to inspect the premises of an adult use establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates an adult use establishment or his or her business partner, agent or employee commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the Carver County sheriff's department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult hotel or motel which are currently being rented by a customer or customers for use as permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-10. - Expiration. 
(a)  Each renewal license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Each license may be renewed only by making an application as provided in section 47-8 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 90 days before the expiration date. If the city council determines good and sufficient cause is shown by the applicant for failure to file a timely renewal application, the city council and/or city administrator may, if other provisions of the section are complied with, grant the application. 
(b)  When the city council denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city council finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date that the application was denied. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-11. - Suspension. 
    The city administrator may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 60 days following written notice and an opportunity to be heard if the city administrator determines that a licensee or an employee of an adult use establishment has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with this Code or state law; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult use establishment or business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow inspection of the adult use establishment premises as authorized by this chapter; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by any person on the adult use establishment or business premises. 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an adult use establishment or business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(6)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in a license application or a renewal application. 
(7)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on the licensed occupation or business. 
(8)  A licensee's criminal conviction that is directly related to the occupation or business licensed as defined by M.S.A. § 364.03, Subd. 2, provided that the licensee cannot show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed occupation or business as defined by M.S.A. § 364.03, Subd. 3. 
(9)  Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-12. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city administrator may revoke a license preceded by written notice and an opportunity to be heard if a cause of suspension of section 47-11 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The city administrator may revoke a license if the city administrator determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information to the city on the application or during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, sale, or barter of a controlled substance(s) on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution to occur on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult use establishment or business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
(5)  A licensee violated any of the provisions of M.S.A. §§ 617.241-617.299 relating to the illegal distribution, possession, or sale of obscene materials. 
(6)  A licensee, or his or her spouse, companion, partner or roommate, with whom he or she resides, or a business partner, agent or employee who has been convicted of a felony or a gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult uses in the past five years. 
(7)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises that are a felony or a gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult uses, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the adult use establishment or business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(8)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the meaning as it is defined in M.S.A. § 609.341, Subd. 11(b); or 
(9)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, local lodging tax, or other taxes or fees related to the adult use establishment. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  When the city administrator revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for two years and the licensee shall not be issued an adult use establishment license for two years from the date that the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city administrator finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation was corrected or abated. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-13. - Appeal. 
(a)  Generally. If the city administrator denies the issuance of a license, or suspends, or revokes a license, the administrator shall sent to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action, and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal in writing the decision of the city administrator within ten days of receiving notice of the city's action. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the city administrator in suspending or revoking a license until the city council makes a final decision. 
(b)  Procedure. The city council may appoint a committee of the council or an independent hearing officer to hear the matter, report findings of fact, and provide a recommendation for disposition to the council. Hearings on the appeal shall be open to the public and the licensee or applicant shall have the right to appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence in its behalf. The city council shall make a final decision within 60 days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
(c)  Additional requirements. The city council may condition denial, suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of a license upon appropriate terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-14. - Transfer. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate an adult use establishment or business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address and premise(s) designated in the adult use establishment application and permit. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 2, 9-10-08) 
ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 47-15. - Existing adult use establishments. 
(a)  License administration for existing adult use establishments. Within ten days exclusive of Saturday and Sunday, of the published date of this chapter, any existing adult use establishments or businesses shall apply for a license from the city. Failure to apply for a license is a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  An existing adult use establishment may continue to operate pending review of the license application by the city, after which license review, the city administrator may either grant or deny a license based on review of the license application provisions provided by this chapter. 
(c)  Existing adult use establishments or businesses which are legally classified as non-conforming uses and are granted a license may continue in accordance with the provision of this chapter. 
(d)  An owner or operator whose adult use establishment or business shall have the right to request an extension provided that owner or operator demonstrates or proves a burden exclusive of pecuniary hardship with the effective termination date of the non-conforming adult use establishment. 
(1)  Such hardships and burdens that may be considered by city council include but are not limited to: 
a.  The degree or magnitude of threat to the public health, safety, and general welfare posed by the secondary impacts of the operation. 
b.  The length of time that the adult use establishment has been operating. 
c.  The ease by which the property could be converted to a conforming adult use. 
d.  The nature and character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
e.  The value and condition of the improvements on the property. 
(e)  An application for an adult use establishment license or a reapplication must be made on a respective form provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-16. - Adult companionship establishment/escort agencies. 
    An adult companionship establishment or escort agency shall not employ or offer or provide services to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-17. - Adult model studios. 
    An adult model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years or offer or provide services to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-18. - Adult motion theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
    A person commits an offense if he or she allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-19. - Adult hotels and motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult hotel or motel as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have an adult use establishment license, he or she rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he or she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection 47-19(b), the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration or remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-20. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult use establishment or business, other than an adult motel or hotel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, any video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for an adult use establishment license, the application shall be accompanied by a drawing, sketch or diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city administrator may waive the foregoing diagram for license renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and approved, and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city administrator. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in a manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from any manager station(s) of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from each manager station(s). 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1). 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to sufficiently illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) of section 47-20 commits an offense if the person fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-21. - General license restrictions. 
(a)  Posting of license. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult use establishment or business so that it may be easily viewed at any time. 
(b)  Effect of license. A license issued under this chapter is only effective for the compact and contiguous space expressly specified in the approved license application. 
(c)  Maintenance of order. A licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall not allow any illegal activity to take place on or near the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, prostitution, public indecency, indecent exposure, disorderly conduct, or the sale or use of illegal drugs. Every act or omission by an employee or independent contractor of the licensee constituting a violation of the chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the license, or as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the employees or independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-22. - Terms of operation. 
(a)  Applicable laws. Operators of adult use establishments shall comply with the provisions of this Code and with the laws of the State of Minnesota and the United States of America. No provision(s) of this Code shall be construed as authorizing or permitting conduct that is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances, including but not limited to statutes or ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material as defined by the State of Minnesota, inordinately prurient in content or nature, or the exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials to minors. 
(b)  Existing adult use establishments. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, existing adult use establishments must comply with all requirements of this chapter immediately upon its effective date. 
(c)  Regulation of hours of operation. Adult use establishments shall be permitted to operate between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each month. Adult use establishments shall not be permitted to operate during the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 10:59 a.m., Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each month. Adult use establishments shall not be permitted to operate anytime Sunday or national holiday. 
(d)  Offsite viewing. Any adult use establishment shall prevent the viewing of its merchandise or any materials depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by any visual or auditory media, including the display, decoration, sign, show window, sound transmission, or other means, from the public right-of-way or from any place not on the premises of the adult use establishment where the public may be able to view, listen to or experience the matter, including off-site viewing. 
(e)  Prohibition on liquor: 
(1)  Adult use establishments shall be prohibited from selling, dispensing or providing intoxicating beverages or food for consumption, or any intoxicating edible matter that is capable of being imbibed and may temporarily impair judgment thereafter. Such matter includes but is not limited to alcohol, liquor, 3.2 percent and higher malt liquor, alcohol that is mixed with other liquids or food forms including but not limited to gelatin and ice. 
(2)  The sale and/or consumption of any intoxicating edible matter is strictly prohibited on the real property premises of any adult use establishment or business, including any parking areas that are owned or leased by the adult use establishment or its owner(s) or employees, or any parking areas that are being used by patrons of the adult use establishment while those patrons are engaging in the business or service(s) provided by the adult use establishment. 
(f)  Entrance and exit points. 
(1)  All entrance and exit points to and from the adult use establishment, with the exception of emergency fire exits and those entrance and exit points that are not useable by patrons, shall be visible from the public right-of-way and illuminated, beginning at sunset, during the hours in which the adult use establishment is being operated or open to the public. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a patron(s) of the adult use establishment to pass through an entrance or exit point not designated for public use as described above in section 47-22(f)(2), except when required and permitted due to emergency situations or situations that warrant immediate egression of the premises. 
(g)  Signs. 
(1)  Exterior signs for adult use establishments or businesses shall not contain representational depiction of any specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  Adult use establishments shall not graphically describe or present descriptions of adult themes or content on any exterior portion of the premises, or on any interior portion of the premises that is visible from outside the adult use establishment building or premises. 
(3)  Adult use establishments shall prominently display within two feet of the entrance point of business a permanent sign of professional quality that states, "This business sells or displays matter containing adult themes. Persons under 18 years of age are prohibited." The size of the letters on the sign shall be between three-eighths of an inch and two inches in height. This sign does not contribute to the maximum allowable signage for any one building or property. 
(h)  Access by minors. 
(1)  Minors shall not be permitted on the property or premises of an adult use establishment or business, except: 
a.  A retail-oriented adult use establishment, accessory, may allow minors on the premises provided that: 
1.  The area or portion of floor space which is allocated for the sale or rental of adult content is sufficiently and completely screened and not accessible, whether physically, visually or audibly to minors; 
2.  The area or portion of floor space which is allocated for the sale or rental of adult content shall prominently display, within two feet of the entrance point of the screened area, a sign of professional quality that states, "This screened area sells or displays matter containing adult themes. Persons under 18 years of age are prohibited." The size of the letters on the sign shall be between three-eighths of an inch and two square inches in height. In the case of a retail-oriented adult use establishment, accessory, additional exterior signage as prescribed in section 47-22(g)(3) is not required; or 
3.  Adult items or merchandise are kept in a storage facility, stock or store room not open to the public. 
b.  No adult item, merchandise, matter or material may be offered, sold, bartered, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to a minor. 
c.  No adult item, merchandise, matter, material, representation or depiction of an adult theme or adult content shall be displayed, communicated or presented whether physically, visually, audibly or otherwise, in a fashion that allows such content to be visible to a minor, whether or not the minor is on the adult use establishment premises. 
(i)  Adult use establishment entertainment. 
(1)  A live performer, entertainer, dancer or employee, whether or not under contract, shall not be under 18 years of age. 
(2)  All adult performances such as dancing and entertaining shall occur on a platform intended for the purpose of performance and shall not be fewer than two feet from the level of the floor. 
(3)  No performers, entertainers, dancers or employees, whether or not under contract, shall fondle, caress or touch any patron, and no patron shall fondle, caress, or touch any performer, entertainer, dancer or employee. 
(4)  No person may be nude on the premises of any adult use establishment. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 47-23. - Location requirements. 
(a)  Adult use establishment, principal. 
(1)  Service-oriented adult use establishments, principal, as prescribed in section 47-4 are permitted uses in industrial districts subject to the following requirements: 
a.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residential planned unit development (PUD) district, residential district or residential property, whether existing or use-guided by the most recently adopted comprehensive plan. 
b.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 2,800 feet of an existing school, place of worship, elder or child care facility, religious, educational or medical institution, including institutionally-owned property. 
c.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 1,500 feet of another adult use establishment. 
d.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 2,800 feet of any parkland property or public recreational facility. 
(2)  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, principal, as prescribed in section 47-4 are permitted uses in industrial districts subject to the following requirements: 
a.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residential planned unit development (PUD) district, residential district or residential property, whether existing or use guided by the most recent comprehensive plan. 
b.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 2,800 feet of an existing school, place of worship, elder or child care facility, religious, educational or medical institution, including institutionally-owned property. 
c.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 1,500 feet of another adult use establishment. 
d.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 2,800 feet of any parkland property or public recreational facility. 
(b)  Adult use establishment, accessory. 
(1)  Service-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as prescribed in section 47-4 are permitted uses in industrial districts subject to the following requirements: 
a.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residential planned unit development (PUD) district, residential district or residential property, whether existing or use-guided by the most recently adopted comprehensive plan. 
b.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 2,800 feet of an existing school, place of worship, elder or child care facility, religious, educational or medical institution, including institutionally-owned property. 
c.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 1,500 feet of another adult use establishment. 
d.  An adult use establishment shall not be located within 2,800 feet of any parkland property or public recreational facility. 
    Retail-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as prescribed in section 47-4 are permitted uses in commercial districts and industrial districts and are subject to the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  For purposes of this chapter, distances shall be the shortest measurement from the property line of any residential district, residential property, educational institution, place of worship, elder or child care facility, public park land, public recreational facility, or an adult use establishment to the property line where the proposed adult use establishment is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 3, 9-10-08) 
Chapter 48 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 349, adopted June 8, 2010, amended Ch. 48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 48, §§ 48-1-48-27, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 255 adopted June 29, 2004 and Ord. No. 279, adopted February 28, 2006. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 46.5; zoning, ch. 62. 

Sec. 48-1. - Purpose. 
    These regulations set forth by the City of Watertown combine the need to protect the public safety and welfare, the need to encourage pedestrian movement, the need for a well-maintained and attractive community, and the need to adequately convey ideas, provide communication and identify features within the community. The provisions do not ensure or provide for every property or business owner's desired level of visibility for signs. The sign standards are intended to allow signs to have adequate visibility from streets and rights-of-way that abut a site, but not for visibility from streets and rights-of-way farther away. The regulations for signs and awnings have the following specific objectives: 
(1)  To ensure that signs and awnings are designed, constructed, installed and maintained according to standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare and to eliminate excessive and/or confusing sign displays that create potential hazards to motorists, pedestrians and to property. 
(2)  To allow and promote positive conditions for sign communication while at the same time restrict signs which create continuous visual clutter and hazards at public right-of-way intersections; 
(3)  To reflect and support the desired character and development patterns of the various zoning districts in order to plan and promote an attractive environment; 
(4)  To allow for adequate and effective signs in commercial and industrial zones while preventing signs from dominating the appearance of the area, thereby encouraging a positive business atmosphere; 
(5)  To establish a sign application and sign permit review process that effectively regulates issues pertaining to the location, placement and physical characteristics of signs in an effort to ensure compatibility with adjoining land uses, architecture and landscape. 
(6)  To provide for consistent and fair application and enforcement of regulations pertaining to signs and to ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is protected. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-2. - Findings. 
    The city finds: 
(1)  Exterior signs serve as an adequate medium through which expression may be conveyed. 
(2)  Mismanaged and/or accumulation and proliferation of signage has the potential to impede visibility and flow for the passage of vehicular traffic and pedestrian movement, thereby creating a hazard for the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(3)  Consistent regulation of the physical characteristics and placement of exterior signs can produce a more desirable effect on the character, quality and economic vitality of the community. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-3. - Scope. 
    The requirements of this chapter apply to all signs, sign structures, awnings, banners and strobe lights located within the City of Watertown. A lessee or owner shall not permit a sign to be placed, erected or maintained on property under their control that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-4. - Clarification for rights-of-way. 
    Signs established by city, county or state agencies are permitted in rights-of-way. Non-governmental/jurisdictional signs located in the rights-of-way are prohibited except in the following situations where any of the following apply: 
(1)  Building signs, sign structures, banners and awnings that are located in the Central Business District which extend from private property over public sidewalks provided such signs, sign structures, banners and awnings adhere to the requirements of this chapter; or 
(2)  Portable or temporary signs located in the central business district not exceeding six square feet of surface area, and which are no taller than three feet from the ground. 
(3)  Public art. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-5. - Authority. 
    This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-6. - Administration. 
    The zoning administrator shall have authority to implement procedures, forms, and written policies for administering the provisions of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall examine all applications for permits for the erection of signs, issuance of permits and denials, authorize the continued use of signs that conform with the requirements of this chapter, record and file all applications for permits with any accompanying plans and documents, make inspections of signs in the City of Watertown, unless required by the building inspector, and make such reports as the city may require. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-7. - Hierarchy of regulations. 
(a)  Conflicts within chapter 62, zoning. In general, an area with base zoning, PUD (planned unit development), overlay zoning, or another planned district is subject to all of the sign regulations of this chapter. When the regulations conflict, unless specifically indicated otherwise, the regulations for a planned district supersede regulations for an overlay zone and the regulations for an overlay zone shall supersede regulations for base zones. The regulations for planned districts and overlay zones shall supersede conflicting regulations for a specific use or development unless specifically stated otherwise. 
(b)  Other conflicts. In the event that no sign regulations exist in a planned district, this chapter shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a land use regulation and a structural regulation, or other conflicts not otherwise addressed by this chapter, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(c)  Objective land use standards and definitions that apply to signs and awnings. Signs, sign structures, awnings and banners being constructed as part of a larger development project shall be subject to additional standards when applicable. Where a land use review is required, the review procedures and criteria contained in this chapter shall apply except as follows: 
(1)  Sign adjustments or modifications. Approval criteria for sign adjustments shall be made by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Nonconforming signs. Approval criteria for the determination of nonconforming sign status shall be made by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-8. - Relationship to other city, regional, state and federal regulations. 
(a)  Compliance required. In addition to the requirements of the zoning chapter, signs shall comply with all other applicable city, regional, state and federal regulations. Where the provisions of this chapter conflict with those set forth in other regulations under the Municipal Code of Watertown, the more restrictive shall control. 
(b)  References to other regulations. References in this chapter to other city, regional, state or federal regulations do not constitute a complete list of such regulations. These references do not imply any responsibility by the city for enforcement of regional, state, or federal regulations. 
(c)  Current versions and citations. All references to other city, regional, state, or federal regulations in this chapter refer to the most current version and citation for those regulations, unless specifically indicated otherwise. Where the referenced regulations have been repealed, sign code requirements for compliance are no longer in effect. 
(d)  Sign-, sign structure- and awning-, and banner-related provisions. Any approved land use review that applies to a specific site shall supersede the standards of this chapter. Examples of land use reviews include master plans, impact mitigation plans, conditional or interim uses, adjustments, design standards and historic design standards. In the event that a land use review does not include provisions for signs, sign structures and/or awnings, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-9. - Applying the code. 
    Literal readings of the code language shall be used. Regulations are no more or less strict than as stated. Words used in this chapter shall have their normal dictionary meaning unless otherwise stated with specific meaning or reference, or unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-10. - Situations where the code is silent. 
    Proposals for signs where the code is silent, or where the rules of this chapter do not provide a basis for concluding that the sign is allowed, are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-11. - Severability. 
    In the event any word or sentence in this chapter, or provision or portion of this chapter, or rules adopted by this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining words and/or sentences, provisions, or portions thereof shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-12. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this chapter, shall be interpreted as herein defined: 
    Abandoned sign means any sign, awning or banner and/or its supporting sign structure which for 180 or more consecutive days has no longer been maintained by the entity which established the sign, or which for a period of 180 or more consecutive days no longer serves the purpose originally intended by the sign, or which has become irrelevant, or which has not been maintained in a manner sufficient to uphold the aesthetic value or physical characteristics of the sign. Signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of one year or more. Any sign remaining after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be abandoned. Non-conforming signs shall be regulated according to section 48-32. 
    Area of sign means the area of the largest single face of the sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled. Any irregular shaped sign area shall be computed by using the actual sign face surface. In the case of wall signs, the area of the copy will be used. 
    Awning means a roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass designed and intended for protections from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily over a window, walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also projects over a door shall be counted as an awning. 
    Awning sign means a sign printed on, or in some fashion attached directly to the surface of an awning. 
    Back lit (sign illumination) means a direct source of light which illuminates a sign by shining through a translucent surface of a sign, including plastic signs, lit from an internal light source. 
    Backed sign means a sign with copy on two faces that are back-to-back, V-shaped, A-shaped, stacked, side-by-side, parallel, or within ten degrees of parallel of each other. 
    Balloon sign means a sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material supported by helium, hot, or pressurized air which is greater than 24 inches in diameter. 
    Banner means a temporary sign typically made of cloth, plastic, or vinyl materials. 
    Beacon/search beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
    Bench sign means a sign which is affixed to a bench not to include memorial dedications in park or recreational areas. 
    Billboard means a sign structure with a surface area over 100 square feet per surface that identifies or communicates a commercial or noncommercial message. 
    Building length means the longest straight line parallel to adjacent public right-of-way from end wall to end wall of a building. 
Figure 1: Building Length 

    Building "shy zone" means the area on the sidewalk within two feet of the building face. 
    Building sign means any sign attached to or supported by any building. 
    Canopy means a roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass, on a support, which provides overhead shelter or shade over a doorway. An awning or a marquee is not a canopy. 
    Canopy sign means any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made of fabric, plastic, or structured protective over a door or entrance. 
    Changeable copy sign means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged through manual, mechanical, or electrical means without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time and temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a commercial message or a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. 
    Commercial speech means any sign which advertises or identifies a product, business, service, event, or any other matter of commercial nature. 
    Copy and graphic means the graphical content of a sign surface in either permanent or removable components, pictograph, symbolic or alphabetic form. 
    Day(s) means calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days. 
    Direct illumination (sign illumination) means a sign whose light source is either located in the interior of the sign so that the rays go through the face of the sign, or which is attached to the face of the sign and is perceived as a design element of the sign. 
    Dynamic sign means any sign with characteristics that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure, or any other component of the sign. This includes displays that incorporate technology or methods allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components, as well as any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking or animated display and any display that incorporates movement such as rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, digital ink or any other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or displays, regardless of the frequency at which the change occurs. 
    External illumination means illumination of a sign that is affected by an artificial source of light not contained with the sign itself. 
    Fascia sign means a single-faced sign attached flush to a building or other structure. Fascia signs do not include sign structures that are attached to signs defined as sign structures by this section. 
    Facade means the front of a building; part of a building facing a street. 
    Flag means any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors, patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign and its applicable structure supported upon the ground that is not attached to any building. 
    Grade means the elevation or level of the ground, street or public right-of-way closest to the sign, awning or banner to which reference is made. 
    Hazardous sign means a sign constituting a hazard to public safety because it no longer meets the lateral and/or vertical loads as specified in the building code, or because it no longer meets the wiring and installation standards of the electrical code, or because it is located or situated in such a way that it poses a threat to public safety by obstructing traffic or pedestrian movement or lines-of-sight. 
    Height of sign means the vertical distance measured from the average grade at the base of the sign to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. 
    Illuminated facade highlights means lighted areas that highlight a building's architectural or structural features and that do not convey a message or image. Illuminated facade highlights can be created either by light projected onto a feature or highlighting a feature with a light fixture. Neon tubing highlights, electronic highlights, or other highlights with color features along a wall or facade's structural features is prohibited. 
    Incidental sign means a small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than one square foot. 
    Lawn sign means a freestanding sign made of lightweight materials such as cardboard or vinyl that is supported by a frame, pole, or other support structure placed directly in the ground without foundation or other anchor. 
    Monument sign means a low profile freestanding sign, with its base resting on the ground and incorporating the design and building materials complementary to the architectural theme of the buildings on the same property. 
    Non-commercial speech means dissemination of messages not classified as commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational topics. 
    Nonconforming sign means a sign that was created in conformance with Watertown Municipal Code, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zoning, land use regulations, or Municipal Code regulations, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable Municipal Code regulations. 
    Off-premises sign means any sign or banner located on any real property for which the owner, maintainer, or entity causing the sign or banner to exist is different from the owner, maintainer, or entity occupying the property on which the sign or banner is located. 
    On-premises sign means a sign identifying or advertise an establishment, person, activity, goods, products or services located on the site where the sign is installed. 
    Owner means, for purposes of this chapter, any person, people, party(ies) recorded on official land records. 
    Permanent sign means any sign not classified as a temporary sign, and which is placed on a structure or affixed to or placed on the ground for a period for more than 14 consecutive days. 
    Pole sign. See Pylon sign . 
    Portable sign means any sign or banner not permanently attached to the ground or a building and designed to be moved easily. Portable signs include, but are not limited to, A-boards, portable reader-boards, and similar signs. For purposes of this chapter, portable signs shall be considered temporary signs. 
    Projecting sign means any sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or wall, generally at right angles, to the building. Projecting signs include signs that extend partially or fully into the right-of-way or partially or fully on private property. 
    Pylon sign means any freestanding sign which as its supportive structure(s) anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level by pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open. 
    Right-of-way means, for purposes of this chapter, a right-of-way shall be defined as any public or private area that allows for the passage of people or goods. Right-of-way includes passageways such as freeways, streets, bike paths, alleys, and walkways. A public right-of-way is a right-of-way that is dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected, constructed or placed upon or over a roof, or placed so as to extend over or above the roofline, which is wholly or partly supported by such buildings. Roof signs shall not include signs located on a mansard roof if the sign is mounted vertically and architecturally integrated with the roof. For the purposes of this chapter architecturally integrated mansard signs and other architecturally integrated signs located below the principal roof line shall be classified as wall signs. 
    Scrolling text means a type of movement in which the letters or symbols move vertically or horizontally across the sign in a continuous scroll, permitting a viewer to observe the message over time. Scrolling shall not include flashing or other types of video movement. 
    Sign means materials placed or constructed, or light projected, that (1) conveys a message or image, and (2) is used to inform or attract the attention of the public. Some examples of signs are materials or lights meeting the definition of the preceding sentence and which are commonly referred to as signs, placards, A-boards, posters, billboards, murals, diagrams, banners, flags, or projected slides, images or holograms. The scope of the term 'sign' does not depend on the content of the message or image conveyed. 
    Sign contractor means any person, partnership or corporation engaged in whole or in part of the erection or maintenance of signs. 
    Sign face means the surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited. 
    Sign maintenance means normal care needed to keep a sign functional including fixing or replacement of broken or worn parts. Replacement includes comparable materials only. Repairs may be made with the sign in position or with the sign removed. 
    Sign structure means any device or material which supports, or has supported, or is capable of supporting, a sign in a stationary position, including decorative components. 
    Structural alteration means modification of a sign, sign structure or awning that affects the sign or awning size, shape, height, or location; changes in structural materials; or replacement of electrical components with other than comparable materials. The replacement of wood parts with metal parts, the replacement of incandescent bulbs with light emitting diodes (LED), or the addition of electronic elements to a non-electrified sign constitute structural alterations. Structural alteration does not include ordinary sign maintenance or repair, repainting an existing sign surface, including changes of message or image, exchanging painted and pasted or glued materials on painted wall signs, or exchanging display panels of a sign through release and closing of clips or other brackets. 
    Swinging sign means any sign installed on an arm, mast or spar, which is not permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole. 
    Temporary business sign means a temporary sign which is used by a business to display commercial messages pertaining to on site services and goods or any non-commercial message. 
    Temporary sign means any sign placed on a structure or affixed to or placed on the ground for limited period of time not exceeding 14 consecutive days. This includes items such as banners, portable signs, sandwich or curb signs. 
    Through pedestrian zone means the portion of a sidewalk or walkway that is intended for pedestrian travel and is entirely free of permanent and temporary objects. 
    Wall sign means any sign attached to a wall or building with the sign's face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building. This includes signs painted directly on a wall. 
    Window sign means any sign installed on a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. For purposes of this chapter, a window sign which is located inside a building but which is visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent public or private property shall be considered a window sign. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 362, § 1, 10-25-11; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 48-13. - Permits required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, company or other entity to erect, alter or relocate within the city any sign without first obtaining a permit and paying the fee required herein unless provided elsewhere. The zoning administrator may require persons failing to hold such permit to pay double the permit fee. No person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign upon any property or building without the consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property or building. Awnings require building permits and shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator and the building inspector. Certain installations are exempt from permit requirements. Exemption from permit or registration does not by default grant authorization for any sign, sign structure or awning to be erected or structurally altered in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Sign permits. No permanent sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the city without first securing a permit from the city. The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit. A sign permit must be obtained for all permanent signs other than signs on awnings provided that the installation or application of the sign onto the awning occurs with the construction of the awning. Awnings that have been issued building permits do not need a separate awning sign permit, but the awning sign must be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator prior to issuing the building permit. Indirect lighting for a sign requires a separate electrical permit. A sign permit is required in the situations listed below: 
a.  To establish a permanent sign; 
b.  To establish a temporary sign for more than 14 days for a time period deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator and not to exceed 30 days; or 
c.  To structurally alter a sign as defined as 'structural alteration' in section 48-12. 
(2)  Permit application. Application for a permit shall be in writing addressed to the zoning administrator and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the sign and the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located. 
b.  The address at which the sign is to be erected. 
c.  The lot, block and addition on which the sign is to be erected and the street on which it is to front. 
d.  A complete set of plans showing the necessary elevations, setbacks, size and details to fully and clearly represent the construction and place of the sign. Plans shall depict the site triangle and unobstructed sight lines for vehicles. 
1.  Building signs. 
i.  A drawing of the proposed sign showing dimensions and describing materials, lettering, colors, illumination, and support systems. 
ii.  Photographs of the building face and the building faces of any adjacent buildings. 
iii.  A drawing of the building face and site plan showing the location of the proposed sign. 
iv.  A cross section of the building face showing how the sign will be attached and how far it will extend from the building. 
v.  Any pictorial proof or other information that the sign is of historical significance or is a reproduction of an historic sign. 
vi.  A building sign plan for a building with more than one use or business, showing all signs. The building sign plan shall be approved by the zoning administrator. 
2.  Monument signs. 
i.  A drawing of the proposed sign showing dimensions and describing materials, lettering, colors, illumination, and support systems. 
ii.  A cross section of the sign structure showing how the sign will be installed, including footings, etc. 
iii.  A site plan drawn on a certified survey showing the proposed sign setbacks. 
iv.  A freestanding sign plan for a building with more than one use or business, showing all signs on a given property. 
e.  Type of sign (i.e. wall sign, monument, etc.). 
f.  Certification by applicant indicating the application complies with all requirements of the sign ordinance. 
g.  If more than one use or business on the property, a sign plan shall be submitted showing all signs on a given property. 
h.  Sign permits become null and void if the sign is not installed 180 days after the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 48-14. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from requiring a permit: 
(1)  Signs that are in existence and are being re-erected following sign repair and sign maintenance. 
(2)  Signs indicating building addresses, per requirements of state fire code. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this sign ordinance, signs consistent with table 1 containing non-commercial speech may be posted in accordance with M.S.A. § 211B.045 as may be amended. 
(4)  Signs located within the confines of a building, and which are not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Traffic or other municipal signs, civic or service organizations, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger, emergency signs, those signs concerned with safety and general welfare of the public, and other signs as may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  No sign permit is required for window signage that does not cover more than one-third of the total area of the window in which the sign is displayed. Signs covering more than one-third of a window shall be considered wall signs. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 48-15. - Signs exemption table. 
    The following table 1 shall determine signage types, quantities, maximum sign face areas, setbacks and maximum aggregate signage that are exempt from requiring a permit according to the zoning district. A second sign may be allowed as long as the total sign face area does not exceed the maximum allowable sign face area for each type of sign and maximum aggregate signage for each lot. 
Table 1. Signs Exemption 
Zoning District(s) Types of Signs 
Exempt from 
Permit Number of Signs Maximum Sign 
Face Area Required Setback Regulations Maximum 
Aggregate 
Signage R-1, R-2 zoning districts low and medium density residential (and including all other residential districts.) Fascia 1 per lot 2 sq. ft. N/A 6 sq. ft. not to include window signage and temporary banner Freestanding 1 per lot 4 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Lawn signs 1 per lot 4 sq. ft Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Window 1 per window 1/3 of window area N/A Temporary banner (up for a max. of 14 days) 1 per lot 32 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' R-3, R-4 zoning districts high density residential and manufactured housing Fascia 1 per building 2 sq. ft. N/A 6 sq. ft not to include window signage and temporary banner Awning 1 per awning 2 sq. ft. N/A Freestanding 1 per parcel 4 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Lawn signs 1 per parcel 4 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Temporary banner (up for a max. of 14 days) 1 per parcel 32 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Window 1 per window 1/3 of window area N/A A-1 zoning districts agriculture Fascia 1 per unit 2 sq. ft. N/A 14 sq. ft. not to include window signage and temporary banner Painted Wall 1 per parcel 6 sq. ft. N/A Wall 1 per parcel 6 sq. ft. N/A Freestanding 1 per parcel 4 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Lawn Signs 1 per parcel 4 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Temporary banner (up for a max. of 14 days) 1 per parcel 32 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Window 1 per window 1/3 of window area N/A P-1, P-2 zoning districts parks/open space, public building or facility As approved by zoning administrator As approved by zoning administrator As approved by zoning administrator As approved by zoning administrator As approved by zoning administrator C-1, C-2, I-1 zoning districts limited commerce, general commerce, light industrial (includes neighborhood commercial district) Fascia 1 per building 4 sq. ft. N/A 14 sq. ft. not to include window signage, incidental sign and temporary banner Awning 1 per awning 4 sq. ft. N/A Painted wall 1 per building 4 sq. ft. N/A Wall 1 per building 4 sq. ft. N/A Freestanding 1 per parcel 4 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Lawn signs 1 per parcel 4 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear 10' Incidental sign 4 per building 1 sq. ft. N/A Temporary banner (up for a max. of 14 days) 1 per building 32 sq. ft. Front: 10' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Window 1 per window 1/3 of window area N/A C-3 CBD zoning district central business district Fascia 1 per unit 2 sq. ft. N/A 6 sq. ft. not to include window signage, temporary banner, incidental sign and portable sign Awning 1 per awning 2 sq. ft. N/A Freestanding 1 per parcel 4 sq. ft. Front: 0' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Lawn signs 1 per parcel 4 sq. ft. Front: 0' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Window 1 per window 1/3 of window area N/A Temporary banner (up for a max. of 14 days) 1 per building 32 sq. ft. Front: 0' Side: 5' Rear: 10' Portable sign 1 per business 6 sq. ft. Building shy zone per downtown design standards Incidental sign 4 per business 1 sq. ft. N/A Painted wall 1 per business 4 sq. ft. N/A Wall 1 per business 4 sq. ft. N/A  
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-16. - Signs on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print, or in any way affix any picture, sign, signboard or poster on any post, utility pole, fire escape, hydrant, curb, sidewalk, tree, lamp post or other structure of any kind on, or as to overhang or protrude over any property owned by the City of Watertown or any easement or public right-of-way of the city. The city may at any time and without notice impound signs which have been installed on public property or within public right-of-way or easement. The city may not be held liable for any damage to impounded signs. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may approve temporary signs on public or institutional property for special events. The first approval for a site may allow only one use of the sign for a specified duration, not to exceed 30 days. Subsequent approvals for the same type of sign may allow recurring use of the sign for limited durations over a period of up to one year. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-17. - Computations for sign area and face. 
(a)  Sign area formula. The area of a sign shall be determined by the zoning administrator using actual dimensions where practical, or approximate dimensions when irregularity of a sign shape warrants. The sign area shall be the sum of the area of not more than two contiguous rectangles or squares that enclose the extreme points or edges of all copy, and/or graphical components of said sign. Unless otherwise indicated, poles, bases, and other supports shall not be included in the sign area calculation. The area of a square or rectangular shaped sign is determined by multiplying the length (L) by the width (W). 
Figure 2: Sign Area Measurement 

(1)  Sign cabinets. The area of sign faces enclosed in frames or cabinets is determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the sign face. 
(2)  Backed signs. Only one side of a backed sign is counted in determining the area of sign faces. Where the two sides are not of equal size, the larger of the two sides is used for the determination of sign area. 
(3)  Multiple cabinets. For freestanding and projecting signs that contain multiple cabinets on one structure and oriented in the same direction, the modules together are counted as one sign face. 
(4)  Signs on a base material. When a sign is on a base material and attached without a frame, such as a wood board or Plexiglas panel, the dimensions of the base material are to be used. 
(5)  Painted wall signs. Painted wall signs are measured by drawing an imaginary rectangle around the edge of each of the sign elements. Sign elements will be measured as one unit when the distance between the elements is less than two times the length of each element. Visible wall area includes windows and doors, but not openings such as loading entrances. 
(6)  Awnings and marquees. When signs are incorporated into awnings, the sign area is determined by computing the area of an imaginary rectangle drawn around the sign face. 
(b)  Sign height measurement. The height of the sign shall be computed as the vertical distance measured from the average grade at the base of the sign to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. When a sign is located adjacent to a public road, and the height of the adjacent road is greater than the height of the proposed sign location, the height of the sign shall be measured from the average grade of the road adjacent to the sign. 
Figure 3: Sign Height Measurement 

(c)  Total sign area calculation. The total square footage of all sign surfaces shall be computed by adding together the sign areas of all signs on a property. 
Figure 4: Total Sign Area Measurement Example 

(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 48-18. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
(1)  Signs obstructing vision. Any sign which obstructs the vision of drivers or pedestrians or detracts from the visibility of official traffic-control device. This includes indoor signs that are visible from public streets. 
(2)  Permanent balloon signs. 
(3)  Portable signs, except temporary signs as defined in section 48-12. 
(4)  Unofficial traffic signs or signals. Signs that imitate or resemble official traffic lights, signs or signals or signs that interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic light, sign or signal. 
(5)  Signs with moving parts, moving lighting or animation. No sign shall display any moving parts, be illuminated with any flashing or intermittent lights, use changing light intensity, utilize spotlights giving off an intermittent or rotating beam existing as a collection or concentration of rays of light (including but not limited to revolving beacons, beamed lights, or similar devices), or be animated. The only exceptions to this provision include allowable changeable copy signs; barbershop poles; static time, temperature, and price information changing when necessary. 
(6)  Signs erected, constructed or structurally altered without a permit. 
(7)  Roof signs. 
(8)  Hazardous signs, any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe, is not kept in good repair, or is capable of causing electrical shock to persons likely to come in contact. 
(9)  Billboards. 
(10)  Signs with obscene, indecent, or immoral matter that is prurient in content or nature or exhibition, shall be prohibited on signs. 
(11)  Painted wall signs including signs painted on the face of a structure. Works of art which are not commercial messages are exempt. 
(12)  Signs that make noise. 
(13)  Signs mounted or painted on vehicles when the vehicle is parked or stored on property or adjacent rights-of-way in such a manner as to identify a business or advertise a product. 
(14)  Off-premises signs. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 48-19. - Regulations specific to a given zoning district. 
    The standards for exempt signs are stated in section 48-15, table 1 of this chapter. Standards for signs not listed as an exempt sign per section 48-15, table 1 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential zoning district. 
a.  In general. Any sign(s) in residential zoning districts which do not meet the standards for exempt signs in table 1 are not permitted unless in conformance with the subsections below. The zoning administrator may refer the request for a sign permit to the planning commission and city council as provided for in section 48-32. 
b.  Residential monument signs. 
1.  In addition to the total allowable sign area for individual residences within a residential zoning district, one monument sign for a unified residential area with six or more units shall be allowed. 
i.  Thirty-two square foot maximum copy and graphic area per entrance; 
ii.  Seventy-five square foot maximum total monument area per entrance; 
iii.  Eight-foot maximum height; 
iv.  Located at primary entrances to subdivision; 
v.  A second sign may be permitted if there is more than one entrance from a public street into the unified residential area, for a maximum of two residential monument signs per unified residential area. 
vi.  Single or double faced. If double faced, the sign faces shall be parallel; 
vii.  External illumination; 
viii.  Located with a dedicated permanent sign easement and not within public right-of-way; and 
ix.  If the sign is to be located in a development which includes individual ownership parcels, the sign shall be located on a parcel held in common ownership and shall be perpetually maintained by a homeowner's association or responsible property owners. 
x.  Changeable copy signs are not permitted for, or as a part of, a residential monument sign. 
c.  Conditionally permitted uses in residential districts: For the following conditionally permitted uses within a residential district, permanent signs which comply with the following standards are permitted. If the use is not specifically listed below, the sign shall be regulated by this chapter. 
1.  Public and semipublic educational, religious and institution facilities: For each educational, religious, public or private institution, and nursing home property, signs are permitted which comply with the following standards: 
i.  Monument signs: 
A.  One sign not to exceed 32 square feet maximum copy and graphic area; 
B.  Seventy-five square feet maximum monument area; 
C.  Eight-foot maximum height; 
D.  Single or doubled faced; and 
E.  Internal or external illumination and the light source shall not be exposed. 
ii.  Building signs: 
A.  Individually mounted letters not to exceed 24 inches in height; 
B.  One sign, area not to exceed 50 square feet or ten percent of the area of the building on which the sign is located, whichever is less; and 
C.  Illumination shall be external. 
(2)  Central business district. The city council has determined that a successful commercial district benefits all residents and visitors in Watertown through the competitive offering of various goods and services in a pleasing environment. The city council has determined that several factors influence the perception and successfulness of an area, including, but not limited to, lighting, signage, landscaping and pedestrian amenities. 
a.  The city shall encourage the use of pedestrian-scale projecting signage as a means of promoting an inviting and walkable area. 
b.  The area of projecting, canopy signs, marquees, and awnings shall not be used in calculating the maximum square feet for a given building within the central business district. 
c.  Signs shall meet all applicable requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the Watertown Downtown Design Standards. 
d.  Signage may be permitted on the rear side of buildings at a rate not to exceed one square foot per two linear feet of building frontage at the rear of the building to a maximum of 25 square feet. "Rear of the building" is defined in this case as the side most opposite to Lewis Avenue. 
e.  All businesses within a multi-tenant building must be represented on the sign(s). 
f.  Nonconforming signs or sign structures shall not be considered. 
g.  Signs shall not be permitted to be internally lit, unless new businesses are established within an existing building and are trying to conform to, be consistent with, or match existing signage of the principal tenant. The zoning administrator shall determine if proposed signage is consistent. 
Table 2. Regulations Specific to Sign Type 
  
Types of Sign Zoning District(s) Sign Area Allowed (Ratio) Maximum Sign Face Area Number of Signs Required Setback Regulations Maximum Height of Sign   
Building Signs Permitted in all zoning districts, except for residential zoning districts 1 SF per 1 lineal foot of building frontage to a max. of 100 SF No more than 100 SF on one side, 200 SF total 1 per lot, on a corner lot 2 are permitted NA NA   
Monument Signs Permitted in all zoning districts, except for residential zoning districts unless such sign is governed by Sec. 48-25 Maximum sign area shall not exceed 50 SF 25 SF (section 48-21.c) 1 per lot Front: 10 feet 
Side: not less than the height of sign 12 feet   
Projecting Signs Permitted in all zoning districts, except for residential zoning districts The projecting sign shall count as one of the permitted wall signs Signs may extend a maximum 4 feet from the building wall 1 per storefront Must be setback a minimum of two feet from the face of curb or street surface Minimum of eight feet of clearance over pedestrian ways   
Changeable Copy Signs Permitted in all zoning districts, if approved by City Council Standard regulations for monument signs shall apply. Changeable copy signs shall be integral to a monument sign 25 SF or 50% of the maximum sign area 1 per lot 50 feet from other changeable copy signs Standard regulations for monument signs shall apply  
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 48-20. - Building signs. 
(a)  Building sign area allowed. One square foot of aggregate sign area may be erected for every lineal foot of building frontage to a maximum of 100 square feet. This total shall not include exempt signs and standards outlined in table 1. In the case of a building on a corner lot, aggregate building signage may be increased one square foot per two lineal feet of secondary street frontage, to a maximum of 100 square feet. No more than 100 square feet may be permitted on one side, 200 square feet total. 
(b)  Multi-tenant building. Where a building, group of attached buildings on the same block, or center contains more than one tenant, the allowable sign area for any single business may be its portion of the gross square footage of the building or center applied as a percentage to the allowable sign area of the entire building or center, subject to size limitations for specific signs. No more than one building sign per each tenant shall be permitted. This provision shall not include projecting signage allowed in the C-3 zoning district. All signage within multi-tenant buildings shall be consistent in design and construction. 
(c)  Letters, symbols, and logos. Under no circumstances shall a letter, symbol, or logo dimension greater than six square feet be allowed in any zoning district. 
(d)  Convenience stores. Only one sign on a canopy in a convenience store or gasoline pump use may be permitted. Such sign shall be one square foot per linear foot of frontage of the canopy to a maximum sign area of 50 square feet. Such sign shall be confined to the actual dimensions of the canopy. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 48-21. - Monument signs. 
(a)  Number of signs. One sign shall be permitted on each lot of record, provided however, if the frontage of such lot measured in a straight line along such street exceeds 500 feet, then two such signs shall be permitted. In the case of a corner lot, one additional sign may be permitted. A minimum distance of 250 feet shall separate the two permitted monument signs on a single lot of record. 
(b)  Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback required for monument signs is ten feet. All signs shall have a side setback not less than the height of the sign. 
(c)  Maximum sign area. The total area of a monument sign shall be the actual square footage of one sign face. Double faced signs may be permitted with the maximum square footage permitted on each side. The maximum sign area of a monument sign shall not exceed 25 square feet; provided, however, the maximum sign area may be increased one square foot for each additional two feet of setback over the minimum required setback to a maximum sign area of 60 square feet and not to exceed a height of 12 feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of sign. The maximum height of a monument sign shall be five feet; provided, however, signage height may be increased one foot for each additional two feet of setback over the minimum required setback to a maximum sign height of 12 feet. The vertical distance between the sign face and the base shall not be greater than 12 inches. 
(e)  Width. The width of the top of the sign structure shall be no more than 120 percent of the width of the base. Monument signs shall have a monolithic or columnar line that maintains essentially the same profile from grade to top. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 382, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 2014, deleted § 48-22, which pertained to pylon signs and derived from Ord. No. 349, § 1, adopted June 8, 2010. 
Sec. 48-23. - Projecting signs. 
    Projecting signs shall be permitted in commercial districts, and shall be encouraged particularly in the central business district, provided that all supports for signs and lighting is architecturally compatible with the principal structure and surrounding area, as well as compatible with the most recently adopted version of the Watertown Downtown Design Standards. 
(1)  Only one projecting sign is allowed per tenant in a multi-tenant building. 
(2)  Signs shall not project over vehicle parking, or public or private streets. 
(3)  All signs shall maintain a minimum of eight feet of clearance over pedestrian ways. 
(4)  The projecting sign shall be hung at a right angle from the building face. 
(5)  Projecting signs may extend a maximum of four feet from the building wall and must be setback a minimum of two feet from the face of curb or street surface. 
(6)  The use of guy wires, chains, straps or steel rods as a support is strictly prohibited. In the event that the weight of a projecting sign requires the use of a guy wire, chain, strap or steel rod for support, the sign shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-24. - Changeable copy signs. 
    Changeable copy signs are permitted in all zoning districts, if approved by the city council following a public hearing held by the planning commission. The city council may allow a changeable copy sign located on public property in the central business district without a public hearing. Changeable copy signs must be integrated into an allowable monument sign as regulated by this chapter and subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Maximum of 25 square feet or 50 percent of the maximum sign area, whichever is less, shall be dedicated to the changeable copy face. 
(2)  Changeable copy signs must be separated from other changeable copy signs by at least 50 feet. Standard setback regulations for monument and pylon signs shall apply. 
(3)  Standard regulations for monument signs shall apply including setbacks and height of the sign as regulated by this chapter. 
(4)  All portions of the message shall have minimum display duration of four seconds and shall be a static display. In all districts, no portion of the message may flash, blink, twirl, change color or in any manner imitate movement as to be deemed a distraction to passing motorists. The exception to this regulation is the transitions between each display panel by fading or dissolving in or out and the allowance of messages that appear to scroll vertically or horizontally across the sign, but are otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, including the definition of "scrolling text." Reasonable speed of the scrolling text shall be determined by the city. 
(5)  All electronic changeable copy signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimming device that controls the sign's brightness to meet the following standards: 
i.  The electronic changeable copy sign shall not exceed 500 lumens per square meter measured one foot from the sign face for the time period between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise. 
ii.  The electronic changeable copy sign shall not cast glare that exceeds 0.4 of a foot candle above ambient light measured at the property line of an adjoining residential property or one foot candle measured at the curb line of a public right-of-way. 
(6)  During the review and approval process, or at any time following the approval of the sign, the city may impose limits to the hours and times that a changeable copy sign may be permitted to be operated. 
(7)  The copy of the sign must be limited to ten words to allow passing motorists to read the entire copy with minimal distraction. 
(8)  Audio, speakers and any form of pyrotechnics is prohibited in association with an electronic changeable copy sign. 
(9)  When located within 150 feet of a residentially-used lot in a residential zone, all parts of the electronic changeable copy sign must be oriented so that no portion of the sign face is visible from an existing or permitted principal structure on that lot or the changeable copy sign shall be dimmed to a light level, as determined by the city, which does not increase the existing light levels on the affected residential property. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 362, § 2, 10-25-11; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 48-25. - Design standards. 
(a)  General. All signs, excluding temporary signs, shall be designed and constructed of materials that are similar to those used on the principal building. In the case of projecting signs located in the central business district, all signs, excluding temporary signs, shall be designed and constructed of materials and colors that are approved in the Watertown Downtown Design Standards Manual. Such signage shall be dominated with materials of permanency and strength and shall be compatible with other structures and signs in the development. A sign shall not obscure architectural features of a building. 
(b)  Sign face. No building sign face shall extend horizontally beyond the supporting structure a distance greater than six inches. These standards do not apply to projecting signs, which are generally at right angles to buildings. 
(c)  Allowable sign area. Unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, ground, monument, and pylon signs, where permitted, shall be limited to one per property for total allowable sign area. 
(d)  Signs needing electricity. Signs needing electricity shall be subject to all applicable electrical codes as may be amended. Overhead wiring for such signs is prohibited. 
(e)  Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure as regulated by the State building code and/or other ordinances of the City of Watertown. Temporary signs shall be excluded from dead load provisions as required above. 
(f)  Clearance from electric lines. Clearance from electric lines shall be in conformance with the National Electric Code (NEC). 
(g)  Number of faces. No sign shall have more than two faces. Sign faces shall be parallel unless otherwise permitted. 
(h)  Illumination. 
(1)  Illumination of signs shall comply with chapter 62 code requirements governing lighting and glare control. 
(2)  Lighted signs shall not be permitted in any residential zoning district except in the case of institutional P-2 districts. 
(3)  Indirect illumination for signs shall be so constructed and maintained so that the source of light (i.e. the bulb; not the fixture) is not visible from the public right-of-way or residential property. 
(4)  A constant level of light shall be maintained, provided that this shall not be construed to prohibit use of an automatic dimmer to reduce garish effects at night. Lighting shall not flash or move unless approved by the city council. Neon tubing and highlights with color features along a wall or facade's structural features is prohibited. Colored lighting schemes shall be prohibited in all zoning districts unless otherwise permitted by city council. 
(i)  Landscaping. Sign owners shall be required to maintain the appearance of the ground around all signs detached from buildings and to landscape where possible. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-26. - Construction, maintenance and repairs. 
(a)  All signs and structures shall be properly maintained and shall be constructed of sufficiently permanent materials so that they shall not succumb to deterioration from weathering. 
(b)  Any existing sign or sign structure which is rotted, unsafe, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise altered, shall be repainted, repaired, replaced, or removed if repair is not feasible. Sign maintenance shall be the responsibility of the underlying fee owner. 
(c)  If the zoning administrator finds that any sign has been erected without the necessary approvals or any sign is being maintained in violation of this chapter or any zoning provision, the zoning administrator may give written notice of such violation to the installer of said sign, the permit holder, and/or the owner, lessee or manager of the property on which the sign is located as best as can be determined by the zoning administrator. If, after receiving said notice, such person fails to remove or alter said sign so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter or zoning provisions, the sign shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be abated by the city under M.S.A. ch. 429, or such other procedure as determined appropriate. The cost of such abatement, including administrative expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees, may be levied as a special assessment against the property upon which the sign is located. 
(d)  Inspections. The zoning administrator may cause to be inspected from time to time any sign regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the sign is secure, and whether it is in need of removal or repair to be in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-27. - Abandoned signs. 
    Signs or supporting structures not used for 180 consecutive days must be removed. Any abandoned sign now or hereafter existing shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the building or land upon which sign may be found within 30 days after written notification from the zoning administrator and, upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the zoning administrator is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure to which the sign is attached. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-28. - Emissions prohibited. 
    No sign shall emit audible sound, noticeable odor, or smoke or other visible matter. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-29. - Obstruction of fire exits, light or ventilation. 
    No sign shall be permitted to obstruct or interfere in any way with the free use of any door, window, fire escape, nor to obstruct or impair operation of any opening required for light or ventilation. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-30. - Traffic hazard. 
    It shall be illegal for any sign to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be of such design which may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; nor shall any sign imitate an official traffic sign or include the words "Stop," "Look," "Caution," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse those in transit. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-31. - Time periods. 
    Temporary banners, signs and portable signs shall be permitted without a sign permit in all districts for a maximum time period of 14 days. The zoning administrator may grant special permission to allow temporary banners, signs, and portable signs for a greater time period, not to exceed 30 days. Such signs are subject to the quantity, size, quality and sign setback provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-32. - Appeal. 
    If the zoning administrator determines that a proposed sign does not meet the provisions or requirements of this chapter, the zoning administrator shall give notice of that determination and the reasons therefore to the applicant within 15 days of having received a completed application. If the applicant disagrees with the decision of the zoning administrator, the applicant may, within 15 days of the mailing of the zoning administrator's determination, appeal the decision to the planning commission by notifying the zoning administrator in writing of such appeal. 
    Upon receipt of such appeal, the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing with the planning commission. Written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed at least ten days before the date of the hearing to the applicant and property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bone fide attempt to comply with this decision has been made. 
    At the hearing the planning commission shall review the application and exhibits and hear the testimony of the applicant, the zoning administrator and all others wanting to be heard on the matter. Upon completion of the hearing the planning commission may uphold the decision of the zoning administrator or allow an appeal upon consideration of the following factors. The content of the sign shall not be considered. 
(1)  The location, size and design of the proposed sign(s); 
(2)  The character of the surrounding area; 
(3)  The proposed character of the surrounding area according to the Comprehensive Plan; 
(4)  The consistency of the proposed sign(s) in comparison to existing signs located in the surrounding area; 
(5)  The appropriateness of the proposed sign(s) in light of the anticipated use of the property; and 
(6)  The granting of a waiver which will not be detrimental to the public welfare nor create an adverse effect upon the surrounding property. 
    The planning commission shall recommend its decision to the city council for final determination. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-33. - Fees. 
    Fees for sign permits shall be set by the city council in an amount determined by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-34. - Nonconforming signs. 
    It is recognized that signs exist within the zoning districts which were lawful before this sign ordinance was enacted, but will be prohibited under the terms of this chapter. It is the intent of this sign ordinance that nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged upon or expanded, nor be used as grounds for adding other signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. It is further the intent of this sign ordinance to permit legal nonconforming signs existing on the effective date of this sign ordinance to continue as legal nonconforming signs provided such signs are safe, are maintained so as not to be unsightly, and have not been abandoned or removed subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No sign shall be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  If the use of the nonconforming sign or sign structure is discontinued for a period of one year the sign or sign structure shall not be reconstructed or used except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Should such nonconforming sign or sign structure be damaged or structure be destroyed by any means to an extent greater than 50 percent of its market value and all required permits for its reconstruction have not been applied for within 180 days of when the sign or sign structure was damaged, it shall not be reconstructed or used except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Should such sign or sign structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(5)  No existing sign devoted to a use not permitted by the zoning code in the zoning district in which it is located shall be enlarged, expanded or moved except in changing the sign to a sign permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(6)  When a building loses its nonconforming status all signs devoted to the structure shall be removed and all signs painted directly on the structure shall be repainted in a neutral color or a color which complements the structure. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-35. - Substitution clause. 
    The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this chapter may substitute non-commercial speech in lieu of any other commercial speech or non-commercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial speech over any other non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 48-36. - Violations. 
    Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 275, adopted Nov. 22, 2005, amended Ch. 50 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 50, §§ 50-26-50-57, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 180, §§ 1-6, adopted Oct. 9, 1990. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; public nuisances affecting health, § 26-29; accumulation of junk, construction material, automobile parts and bodies declared public nuisances, § 26-30; planning, ch. 46.5; utilities, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial establishment means any premises where a commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on, and shall include restaurants, clubs, churches and schools. 
    Garbage means all putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but excluding human excreta, sewage and water-carried wastes. 
    Multiple residential dwelling means any building used for residential purposes consisting of more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each. 
    Other refuse means ashes, nonrecyclable glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags and similar non-putrescible wastes, including sand, earth, brick, stone and concrete except when on-site construction is occurring, and trees, tree branches and wood except when stored as firewood. 
    Recyclable means materials which may be recycled or reused through recycling processes. 
    Residential dwelling means any single building containing one through four residential dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each. "Residential dwelling" includes townhouses. 
    Special pickup means any collection of materials other than garbage, other refuse, recyclables and yard waste, including white goods, household hazardous waste, furniture, oversized materials and construction debris. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings or other plant materials as may be defined by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 50-27. - Garbage collection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of an occupied residential dwelling, multiple residential dwelling or commercial establishment not to have periodic collection or disposal of garbage or other refuse as required in this article. It shall be unlawful to dump or bury garbage and other refuse in the city. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 50-28. - General operating and equipment standards. 
(a)  All solid waste which is hauled must be secured in covered, leak-proof vehicles or containers such that loads will not blow free or discharge liquids from the hauling vehicle. Where spillage does occur, the material must be picked up immediately by the hauler or solid waste transporter. Spillage that cannot be immediately and completely cleaned up must be reported to the city. 
(b)  All vehicles or containers which are used to haul solid waste on a regular basis must be kept clean and free of residues of the waste material so as to minimize problems associated with odors, animals, and insects. 
(c)  No one shall collect or transport solid waste that is smoking, smoldering, or burning, except in a container designed and approved by the fire marshall and the city for that purpose. 
(d)  Not including non-putrescible source-separated recyclable materials, solid waste may not be stored in any type of collection or transportation vehicle for a period of more than 48 hours. This period may be extended up to 72 hours if the waste cannot be disposed of or processed due to a legal holiday being celebrated on a Friday or Monday. Non-putrescible source-separated recyclable materials may be stored in collection and/or transportation vehicles for no longer than seven calendar days. 
(e)  No solid waste collection or transportation vehicle which is not thoroughly cleaned and free of waste residues may be parked outdoors within 500 feet of a commercial or residential structure not owned by the owner or the operator of the vehicle for more than two hours unless the city has been notified and has approved a longer duration. 
(f)  All relevant Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT) and Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) requirements regarding equipment, operations, and inspections and all applicable local, state and federal regulations must be met. 
(g)  Insurance. The hauler shall obtain and submit certificates of insurance issued by insurers duly licensed by the State of Minnesota providing the following coverage, or a self-insurance plan certified by the Minnesota Commissioner of Commerce for providing equivalent coverage. 
(1)  General liability coverage in the amount of $500,000.00 for bodily injury per occurrence, $250,000.00 for property damage per occurrence, or $500,000.00 combined single limit; and 
(2)  Automobile liability coverage in the amounts of $500,000.00 for property damage, $250,000.00 for bodily injury per person and $500,000.00 for bodily injury per accident, or $500,000.00 combined single limit. 
(3)  Workers compensation insurance in accordance with M.S.A. ch. 176. 
    Nothing in this provision shall prohibit a hauler from providing insurance with limits higher than the limits provided herein. All such required policies shall name the City of Watertown as additional insureds. All policies and certificates shall be endorsed to require that the insurer provide at least a 60-day written notice to the city prior to the effective date of policy cancellation, non-renewal, or material adverse change in coverage terms. The hauler shall maintain insurance in compliance with this paragraph throughout the term of the license. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Secs. 50-29-50-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 50-41. - Required. 
(a)  Operating license. Any hauler which collects or transports mixed municipal solid waste in the City of Watertown must obtain and maintain an operating license from the city. 
(b)  Vehicles licensed/vehicle decals. All vehicles used by the hauler for the collection or transportation of mixed municipal solid waste within the city shall be included in the hauler's license application. The hauler shall affix a decal as required by the city in a conspicuous place on the left side of the cab of the vehicle for which it was issued. The hauler must maintain the license decal so that it is readily visible and legible at all times. Any vehicle not bearing the required decal shall be considered unlicensed. 
(c)  Identification. The business name and telephone number of the hauler shall be printed or painted in legible characters on both sides of all vehicles or containers used by the hauler to store, collect, or transport mixed municipal solid waste in the city. Such characters shall be at least four inches in height for all vehicles and at least two inches in height for all containers. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage, other refuse or recyclables for hire without a license from the city, or to haul garbage, other refuse or recyclables from his own residence or business property other than as excepted in this article. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to scavenge or otherwise collect garbage, other refuse, recyclables or yard waste at the curb or from containers designated for recyclable materials without a license from the city and an account relationship with the owner or tenant of the premises. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall prevent persons from hauling garbage, other refuse or recyclables from their own residences or business properties subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  All garbage must be transported in containers that are watertight on all sides and the bottom, with tightfitting covers on top; 
(2)  All other refuse and recyclables must be transported in vehicles with leakproof bodies and completely covered or enclosed so as to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of cargo; 
(3)  All garbage and other refuse must be dumped or unloaded only at the designated sanitary landfill or county designated facility; 
(4)  Recyclables must be disposed of at a recycling facility, organized recycling drive or through a licensed recyclable hauler; and 
(5)  Yard waste must be composted privately or be disposed of at a composting facility or through a licensed refuse hauler. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 50-42. - Hauler license requirements. 
(a)  A hauler license shall be granted only upon the condition that the licensee have watertight packer-type vehicles or, in the case of collection of recyclables, appropriate container vehicles to prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo; that the vehicle be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible, and that the vehicle shall not be allowed to stand in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect garbage, other refuse, yard waste or recyclables. Licenses shall be issued by the city council for a one-year period. License fees shall be set by city council resolution. 
(b)  The hauler shall designate and file at city hall collection dates in the city for residential collection. Collection on dates other than those filed is unlawful except to collect a missed pickup, special pickup as approved by the city, or when an observed holiday halls within that week. The hauler shall give at least 60 days' notice to the city and its customers of any change in collection dates. 
(c)  The city council, in the interest of maintaining healthful and sanitary conditions in the city, hereby reserves the right to limit the number of licenses to be issued pursuant to this article. 
(d)  An applicant for a hauler license shall file with the clerk-treasurer a schedule of proposed rates to be charged for the licensed period. A licensee shall give the city and its customers at least 60 days' notice for any proposed rate change. Any rate increase proposal will require approval by the city council. Haulers may charge on the basis of volume. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 50-43. - Licensee responsibilities. 
    Licensee's responsibilities shall include, but shall not be limited to those described in this section. 
    The licensee shall be responsible for compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter and all applicable state and federal statutes and rules promulgated there under. 
    The licensee shall allow the city, its employees and designees free access to the solid waste management activity, site, or facility; provided that the entrance and activity is undertaken after reasonable notice and during normal business hours, except as provided in M.S.A. § 115A.882 Records; inspection; for the purpose of making such inspections as may be necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter or any other applicable statute, ordinance, or regulation. 
    The licensee shall allow the city, its employees and designees access to records required under M.S.A. ch. 115A.882 Records; Inspection, MPCA Solid Waste Management Rules parts 7001.3500 Subp. 3. A. and 7035 concerning the operation of a solid waste management activity or facility. 
    No licensee shall operate any solid waste management activity or facility, or dispose of, or permit to be disposed, any solid wastes in a manner so as to degrade the soil, air, or waters of the city. Any licensee who causes any degradation of the soil, air, or waters of the city shall undertake whatever action is necessary to correct the degradation and restore the soil, air, or waters to its condition prior to its degradation. 
    The licensee shall be responsible for facilitating all environmental monitoring, including but not limited to water, soil, and landfill gases, which are required by this chapter or the license conditions for the applicable solid waste management activity or facility. 
    The licensee agrees to indemnify and save the city harmless from all injuries, losses, costs, and charges that may be incurred by the city due to the negligent or intentional acts the licensee, its officers, agents, or employees or the failure of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this chapter and which are not otherwise payable from the insurance and financial assurance required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 50-44. - Reporting responsibilities. 
    If a commercial hauler terminates service to an account due to delinquent payment, the commercial hauler shall notify the city of this action within 15 days of the termination so that the Department may determine the potential for public health or pollution problems resulting from the lack of collection services at the property. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Secs. 50-45-50-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 50-56. - Requirements. 
(a)  Recycling shall be provided by the hauler to the following: 
(1)  Curbside recycling to residential dwellings which have accounts with the hauler. 
(2)  Commercial and multiple residential dwellings. 
(b)  Recyclables collected by the hauler shall include tin cans, aluminum beverage cans, glass containers (all colors), plastics, newspapers, magazines, and cardboard. Other materials required to be recycled may be added by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 50-57. - Annual report. 
    All hauling licensees shall report to the city in written form by September 1 of each year the quantity of all recyclables and yard waste abated from the landfills for the previous 12-month period. Such quantities shall be reported by tonnage, with the exception that yard waste may be reported in estimates of cubic yardage abated. Failure to certify the volumes and submit the report may be cause for revocation of hauling license. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 50-58. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Commercial licensed haulers must operate or haul only in commercial areas and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(b)  Residential licensed haulers must operate or haul only in residential areas and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(c)  No garbage or recycling hauling shall be allowed on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 50-59. - Uniform applicability of county and state requirements. 
    The licensee shall comply with all applicable county ordinances and regulations and state laws and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter unless such laws supersede the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 275, 11-22-05) 
Chapter 51 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 51-1. - Right-of-way usage. 
(a)  The risk of damage including but not limited to landscaping, gardens, or plantings including nursery and inanimate materials, lawn irrigations systems, and pet containment systems that are installed or encroach on city owned right-of-way shall be assumed by the property owner. 
(b)  All disturbed areas shall be restored with sod or seed. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 7-28-09) 
Secs. 51-2-51-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 300, § 1, adopted June 26, 2007, repealed Ch. 51, Art. II, §§ 51-26-51-48, in its entirety. Subsequently, Ord. No. 301, § 1, adopted June 26, 2007 enacted a new Art. II, §§ 51-26-51-58 to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. II, pertained to Right-of-Way Use Regulations and derived from Ord. No. 262, §§ 1.01-1.09, 1.11-1.23, adopted Dec. 14, 2004. 

Sec. 51-26. - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. 
(b)  Accordingly, the city enacts this new article II of The Municipal Code of Watertown relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This article imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within the city's rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this article, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work through the recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  This article shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S.A. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This Article shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 - 7819.9950 where possible. To the extent that any provision of this article cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, the interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-27. - Election to manage the public rights-of-way. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory, administrative and common law, the city elects pursuant to M.S.A. § 237.163 Subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-28. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply to this article of this Code. References to "subdivisions" are unless otherwise specified references to subdivisions in this section. 
    Abandoned facility means a facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries service. 
    Applicant means any person requesting permission to excavate, install utilities in or obstruct a right-of-way. 
    City means the city of Watertown, Minnesota. For purposes of sections 51-26 through 51-58, city means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents. 
    Commission means the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission. 
    Congested right-of-way means a crowded condition in the subsurface of the public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities in conformance with M.S.A. § 216D.04, Subd. 3, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet. 
    Construction performance bond means any of the following forms of security provided at permittee's option: 
(1)  Cash deposit; 
(2)  Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city. 
    Degradation means a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur. 
    Degradation cost subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 means the cost to achieve a level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950. 
    Degradation fee means the estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost. 
    Delay penalty is the penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit. 
    Department inspector means any person authorized by the city to carry out inspections related to the provisions of this section. 
    Director means the city administrator of the city, or her or his designee. 
    Emergency means a condition that: 
(1)  Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or 
(2)  Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer. 
    Equipment means any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-of-way. 
    Excavate means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way. 
    Facility or facilities means tangible asset in the public right-of-way required to provide utility service. The term does not include facilities to the extent the location and relocation of such facilities are preempted by M.S.A. § 161.45, governing utility facility placement in state trunk highways. 
    High density corridor means a designated portion of the public right-of-way within which right-of-way users having multiple and competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure. 
    Hole means an excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length less than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement. 
    Local representative means a local person or persons, or local designee of such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this article. The designee shall be identified by the registrant, person or persons in writing and maintained on file at city hall. Notice shall be deemed to be received by the registrant when provided to the local representative. 
    Management costs means the actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed, mapping of "as built" location of facilities located in the right-of-way; and revoking right-of-way permits and performing all other tasks required by this article, including other costs the city may incur in managing matters described in this article. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, chapter 123; M.S.A. §§ 237.162 or 237.163 or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to section 802.61. 
    Obstruct means to place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way for a period of eight hours or more without the issuance of a right-of-way permit. 
    Obstruction permit means the permit which, pursuant to this article, must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for the duration specified therein, including a blanket permit for a period of time and for types of work specified by the director, if deemed appropriate in her or his discretion. 
    Obstruction permit fee means money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the costs as provided in section 51-37. 
    Patch or patching means a method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base; and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. 
    Pavement means any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with paver blocks, bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel. 
    Permit has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in M.S.A. § 237.162. 
    Permittee means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this Section. 
    Person means an individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political. 
    Public right-of-way or right-of-way has the meaning given it in M.S.A. § 237.162, Subd. 3. 
    Registrant means any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way. 
    Restore or restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation. 
    Right-of-way permit means either the utility permit or the obstruction permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this article. 
    Right-of-way user means: 
(1)  A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S.A. § 237.162, Subd. 4; or 
(2)  A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way. 
    Service or utility service means and includes: 
(1)  Services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S.A. § 216B.02, Subds. 4 and 6; 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data information; 
(3)  Services of a cable communications system as defined in M.S.A. ch. 238.02, Subd. 3; 
(4)  Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by a local government unit; 
(5)  Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized under M.S.A. ch. 308A; and 
(6)  Water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services. 
    Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment. 
    Supplementary application means an application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been issued. 
    Temporary surface means the compaction of subbase and aggregate base and replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the excavation. 
    Trench means an excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement. 
    Telecommunication right-of-way user means a person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this section, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S.A. ch. 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services whether provided by a public utility as defined in M.S.A. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under M.S.A. chs. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S.A. ch. 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users. 
    Utility permit means the permit which, pursuant to this section, must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. A utility permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit. 
    Utility permit fee means money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in section 51-37. 
    Utility pole means a pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric service. 
    Wireless support structure means a new or existing structure in a right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 51-29. - Administration. 
    The director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-30. - Utility coordination committee. 
    The city may create an advisory utility coordination committee. Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and by making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants that have expressed a desire to assist the city. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-31. - Registration and right-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will consist of providing application information, designating the local representative and paying the registration fee. Registration shall be renewed by the first of each calendar year or prior to applying for the first permit of a calendar year. 
(b)  Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city. 
(c)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a city ordinance establishing the rights of and limitations placed on persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street curb. Persons carrying out or requesting the following work shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way within the meaning of this Section, and shall not be governed by this Section. Such work by non right-of-way users shall be regulated by other city Code sections, unless provided otherwise. 
(1)  Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens. 
(2)  Persons erecting fences, installing driveways, sidewalks, curb and gutter, or parking lots. 
(3)  Persons engaged in snow removal activities. 
(4)  Persons installing street furnishings, bus stop benches and shelters. 
(5)  Persons installing vending machines. 
(6)  Persons installing irrigation systems. 
(7)  Persons installing pet containment systems. 
(8)  Plumbers licensed in accordance with the State of Minnesota. 
(9)  Electricians licensed in accordance with the State of Minnesota. 
(d)  Gopher-One-Call. Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the M.S.A. ch. 216D, Gopher-One-Call Law. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-32. - Registration information. 
(a)  Information required. The registrant shall provide the following at the time of registration and shall promptly notify the city of changes in such information: 
(1)  Registrant's name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and Gopher One-Call registration certificate number if required by state law. 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number, and facsimile number of the local representative responsible for fulfilling the obligations of the registrant. 
(3)  A certificate of insurance from a company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota providing coverage in the following amounts: 
GENERAL LIABILITY: Public Liability, including premises, products and complete operations 
Bodily Injury Liability $1,000,000.00 each person     3,000,000.00 each occurrence Property Damage Liability     3,000,000.00 each occurrence Bodily Injury and Property Damage Combined  3,000,000.00 single limit  
COMPREHENSIVE: Automobile Liability Insurance, including owned, non-owned and hired vehicles. 
Bodily Injury Liability $1,000,000.00 each person Property Damage Liability     3,000,000.00 each occurrence In lieu of 1) and 2) Bodily Injury and Property Damage combined 3,000,000.00 single limit  
Such certificate shall verify that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the; (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees; and (ii) placement and use of equipment or facilities in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground equipment and collapse of property. Such certificate shall also name the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages. Such certificate shall require that the director be notified 30 days prior to cancellation of the policy. 
(4)  24-hour emergency number. 
(5)  An acknowledgement by the registrant to be bound by the indemnification pursuant to Section 51-54 and signed by an individual authorized to bind the registrant. 
(6)  Such other information the director may require. 
(b)  Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-33. - Reporting obligations. 
(a)  Operations. If requested by the director, each registrant shall, at the time of registration, file a construction and major maintenance plan for all known underground facilities projects at the time of this filing with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. 
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year. 
(b)  Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit based solely on the failure to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-34. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no right-of-way user may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so. 
(1)  Utility permit. A utility permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. 
(2)  Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid utility permit for the same project. 
(3)  Other permits. Other permits may be required for persons in accordance with the city Code. 
(4)  Overhead facilities. Permits for installation, repair or other work on above-ground facilities within the meaning of M.S.A. § 237.163, Subd. 6(b)(4) will be obstruction permits, notwithstanding the need for excavation, provided the excavation is angered or hand dug for the purpose of placing a pole type structure. 
(5)  Small wireless facility . A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified portion of the public ground, to the extent specified therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked. 
(b)  Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless; (i) such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, or requests a verbal extension; and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted. Verbal extensions may be granted by the director for a period no greater than 48 hours or for emergencies. 
(c)  Diligence in performing work. Work shall progress in an expeditious manner as permitted by weather conditions until completion in order to avoid unnecessary inconvenience. In the event that the work is not performed in accordance with applicable regulations or conditions of the permit, or the work is not done in an expeditious manner, or is abandoned without due cause, the city may, after 48 hour notice to the permit holder, correct and fill the excavation or repair the street. The entire cost of such work shall be paid by the permit holder upon demand made by the city. 
(d)  Delay penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3, the city shall establish and impose a reasonable delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by city council resolution. A delay penalty will not be imposed for delays due to force majeure, including inclement weather, civil strife, acts of God, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. 
(e)  Permit display. Permits issued under this section shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city. 
(f)  Routine obstruction and excavation. Routine excavations and obstructions are permitted without separate notice and separate compensation for such projects. Projects that do not involve excavation of paved surface and that last less than eight hours in duration may, in the director's discretion, be considered routine obstruction and excavation and include by way of example, switching, replacing fuses, replacing transformers, placing line guards, animal protection, leak surveys, anode installations and inspections, or repair to facilities due to public damage or accident. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 51-35. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Content of permit. Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions: 
(1)  Registration with the city pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Submission of a completed permit application form as provided by the city, including all required attachments, and five copies of scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities owned or operated by the applicant. Plans must include scaled dimensions indicating the proposed location of the facility within the right-of-way and scaled dimensions of the facility from an existing physical topographic feature (such as "back of curb", "edge of bituminous road"). Plans must also show all existing physical topographic features (trees, shrubs, wetlands, wetland buffers, flood plain, flood fringe, culverts, driveways, fences, street signs) that lie within 20 feet of the proposed facility location. The director may use discretion in changing the type of information required on the plan depending on the scope of the project. 
(3)  Scaled drawings showing the location of the right of way, any public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or trails that will be disrupted by the work. 
(4)  Scaled drawings showing the location of any public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or trails that will be temporarily closed to traffic or obstructed by the work. 
(5)  A description of methods to be used for restoration of streets or boulevards. 
(6)  Payment of money due the city for: 
a.  Permit fees and estimated restoration costs; 
b.  Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; 
(7)  Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 100 percent of the amount owing. 
(8)  Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional facilities when applicant requests a utility permit to install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable standards. 
(9)  Security. For companies not operating under a franchise with the city that waives this requirement, a surety bond, letter of credit or cash deposit in the amount determined by the director but not less than $5,000.00, shall be required from each applicant. A surety bond shall be from a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state. Security required pursuant to this subdivision shall be conditioned that the holder will perform the work in accordance with this article and applicable regulations, will pay to the city any costs incurred by the city in performing work pursuant to this article; and will indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees pursuant to this article. The bond, letter of credit or cash deposit shall be released by the city upon completion of the work and compliance with all conditions imposed by the permit. For permits allowing excavations within public streets, such bond, letter of credit or cash deposit shall be held for a period of 24 months to guaranty the adequacy of all restoration work. 
(10)  A written timeline identifying the start and completion dates for completing all work associated with the permit. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-36. - Issuance of permit; conditions. 
(a)  Permit issuance. No permit will be issued until the application has been deemed complete and found to meet all applicable standards and requirements within this article as determined by the director. 
(b)  Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. 
(c)  Notice of work. Upon request by the director, the permittee shall notify in writing in a form approved by the director, all properties specified by the director indicating start and completion dates. Written notification is not required for routine obstruction and excavation projects described in section 51-34. 
(d)  Small wireless facility requirements. In addition to the requirements of division (a), the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless facility in or on public ground shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application. 
(2)  No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit. 
(3)  No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its wireless support structure. 
(4)  Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way. 
(5)  Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure. 
(6)  Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 51-37. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Fee schedule and fee allocation. The city's permit fee schedule shall be available to the public and established in advance where reasonably possible. The permit fees shall be designed to recover the city's actual management costs incurred in managing the right-of-way and shall be based on an allocation among all users of the right-of-way, including the city. 
(b)  Utility permit fee. The city shall establish a utility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs: 
(1)  City management costs. 
(2)  Degradation costs, if applicable. 
(c)  Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs. 
(d)  Small wireless facility permit fee. For applications for a permit for small wireless facilities, the city shall impose a small wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover: 
(1)  City management costs, and 
(2)  City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small wireless facilities. 
(e)  Payment of permit fees. No utility permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without payment of utility or obstruction permit fees. 
(f)  Nonrefundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a breach as stated in section 51-47 are not refundable. 
(g)  Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 51-38. - Right-of-way patching and restoration. 
(a)  Timing. The work to be done under the utility permit, and the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under section 51-41, (b) 
(b)  Patch and restoration. Permittee must patch its own work. The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the surface and subgrading portions of right-of-way or to restore the surface portion of right-of-way itself. 
(1)  Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an utility permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Section 51-35(a)(7) and Minnesota Rules 7819.3000. 
(2)  City restoration. If the city restores the surface portion of right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such restoration, the pavement settles or otherwise fails for reasons not caused by city's failure to properly restore, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work. 
(3)  Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for replacing and compacting the subgrade and aggregate base material in the excavation area to a grade determined to be acceptable by the director and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities. 
(c)  Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100. 
(d)  Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Upon notification from the city, permittee shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Unless otherwise agreed to by the director, said work shall be commenced within two days of receipt of the notice from the city and shall be completed within 14 days of commencement of work, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under section 51-41. 
(e)  Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the city shall notify the permittee in writing of the specific alleged failure or failures and shall allow the permittee five days from receipt of said written notice to cure said failure or failures, unless otherwise extended by the director. In the event the permittee fails to cure, the city may at its option perform the necessary work and permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the city's cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-39. - Joint and individual applications. 
(a)  Joint trenching. director may require registrants to jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time. 
(b)  Fees. The registrant who applies for a joint utility permit shall pay the required permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-40. - Extra work added applications. 
(a)  Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area; (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby; and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension. 
(b)  Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. Except in the case of verbal extensions, if a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-41. - Other obligations. 
(a)  Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to M.S.A. § 216D.01-216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System). A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work. 
(b)  Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, or when approved by the director, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work. 
(c)  Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with, unless otherwise approved by the director. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit. The storage of all equipment and the limits of all work to be completed must be done within the area specified on the permit application or as allowed by city parking regulations. 
(d)  Traffic control. A permittee shall implement traffic control measures in the area of the work and shall use traffic control procedures in accordance with the most recent manuals on uniform traffic control, traffic control devices and traffic zone layouts published by the State of Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-42. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this section or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use or for the following specific violations. 
(1)  Failure to register pursuant to section 51-31. 
(2)  A proposed excavation within a street or sidewalk surface that has been constructed or reconstructed within the preceding seven years, unless the director determines that no other locations are feasible or when necessitated by emergency. 
(3)  The applicant is subject to revocation of a prior permit issued or a previous permit has been revoked pursuant to this section. 
(4)  The proposed schedule for the work would conflict or interfere with and exhibition, celebration, festival or any other similar event. 
(5)  The right-of-way would become unduly congested due to the proposed facilities and equipment when combined with other uses in the right-of-way as provided in section 51-31(c)(3). 
(6)  Businesses or residences in the vicinity will be unreasonably disrupted. 
(7)  The applicant failed to meet a reasonable schedule to participate in a mandated joint trench operation with other applicants, and the additional work will unreasonably disrupt the restored right-of-way, businesses or residences. 
(8)  The proposed schedule conflicts with scheduled reconstruction of the right-of-way. 
(9)  The applicant previously failed to comply with the requirements and conditions of this article or a previously issued permit. 
(b)  Action on small wireless facility permit applications. 
(1)  Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such application. The small wireless facility permit and any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this section. 
(2)  Consolidated applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by the city, provided that all small wireless facilities in the application: 
a.  Are located within a two-mile radius; 
b.  Consist of substantially similar equipment; and 
c.  Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures. 
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the application. 
(3)  Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if: 
a.  The city received applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such instance, the city may extend the deadline for all such applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants, in writing, of such extension. 
b.  The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant, in writing, of any still-missing information. 
c.  The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree, in writing, to toll the review period. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 51-43. - Installation requirements. 
    The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100, 78.19.5000 and 7819.5100 and other applicable local requirements such as the city standard specifications and details, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S.A. §§ 237.162 and 237.163. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-44. - Inspection. 
(a)  Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
(b)  Authority of director. 
(1)  At the time of inspection the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public. 
(2)  The director may issue an order to the permittee to correct any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or code. If the work failure is a "substantial breach" within the meaning of M.S.A. § 237.163 Subd. 4(c), the order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit after a specified period determined by the director. The permittee shall present proof to the director that the violation has been corrected within the time period set forth by the director in the order. Such proof shall be provided no later than the next business day following the day of completion. If adequate proof has not been presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to section 51-47. 
(c)  Standards during construction or installation. The permit holder shall comply with the following standards when engaging in the work: 
(1)  Observe and comply with all laws, rules and regulations of the federal, state and local authorities. 
(2)  Conduct the operation and perform the work in a manner as to ensure the least obstruction and interference to traffic. 
(3)  Take adequate precautions to ensure the safety of the general public and those who require access to abutting property. 
(4)  If required by the director, notify adjoining property owners prior to the commencement of work which may disrupt the use of and access to such adjoining properties. 
(5)  In all cases where construction work interferes with the normal use of the construction area, provide for closing the construction area to traffic or to afford restricted use of the area and comply with manual of uniform traffic control devices (MUTCD) traffic safety signing requirements. 
(6)  Exercise precaution at all times for the protection of persons, including employees and property. 
(7)  Protect and identify excavations and work operations with barricade flags, and if required, by flagmen in the daytime, and by warning lights at night. 
(8)  Provide proper trench protection as required by occupational safety and health administration (O.S.H.A.) when necessary and depending upon the type of soil, in order to prevent cave-ins endangering life or tending to enlarge the excavation. 
(9)  Protect the root growth of trees and shrubbery. 
(10)  Installation of pipe (utility conductors) under concrete, or bituminous pavements shall be done by jacking, boring, auguring or tunneling as directed by the director unless otherwise authorized. 
(11)  All backfilling must be placed in six-inch layers at optimum moisture and compacted with the objective of attaining 100 percent of standard proctor density and in accordance with the city of Watertown Design Standards Manual. Compaction shall be accomplished with hand, pneumatic or vibrating compacters as appropriate. 
(12)  Erosion control shall be consistent with applicable standards and permits. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-45. - Work done without a permit. 
(a)  Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event regarding its facilities that the registrant considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency, unless the director allows a longer time, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this section for the actions it took in response to the emergency. If the director concludes that a registrant is required to perform work at the facility solely because of an emergency created by another registrant and the work is performed in the immediate area of the emergency work, the director may waive the permit otherwise required by the registrant(s) called to the emergency created by another party. 
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the city will contact the registrant's emergency phone number as registered with the city or listed in the phone directory. The city will make the area safe, as necessary. If there is no response from the registrant, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the permittee or registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency. 
(b)  Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay an unauthorized work permit fee in an amount established from time to time by the city council, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this article. The director shall determine whether the situation is an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-46. - Supplementary notification. 
    If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city by supplementary application of the accurate information as soon as this information is known and must receive prior approval. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-47. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Substantial breach. The city reserves its right to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit; 
(2)  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens; 
(3)  Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit; 
(4)  The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or 
(5)  The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to section 51-44. 
(6)  Failure to comply with this article. 
(b)  Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach. 
(c)  Response to notice of breach. Within a time established by the director following permittee's receipt of notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan to cure the breach, acceptable to the city. Permittee's failure to submit a timely and acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. 
(d)  Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-48. - As built drawings. 
    Rule. Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information in a form required by the city in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Upon written demand by the director and within 90 days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the director accurate maps or drawings certifying the "as-built" location of all facilities and equipment installed, owned and maintained by the permittee. Such maps or drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic mapping system. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this article shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-49. - Underground facilities. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is intended to foster; (i) safe travel over the right-of-way; (ii) non-travel related safety around homes and buildings; and (iii) aesthetic cohesiveness and smart view sheds. Location and relocation, installation and reinstallation of Facilities in the right-of-way or in or on other public ground must be made in accordance with this section. This section is intended to be enforced consistently with state and federal law regulating right-of-way users, specifically including but not limited to M.S.A. §§ 161.45, 237.162, 237.163, 300.03, 222.37, 238.084 and 216B.36 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Title 47, U.S.C. section 253. 
(b)  Underground placement of facilities. Facilities newly installed, constructed or otherwise placed in the public right-of-way or in other public property held in common for public use must be located and maintained underground pursuant to the terms and conditions of this section and in accordance with applicable construction standards, subject to the exceptions allowed by subsection (d), [below]. Above-ground installation, construction, modification, or replacement of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, pad mount switches, capacitor banks, junction boxes, re-closers and service connection pedestals shall be allowed. The requirements of this subdivision shall apply equally outside of the corporate limits of the city coincident with city jurisdiction of platting, subdivision regulation or comprehensive planning as may now or in the future be allowed by law. 
(c)  Underground installation of permanent replacement, relocated or reconstructed facilities. The city may require a permanent replacement, relocation or reconstruction of a facility of more than 300 feet to be located, and maintained underground, with due regard for seasonal working conditions. For purposes of this section, reconstruction means any substantial repair of or any improvement to existing facilities. Underground installation may be required whether a replacement, relocation or reconstruction is initiated by the right-of-way user owning or operating the facilities, or by the city in connection with: 
(1)  The present or future use by the city or other local government unit of the right-of-way or other public ground for a public project; 
(2)  The public health or safety; or 
(3)  The safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way. 
(d)  Exceptions to underground installation. The following exceptions to the strict application of this section 51-49 shall be allowed upon the conditions stated: 
(1)  Transmission lines. Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of those facilities commonly referred to as "high voltage transmission lines" shall be allowed unless the city council requires undergrounding of the facilities after providing the right-of-way user notice and an opportunity to be heard. This provision shall not be construed as waiving the requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of the city as the same may apply to any such proposed project. 
(2)  Line of site telecommunications. Facilities and equipment associated with line of site telecommunications shall be allowed if specifically approved by the council. 
(3)  Technical/economic feasibility; promotion of policy. Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of facilities shall be allowed where in the discretion of the city council, it does not promote the purpose of the article or is otherwise not technically or financially feasible. 
(4)  Temporary service. Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of temporary service lines shall only be allowed: 
a.  During construction of any project for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months or a time period determined by the director; 
b.  During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or property within the city; 
(e)  Developer responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers are responsible for complying with the requirements of this subdivision, and prior to final approval of any plat or development plan, shall submit to the director written instruments from the appropriate right-of-way users showing that all necessary arrangements with said users for installation of such Facilities have been made. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-50. - Location and relocation of facilities. 
(a)  Rule. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities. 
(1)  Relocation notification procedure. Whenever reasonably possible, the director shall notify the utility owner at least six months in advance of the need to relocate existing facilities so the owner can determine if relocation or replacement is required and plan any required work. If undisclosed utilities are discovered during construction, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. 
The city should provide one written notification that includes the date work will start on the city's project, and if different, provide the date by which the relocation must be completed. All utilities shall be relocated within the time frame specified and the utility owner shall diligently work to relocate the facilities. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. 
(2)  Delay to city project. If the owner fails to meet the relocation deadline due to circumstances within the utility's control, the city may charge the utility owner a reasonable delay penalty as established by resolution of the city council. Additional wording removed. 
(3)  Joint trenching. all facilities shall be placed in appropriate portions of right-of-way so as to cause minimum conflict with other underground Facilities. When technically appropriate and no safety hazards are created, all utilities shall be installed, constructed or placed within the same trench. Notwithstanding the foregoing, gas and electric lines shall be placed in conformance with Minnesota Rules Pt. 7819.5100, subdivision 2, Governing Safety Standards. 
(b)  Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that are or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will be located within the right-of-way. All utility, obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of Facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. A typical crossing section of the location for utilities may be on file at the director's office. This section is not intended to establish "high density corridors". 
Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the city may remain at that location until the city requires Facilities relocation to the corridor pursuant to relocation authority granted under Minnesota Rules part 7819.3100 or other applicable law. 
(c)  Limitation of space. To protect the public health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-51. - Pre-excavation facilities location. 
    In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S.A. § 216D.01-216D.09 ("One Call Excavation Notice System") before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall be responsible to mark the horizontal placement of all said facilities, to the extent technically feasible. To the extent its records contain such information, each registrant shall provide information regarding the approximate vertical location of their facilities, at the time of installation, to excavators upon request. Nothing in this subsection is meant to limit the rights, duties and obligations of the facility owners or excavators as set forth in M.S.A. § 216D.01-216D.09. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-52. - Right-of-way vacation-Reservation of right. 
(a)  Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the equipment of a registrant, and if the vacation does not require the relocation of registrant facilities and equipment, the city shall reserve, to and for itself and all registrants having facilities and equipment in the vacated right-of-way, the right to install, maintain and operate any facilities and equipment in the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon such right-of-way at any time for the purpose of reconstruction, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same. 
(b)  Relocation of equipment. If the vacation requires the relocation of registrant facilities and equipment; and (a) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the registrant, the registrant must pay the relocation costs; or (b) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the city, the registrant must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city and the registrant; or (c) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons other than the registrant or permit holder, such other person or persons must pay the relocation costs. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-53. - Indemnification and liability. 
    By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this section, a registrant or permittee agrees to the city's election to adopt the indemnification provisions in Minnesota Rule 7819.1250 and thereby agrees to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250. The obligations under this section shall survive the expiration, termination or revocation of any permit issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-54. - Abandoned facilities. 
(a)  Discontinued operations. A registrant who has decided to discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this article have been lawfully assumed by another registrant. 
(b)  Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way pursuant to Minnesota Rule Part 7819.3300, unless the requirement is waived by the director. 
(c)  Records. Records of abandoned facilities must be maintained by the registrant and made available to the city upon the written request of the director. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-55. - Appeal. 
    A right-of-way user that: 
(1)  Has been denied registration; 
(2)  Has been denied a permit; 
(3)  Has had permit revoked; or 
(4)  Believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with M.S.A. § 237.163, Subd. 6 may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, heard by the city council. The city council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the city council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-56. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-57. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-58. - Franchise agreement. 
    Nothing in this article precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 51-59. - Small wireless facility agreement. 
    A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following: 
(1)  Up to $150.00 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure. 
(2)  $25.00 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation. 
(3)  A monthly fee for electrical service as follows: 
a.  $73.00 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts; 
b.  $182.00 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or 
c.  The actual cost of electricity, if the actual cost exceeds the foregoing. 
    The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Chapter 52 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 230, adopted June 11, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as chapter 63. To preserve the style of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as chapter 52. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; landscaping, ch. 28; manufactured housing, ch. 30; planning, ch. 46.5; signs, ch. 48; utilities, ch. 58; wireless telecommunications towers and antennas, ch. 60; zoning, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Title. 
    This chapter of the Municipal Code of Watertown, Minnesota shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Watertown, Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-2. - Intent and scope. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of a plat to be subject to the control of the city pursuant to the comprehensive plan of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city. 
    Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. 
    Public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the comprehensive plan, official map, and the capital budget and program of the city, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the building code, zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, official map, and capital budget of the city. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. These rules and regulations shall apply to all plats and subdivisions of land, including registered land surveys, within the jurisdiction of the City of Watertown as provided by state statute. 
    All subdivisions of land within the City of Watertown shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in this chapter. The standards established by this chapter are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or impair private agreements or restrictive covenants currently in effect. The proposed subdivision shall conform to all applicable regulations and ordinances, of the City of Watertown. The design features set forth in this chapter are minimum requirements. To further the intent of this chapter the city may impose additional requirements concerning lot size, streets and overall design as deemed appropriate. 
(b)  Platting authority. The city council shall serve as the platting authority of the city in accordance with Minnesota Statutes. No plat, replat, subdivision of land or registered land survey shall be filed or accepted for filing by the County Recorder/Registrar of Titles of Carver County unless it is accompanied by a certified copy of a resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the city council approving such plat, replat, subdivision of land or registered land survey unless another provision of this chapter otherwise provides. 
(c)  Approval. Approval shall be required for any subdivision of land within the jurisdictional boundary of the city. Approval procedures shall conform to those prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-4. - Definitions. 
    The definitions in the city's zoning ordinance apply to this chapter. The following definitions shall also be applicable: 
(1)  Rules of word construction. 
Words in the present tense shall include the future tense; 
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular; 
The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual, natural person; 
The masculine includes the feminine, and the feminine includes the masculine; 
The word "used" or "occupied" include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied; 
The word "lot" includes the words plot or parcel, and all other words or phrases used to denote an individual site that complies with the minimum provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Definitions. 
    Adequate public facilities ordinance means an ordinance that ties or conditions development approvals to the availability and adequacy of public facilities. Public facilities may include but are not limited to those facilities relating to roads, sewer systems, schools, water supply and distribution, and fire protection. 
    Alley means a public or private way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and which is not intended for general traffic circulation and which is generally considered for the use of service vehicles and lines, such as water, sewer, gas, and electrical poles. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision which is entirely bounded by streets or by a combination of streets, railroad right-of-way, public parks, or cemeteries, the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or the shoreline of a river or lake. 
    Board of Adjustment means the Board of Adjustment of the City of Watertown as established in the City of Watertown Zoning Ordinance. 
    Boulevard means that portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the property line. 
    Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel, or property of any kind. 
    Building setback line means a line parallel to a street between which line and the nearest street right-of-way line no building may be erected or placed. 
    Capital improvement program (CIP) means an itemized program setting forth the schedule and details of specific contemplated public improvements by fiscal year, together with their estimated cost, the justification for each improvement, the impact that such improvements will have on the current operating expense of the government, and such other information on capital improvements as may be pertinent. 
    City means City of Watertown, Carver County, Minnesota. 
    City council means governing body of the City of Watertown 
    Comprehensive plan means the document(s) and amendments thereto containing the policies, statements, goals, and interrelated plans for the public and private land and water use, transportation, and community facilities of the City of Watertown adopted pursuant to M.S.A. § 473.864. 
    County means Carver County, State of Minnesota. 
    Crosswalk or pedestrian way means a municipally owned right-of-way that crosses a block and furnishes pedestrian access to adjacent streets or properties. 
    Cul-de-Sac see street, cul-de-sac. 
    Developer means a person or firm that develops land through construction of public and/or private improvements. The developer may be the owner and/or developer. 
    Development plan means a dimensioned presentation of a proposed development of a specific parcel of land. Such plan may be used to describe a site, sketch plan, preliminary or final plat, or conditional use permit. 
    Duplex means a residential structure containing two dwelling units only, completely surrounded by open space. 
    Easement means a grant or authorization by a property owner for the use of a designated part of his property by the public, a corporation, or persons for a specific purpose such as utilities, drainage ways, roadways, walkways, trails, buffers, and berms. 
    Engineer means the city engineer or a consultant engineer employed by the city. 
    Escrow means the deposition of funds in an account maintained by the city specifically for the purpose of ensuring fulfillment of certain obligations assumed pursuant to the chapter. 
    Frontage (have frontage on, front on) means abut, immediately adjacent. 
    Governing body means city council of the City of Watertown. 
    Grade means the average elevation of the finished ground at the exterior walls of the principal building 
    Grade, percentage of means the rise or fall of a street in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance measured at the centerline of the street. 
    Improvement - Lot means any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the lot constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
    Improvement - Public means any drainage facility, roadway, parkway, park, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which city responsibility is established. 
    Lot means the smallest unit of a subdivision individually numbered or designated on the plat for purpose of description, recording, conveyance, development and taxation. 
    Lot, corner means a lot situated on the intersection of two streets. 
    Lot depth means a mean horizontal distance between a street right-of-way line and the opposite rear line of the lot measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. See Figure 1. 
Lot Figure 1 
    Lot, key means a lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots. See Figure 1. 
    Lot line means the line forming the boundary of a lot. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side property lines of a lot measured at the building setback line. 
    Minimum subdivision design standards means the guidelines, principals, and specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating among other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the preliminary plat. 
    Official map means a map adopted in accordance with M.S.A. § 462.359 which may include existing city streets, county and state highways, proposed future city streets, county and state highways, and areas needed for the planned widening of such streets and highways. An official map may also show the location of existing public land and facilities and other land needed for future public purposes including public facilities such as parks, playgrounds, schools, and other public buildings, civic centers, and travel service facilities. 
    Outlot means a parcel of land shown on a subdivision plat as an "outlot", and designated alpha-numerically, for example: "outlot A." Outlots are used to designate one of the following: land that is part of the subdivision but is to be subdivided into lots and blocks at a later date; land that is to be used for a specific purpose as designated in a development contract or other agreement between the city and the developer for a public purpose. 
    Owner means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. 
    Pedestrian ways see, trails. 
    Plat means the drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record pursuant to M.S.A. ch. 505 and containing all elements and requirements set forth in applicable local regulations adopted pursuant to M.S.A. § 462.358 and ch. 505. 
    Plat, final means the final map, drawing or chart on which the developer's plan of subdivision is presented to the city council for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the county recorder/registrar of titles for filing. 
    Plat, sketch a rough sketch map of a proposed subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion. 
    Plan, development See development plan. 
    Plan, site See site plan. 
    Planning commission means Planning Commission of the City of Watertown. 
    Platting officer means the person designated by the city council as having the primary authority for the implementation and enforcement of this chapter on behalf of the city. 
    Plat, preliminary means the preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission and city council for their consideration for compliance with the city comprehensive plan and this chapter along with required supporting data. 
    Protective/restrictive covenants means contract filed in the Office of the County Recorder/Registrar of Titles between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used with a view towards protecting and preserving the physical, aesthetic and economic integrity of the area. 
    Registered land surveyor means a land surveyor properly licensed and registered in the State of Minnesota. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, alley, trail, water line, sanitary sewer and/or other public utilities or facilities. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-Way intended for streets, alleys, trails, water main, sanitary sewers, utilities, shade trees, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the owner of the land being platted on which such right-of-way is established. 
    Site plan means a plan prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principle site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land. 
    Street right-of-way width means the distance between property lines measured at right angles or radially to the centerline of the street. 
    Street, arterial means a street of considerable continuity, which is used primarily for heavy through traffic between major traffic generation areas. Arterial streets are designated in the comprehensive plan. 
    Street, boulevard means a broad thoroughfare with landscape, sidewalk, or pedestrian improvements, often with a landscaped median or center divider that functions as a linear open space. 
    Street, collector means a feeder street as designated in the comprehensive plan which provides connection primarily between arterial streets and minor streets. Collector streets include the principal entrance streets to a residential development and the principal streets for circulation within such development. 
    Street, cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminus for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    Street, half means streets with half the width of the required right-of-way on the bounding edge of a tract being subdivided. 
    Street, local means a minor street, the principal function of which is to provide access to individual parcels of property. Cul-de-sacs and marginal access streets are to be considered local streets. 
    Street, marginal access (service street, frontage road) means a minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a highway or an arterial street; and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Street, parkway means a divided thoroughfare having controlled access with landscape, trail, or pedestrian improvements with a landscaped center island that functions as a linear open space. 
    Street width means the width of the improved surface of the street as measured at right angles or radially to the centerline of the street from curb face to curb face, or on a street without curbs from the outside edge of the improved shoulder to outside edge of improved shoulder. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected that requires location in or on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground, including mobile storage sheds. 
    Subdivider means a person who submits a plat for the purpose of land subdivision as defined herein. The subdivider may be the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the land to be subdivided. A subdivider may also be called the developer. 
    Subdivision means a separation of an area, parcel, or tract of land into two or more parcels, tracts, or lots. The use of the term subdivision may include the terms "resubdivision," "plat," "replat," "registered land survey," or "boundary adjustment." 
    Townhouse means a single family dwelling unit horizontally attached to one or more similar dwelling units in a linear arrangement and structured on individual lots. Features of townhouses are their private yards and private entrances. Townhouses by this definition do not include multiple units in a single structure such as tri-plexes, four-plexes, or apartment buildings. 
    Tree, evergreen means any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which at maturity attains a trunk diameter of at least three inches or more when measured at a point four feet above ground level and normally displays green leaves or needles throughout the year. 
    Tree, ornamental means any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which at maturity attains an overall height of at least ten (10) feet, usually with flowering buds and fruits or berries. 
    Tree, overstory means any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which at maturity attains a trunk diameter of at least three inches or more when measured at a point four feet above ground level and normally attains an overall height of at least 15 feet, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
    Tree, Significant means trees that are healthy, measure a minimum of eight inches in diameter at a distance of 54 inches above ground, and are a minimum of four inches in diameter for conifers. 
    Twin homes See duplex. 
    Zoning ordinance means the ordinance so named, and any amendments thereto, adopted by the City of Watertown regulating the use of land within the corporate limits of the city and in the orderly annexation area. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2; Zoning definitions, § 62-1. 
Sec. 52-5. - Generally. 
(a)  Metes and bounds. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, no land shall be conveyed or subdivided by a metes and bounds description. 
(b)  Adoption of a manual of standards. The City of Watertown is hereby authorized to adopt by resolution a manual of standards for the subdivision of land and the design and installation of public improvements associated with the subdivision of land. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-6. - Performance security. 
    Letter of credit: Prior to the city signing the final plat and prior to the construction of any improvements, the developer shall provide the city with a letter of credit or cash escrow to insure that all improvements required by this chapter will be installed and paid for at no city expense. For improvements to be installed by the developer, the developer is obligated to install and complete all such improvements at his own expense and under the supervision and inspection of the city. For improvements that the city agrees to install, the developer shall pay the cost of such improvements through payment of special assessments or such other method agreed upon by the city. As security to the city for installation of the improvements by the payment of special assessments, the developer shall be required to file a cash escrow or letter of credit in an amount and form acceptable to the city to cover the cost of all public improvements and special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 52-7-52-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-26. - Building permits. 
    No building or other permits will be issued by the city for grading, buildings, structures or improvements to any lot unless there has been full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-27. - Approval, recording of final plat. 
    Unless approved as a final plat as provided in this chapter, no subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the office of the county recorder or the office of the county registrar of titles, or have any validity. The city shall not permit any public improvements to be installed unless the final plat is approved and shall not permit occupancy until approval of the final plat and recording of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-28. - Registered land surveys and conveyance by metes and bounds. 
    All registered land surveys shall be filed subject to the same procedure as required for the approval of a preliminary plat for platting purposes. The standards and requirements set forth in this chapter shall apply to all registered land surveys. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-29. - Enforcement. 
    If the city administrator, city planner or building official, or their designees finds that any construction or proposed construction or occupancy of a development for which a development plan has been approved will not substantially comply with the development plan as approved, or that the construction and development is not being carried out in accordance with the development plan approved by the city council, the city administrator, city planner or building official, or their designees shall suspend all building permits for the development and order all construction stopped until such time as the developer provides satisfactory proof that compliance with the development plan will be attained. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-30. - Development review procedures. 
(a)  General review procedures. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter all subdivision of land in the City of Watertown shall follow the following procedures. Steps completed previously and not expired may be omitted provided no update is deemed necessary by the city council. Certain steps may be waived or determined not required in particular situations. 
(1)  Predevelopment meeting. 
(2)  Master plan. 
a.  Comprehensive plan amendment. 
b.  Phasing. 
(3)  Develop sketch plan. 
a.  Layout, streets, parks. 
b.  Utility feasibility study. 
(4)  Preliminary plat. 
a.  Traffic impact. 
b.  School impact, adequate public facilities. 
(5)  Site plan (attached family developments). 
(6)  Annexation. 
a.  Township discussion. 
b.  Council discussion. 
c.  Agreement/resolution. 
(7)  Rezoning. 
(8)  Final plat. 
a.  Construction documents. 
b.  Development agreement. 
c.  Covenants, homeowners association. 
(b)  Consultant review. The city may retain outside consultants in the review of development proposals. All fees or charges incurred for this review shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(c)  Construction requirements. All subdivision construction shall occur in order to provide maximum protection from and minimization of negative impacts to all residents, including those in the new development. Construction shall be staged to require minimal construction truck traffic through residential development. Methods to be employed may include separate construction entrances, alternative phasing, traffic calming, etc. to minimize these impacts. 
(d)  Predevelopment meeting. Prior to the submission of a development plan application, a preapplication review meeting scheduled with the city planner is recommended. The purpose of the preapplication review meeting is to begin identifying issues, communicate development requirements, and point out possible future difficulties. This evaluation is preliminary in nature and shall not be considered an intention to approve or deny any particular project and is not intended to be inclusive of the comments but only to identify major areas of concern or issues to be considered. The city reserves the right to supplement additional comments that may be generated during the formal review of the application. 
(e)  Application submittal. Application for a development plan review shall be made to the city planner on forms provided by the city. The application shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Evidence of ownership or interest in the property; 
(2)  Application fee and escrow deposit as determined from time to time by the city council; and 
(3)  Completed application and checklist forms. Such forms shall require sufficient information necessary to fully review a development application. 
(f)  Incomplete submittals. If all required submittal items are not provided, the application will be deemed invalid and such submittal will be returned to the applicant as incomplete. The city will retain no record of the submittal if returned to the applicant as incomplete. 
(g)  Waiver of requirements. The city may find that unusual characteristics of an application make it unnecessary for the applicant to submit all of the information for an application required by this ordinance. In such cases, the city may waive or reduce the requirements if it is also found that the absence of such information will not inhibit the city's ability to evaluate the compliance of the proposed development with the standards of this chapter and any other requirements for the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(h)  City review. The city shall refer a copy of the development plan to the city engineer, public works director, water plant operator and fire chief. Each department shall review the development plan and recommend changes deemed advisable as to its compliance with the ordinances of the city, accepted planning practice, its effect upon public utilities, streets, property, safety, and general welfare and submit findings as soon as possible to the city planner. The city planner shall forward the development plan and city staff report to the planning commission. 
(i)  Master plan. Prior to annexation, or prior to a development involving the creation or improvement of public roads or utilities a master plan shall be developed. The master plan shall include, but may not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Property ownership, existing land uses and connections, slopes, soils, wetlands, existing vegetation, etc. 
(2)  Master plan should identify items required on forms provided by the city, including, but not limited to proposed connections with existing and proposed city streets and utilities. 
(3)  A master plan shall be consistent with provisions highlighted by the comprehensive plan. Where the comprehensive plan requires modification, a comprehensive plan amendment shall be developed, and approved by the city council and metropolitan council prior to the acceptance of a preliminary plat. Such amendments shall follow procedures as indicated on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 249, § 1, 8-26-03) 
Secs. 52-31-52-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINOR SUBDIVISION 

Sec. 52-46. - Minor subdivision approval. 
(a)  Application of provisions. Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall apply to those subdivisions classified as "minor subdivisions." Any subdivision of land regulated by this chapter shall be considered a major subdivision unless specifically defined as a minor subdivision in this section. 
(b)  Minor subdivisions. Any subdivision of land creating not more than three lots in which the lots created conform with all of the following requirements may be considered a minor subdivision: 
(1)  The subdivision meets the zoning ordinance requirements for frontage on an existing road. 
(2)  The subdivision does not require the construction of any new public facilities or improvements, including buffers, but excluding parks or trails. 
(3)  The subdivision complies with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and official map. 
(4)  The subdivision does not appear to circumvent the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  Any land subdivision that creates one new lot shall be platted and the final plat recorded with the county recorder. 
(c)  Minor subdivision procedure. The owner or developer shall file with the platting officer five copies of a plat or survey of the land to be subdivided by a licensed land surveyor if the land is to be described by metes and bounds or for the purpose of a minor boundary adjustment in accordance with this section, along with a completed application, the required fees, and an up-to-date abstract, registered property report, or such other evidence required by the city attorney and/or platting officer to show that the applicant has sufficient ownership or control of the land to make application. The application shall be considered officially filed when the platting officer has determined that the application is complete and other required documents are attached to the application. 
(d)  Procedure for approval/denial. Within a reasonable time after the platting officer has determined that the application is complete, the platting officer shall: 
(1)  Review the documents demonstrating ownership or control or refer the documents to the city attorney for review. 
(2)  Refer copies of the plat to the city engineer and other staff, boards, committees, or outside agencies, as appropriate, and to the affected municipal or private utility companies. 
(3)  Provided no objection is received, the platting officer may approve the minor subdivision. Following receipt of unfavorable review reports, the platting officer may refer the subdivision request to the planning commission and city council in such manner as prescribed for major subdivisions. 
(e)  Qualifications governing approval of minor subdivisions. Any subdivision plat approved pursuant to this section shall conform with the Carver County Manual of Standard Procedures: Subdivision Plats and Registered Land Surveys. 
(f)  Minor boundary adjustments. The relocation of the boundary lines between two existing abutting parcels shall be considered a minor subdivision provided such relocation shall not cause the creation of a new parcel or parcels and such parcels comply with the zoning ordinance. The platting officer may approve minor boundary adjustments. Surveys for both amended parcels shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 249, § 2, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 52-47. - Copies of recorded deeds (minor subdivisions). 
    Whenever deeds are recorded instead of a plat, the developer shall, immediately upon receipt of the recorded deeds from the county recorder or certificate of title from the registrar of titles, provide copies thereof to the platting officer for verification of the recording of the documents. No building permits shall be issued prior to the city receiving evidence of the recording of deeds. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 52-48-52-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SKETCH PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 249, § 3, adopted Aug. 26, 2003, amended div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 3, §§ 52-61-52-80, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 230, adopted June 11, 2002. 

Sec. 52-61. - Sketch plan; generally. 
(a)  Developers shall prepare for review with the planning commission, city engineer, city planner and others a sketch plan depicting the proposed subdivision. The sketch plan and any accompanying information shall serve as a basis for discussion between the developer and the city and is intended to provide a developer with an advisory review. 
(b)  A land planner or landscape architect shall develop the sketch plan to maximize existing conditions (including but not limited to vegetation, topography, natural resources, etc.), minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties, while enhancing pedestrian and vehicular access and creating a cohesive, aesthetically pleasing, inviting, and attractive environment. Upon approval of the sketch plan, a licensed engineer shall prepare the approved design for later stages. 
(c)  All applicable ordinances and regulations shall be addressed after the approval of a sketch plan, but prior to the acceptance of a preliminary plat. 
(d)  The sketch plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A site location map showing major streets, parks, community facilities and other significant developments. 
(2)  Tract boundaries. 
(3)  North point and scale. 
(4)  Topography and physical features, including lakes, ponds, wetlands and wooded areas. 
(5)  Proposed uses, including park and open space. 
(6)  Streets within and adjacent to the tract. 
(7)  Proposed general street design. 
(8)  Proposed lot size and orientation. 
(9)  Proposed zoning change, if any. 
(e)  Submission of such sketch plan shall not constitute formal filing of a preliminary plat. The planning commission will, on the basis of such sketch plan, unofficially advise the developer of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms to this chapter and will discuss possible modifications. The city council may also review the sketch plan. 
(f)  Following review of the sketch plan, the city council may cause the engineer to prepare a feasibility study for extension or improvement of public utilities, including water, sewer, storm, streets and trails. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 3, 8-26-03) 
Secs. 52-62-52-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRELIMINARY PLAT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 249, §§ 4 and 6, adopted Aug. 26, 2003, amended div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 4, §§ 52-81-52-100, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 230, adopted June 11, 2002. 

Sec. 52-81. - Preliminary plat; generally. 
    Property shall be platted to augment existing topography vegetation, etc. and shall be consistent with the prepared sketch plan, comprehensive plan, and prepared master plan. A preliminary plat shall be prepared and reviewed as follows: 
(1)  Application. The application for preliminary plat approval shall be on forms prescribed by the city and shall be accompanied by copies of the preliminary plat in such number as required by the city. The applicant shall pay the application fee and an escrow deposit established by city council resolution from time to time. The escrow deposit shall be used throughout the complete subdivision process to reimburse costs or expenses incurred by the city and can only be waived or decreased by the city council. All required data, documentation plans, copies and fees must be submitted before the application will be considered complete. Rejection of the plat by the city council, or abandonment or withdrawal of the proposed plat by the developer, shall not entitle the applicant to a return of all or any part of the application fee. 
(2)  Content. The application shall include, but is not limited to: 
a.  Evidence of ownership or interest in the property. 
b.  Application fee as determined from time to time by the city council. 
c.  Completed application forms. Developer shall provide all information as required on the development application. 
(3)  Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat after notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing has been published once in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing. Written notice shall also be mailed by the city to the applicant and all owners of record within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the preliminary plat. Failure to give notice or defects in the notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings. 
(4)  Planning commission review. The planning commission shall make a recommendation on the preliminary plat to the city council. The planning commission may recommend approval, approval subject to conditions or that the preliminary plat be denied. If denial is recommended, the reasons for that recommendation shall be stated in the record. The preliminary plat review by the planning commission and city council shall include review of the provisions of adequate public facilities, including school facilities, traffic impacts to the streets and trails, water, sewer systems. 
(5)  City council review. Following action by the planning commission, the city council shall consider the preliminary plat. The city council shall make its decision within 120 days following receipt by the city of the properly completed application, unless the developer consents in writing to a continuance. 
(6)  Findings of approval-Preliminary and final plat. The findings necessary for city council approval of the preliminary plat and the final plat shall be as follows: 
a.  The proposed subdivision is consistent with the zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances; 
b.  The proposed subdivision is consistent with all applicable city, county and regional plans including but not limited to the city's comprehensive plan and master plan for the area; 
c.  The physical characteristics of the site, including but not limited to topography, soils, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, and stormwater drainage are suitable for the proposed development; 
d.  The proposed subdivision makes adequate provision for water supply, storm drainage, sewage disposal, streets, erosion control and all other improvements required by this chapter; 
e.  The proposed subdivision will not conflict with easements of record; 
f.  The proposed subdivision is not premature. A subdivision is premature if any of the following exists: 
1.  Lack of adequate stormwater drainage; 
2.  Lack of dedicated and improved public streets; 
3.  Lack of adequate sanitary sewer systems; 
4.  Lack of adequate off-site public improvements or support systems. 
(7)  Duration. Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire one year after the date of approval unless the developer has filed a completed application for approval of the final plat or has received an extension from the city council. An extension shall be granted only if good cause is shown by the applicant, and if there has been no change in any land use control or comprehensive plan affecting the use, development density, lot size, lot layout, dedication or platting requirements since the approval of the preliminary plat, and the city council determines that it is in the best interest of the city to grant an extension. The duration of an extension shall be determined by the city council and shall begin from the date of expiration of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 5, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 330, § 1, 11-10-08) 
Sec. 52-82. - Site plan (where required). 
    In areas where development proposals require site plan approval as prescribed in article VIII of the Watertown Zoning Code, such procedures shall be followed as prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 6, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 52-83. - Annexation. 
(a)  Joint resolution. If deemed appropriate the city council may accept a request for annexation using the following procedures: 
(1)  Township discussion. The property owner shall make an informal request to the township board regarding annexation of the land. Annexation should follow staging as identified in the Watertown Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Council discussion. Following informal review of the request by the township board and receipt of recommendation from the board, the city council may review the request. If the city council deems necessary, the council shall direct the city attorney to draft a joint resolution for annexation, to be adopted by both the city and the township. 
(b)  Other methods. The city may annex land pursuant to other provisions of M.S.A. ch. 414. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 6, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 52-84. - Rezoning. 
    Following annexation the city council may rezone property consistent with the comprehensive and master plans of the city following procedures outlined in section 62-165 of the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 6, 8-26-03) 
Secs. 52-85-52-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 52-101. - Generally. 
(a)  The final plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor who is registered in this state and shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and state law. 
(b)  The final plat will have incorporated all modifications required by the city council and in all other aspects shall conform with the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-102. - Procedures. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in the development contract for phased development, within one year after the date of the city council approval of the preliminary plat, the developer shall file an application for approval of the final plat. In addition to the application the developer shall submit: 
a.  Copies of the plat in such quantities as required by the city. 
b.  Two mylar copies of the plat. 
c.  One 200-scale copy of the plat. 
(2)  Termination. If the final plat application is not filed within this period, the preliminary plat will be considered void unless for good cause shown an extension is requested in writing by the developer and granted by the city council. 
(b)  Planning commission review. The planning commission shall make a recommendation on the preliminary plat to the city council. The planning commission may recommend approval, approval subject to conditions or that the preliminary plat be denied. If denial is recommended, the reasons for that recommendation shall be stated in the record. 
(c)  City council review. The city council shall review the final plat and shall approve or disapprove the plat following recommendation from the planning commission. 
(d)  Acceptable form. No final plat shall be approved by the city council until the plat is in a form acceptable for recording with the county, the proper filing fees have been paid to the city, a development agreement has been signed, appropriate security has been furnished, and no other payments to the city related to the development are outstanding. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-103. - Development agreement. 
    Before the city signs a final plat and before the developer constructs any improvements, the developer shall enter into a development agreement with the city. The agreement shall delineate the conditions under which approval is granted. The city council shall approve the development agreement by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-104. - Recording. 
    If the final plat is approved, the developer shall record the plat in the Office of the Carver County Recorder/Registrar of Titles within 45 days after the date of approval and furnish the city evidence of the recording; otherwise the approval of the subdivision shall be considered null and void. No building permits shall be issued until evidence of recording the plat is received. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-105. - Reproducible mylar print copy and blue line print to city. 
    The developer shall, immediately upon recording, furnish the city with a reproducible mylar copy and one blue line print of the final plat or survey. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-106. - Duration. 
    Approval of a final plat submitted under this division shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan, or an extension is granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 52-107-52-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-126. - Generally. 
    All developments within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Watertown shall conform to the engineering and building standards as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-127. - Streets. 
(a)  Dedication. Streets shall be dedicated on the plat to the public. The location and design of streets shall consider existing and planned streets, accommodate anticipated traffic circulation, topography conditions, runoff or stormwater, public convenience and safety and the proposed land uses of property to be served. 
(b)  Right-of-way. 
(1)  Street right-of-way width shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and official map, and shall conform to county and state standards for trunk highways. If no such plans or standards are applicable, right-of-way widths shall not be less than the following: 
Street Classifications Right-of-Way Width (feet) Pavement Width (feet) Measr'd from back of curb Arterial 100 36 to 44 Parkway 80 42 (outside to outside minimum) Local Collector 80 36 Local Street 60 28-32 Cul-de-sac diameter 195 32  
(2)  Right-of-way width may be increased to provide additional parking, traffic calming, etc. as is necessary to promote the health, safety, and general welfare. 
(3)  The use of landscaped center islands within cul-de-sac bulbs and traffic calming islands is encouraged. Such islands shall be placed so as to provide adequate emergency and maintenance access. 
(c)  Intersections. Streets shall intersect at right angles. In no case shall the angle formed by the intersection of two streets be less than 60 degrees. Intersections having more than four entering street segments are prohibited. 
(d)  Centerline grades. All centerline grades shall be at least five-tenths (.05) percent and shall not exceed five percent for arterials and seven percent for all other streets and alleys. Whenever possible, grades within 30 feet of intersections or railroad crossings shall not exceed three percent. 
(e)  Access, arterial/collector streets. Where a proposed residential subdivision is adjacent to an arterial or collector street, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to such arterial or collector streets. Access to arterial streets shall be at intervals of not less than 1/4 mile and through existing and established crossroads. Access along collector streets will be restricted and controlled on the final plat. 
    Access to commercial or industrial subdivisions shall be provided to maximize safe efficient travel within and adjacent to the subdivision. 
(f)  Half streets. Half streets shall not be approved. 
(g)  Private streets. Private streets shall not be approved. 
(h)  Cul-de-sacs. The use of cul-de-sacs is discouraged except, where to further the intent of this chapter, cul-de-sacs are appropriate due to existing topography, vegetation, etc. In no case shall a street ending in a cul-de-sac exceed 300 feet. Where a cul-de-sac is deemed appropriate, such cul-de-sac right -of-way shall include the following: 
(1)  Fifteen feet of right-of-way boulevard area; 
(2)  Thirty-two-foot wide street (back of curb to back of curb); 
(3)  One hundred-foot diameter circle landscaped island. Such island may be teardrop shaped to correspond to traffic patterns. 
(i)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline off sets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited. Greater offsets may be required for collector and arterial streets to accommodate turn lanes. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 249, §§ 7, 8, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 52-128. - Arrangement of streets. 
    The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions or plats shall be laid out so as to provide a continuation of existing streets of adjoining areas, whether in the city or in adjoining governmental subdivisions or the projection of east-west or north-south streets of the city if there are no adjoining streets. The width of the streets in new subdivisions shall not be less than the minimum street width established herein. Offset or irregular streets are prohibited. Streets shall be extended to the subdivision property line where required. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-129. - Street signs. 
    Streets signs of a standard design approved by the city shall be installed at each intersection. Regulatory (no parking, stop, yield, etc.) signs shall be installed as required prior to issuance of a building permit. Such funds as are necessary to complete the signage shall be included in the subdivision security requirements. This requirement shall not apply for those lots identified as model homes in the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-130. - Sub-base, grading. 
    Every street shall have adequate sub-base and shall be improved with a bituminous or concrete surface in accordance with the design standards specified by the city. Except in areas where topography or tree cover dictate otherwise, grading shall provide for installation of sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-131. - Alleys. 
    Alleys may be required in blocks greater than 900 feet in length. Alley rights-of-way and pavement width shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
Classification Right-of-way (in feet) Pavement (in feet) Residential (two-way) 20 16.5  
    The city council may reduce the width of the alley right-of-way or pavement width. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-132. - Blocks. 
    The length and width of blocks shall be sufficient to provide a convenient and safe access, circulation, control and street design. Blocks shall not be longer than 1,800 feet, or shorter than 300 feet except where topography of surrounding development limits the ability to strictly comply or as specifically approved by the city council to foster innovative design consistent with sound planning principles. Pedestrian ways may be required on blocks longer than 900 feet or in other areas to provide access to schools, parks and other destination points. Easements for pedestrian ways shall be at least 20 feet wide and shall be located to minimize intersections with streets. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-133. - Lots. 
(a)  All lots shall abut a publicly dedicated street for their full required minimum frontage as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or substantially radial to curved streets. 
(c)  Lots shall be graded to drain away from building locations. 
(d)  Lots shall be placed to preserve and protect natural amenities, such as vegetation, wetlands, steep slopes, water courses, and historic areas. 
(e)  Lot remnants are prohibited. 
(f)  Street arrangements for the proposed subdivision shall not cause undue hardship to owners of adjoining property in subdividing their own land. 
(g)  Lot layouts should take into consideration the potential use of solar energy design features. 
(h)  Driveway slope shall be a minimum of 1/2 percent and a maximum grade of ten percent. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-134. - Trail, access and conservation easement. 
    Where any proposed plat adjoins a lake, wetland, pond, river or stream, including streams that flow only intermittently, the city may require that a strip of land running along all sides thereof that are contiguous to such lake, wetland, pond, river or stream, be dedicated to the city for public use, or subject to a perpetual easement in favor of the city for purpose of protecting its hydraulic efficiency and natural character and beauty. There shall also be granted to the city the right of ingress and egress from the dedicated land. Conservation easements may also be utilized along buffer areas as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 249, § 9, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 52-135. - Trails. 
(a)  Width. Trail width shall be eight feet unless otherwise required by the city council 
(b)  Material. Trails shall be constructed of bituminous or concrete material in accordance with the design standards as adopted by the city. 
(c)  Lighting. The city may require accent or security lighting. Such lighting shall be in a form and style approved by the city council. 
(d)  Landscaping. Trails shall be located within easements or dedicated right-of-way. Trail improvements shall provide definition to discourage trespassing onto private property. Such definition may include open fencing, landscaping, and/or berms. One overstory or one evergreen tree shall be installed for each 40 feet of trail length. Such trees may be grouped. Tree sizes shall be a minimum caliper of 2-1/2 inches for overstory shade trees or six feet in height for evergreen trees. Berming and lot grading shall not direct surface drainage over the trail surface. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-136. - Water supply. 
    Water mains shall be extended to the subdivision property lines as may be required by the city and all necessary fire hydrants shall be provided. Extensions of the public water supply systems shall be designed to provide public water service to each lot with the minimum distance necessary and shall be in accordance with applicable city requirements. Water mains shall be routed so as to provide a loop of the city water system, promoting the water quality and fire safety. Fire hydrants shall be provided as required in the uniform fire code. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-137. - Sanitary sewer. 
    Public sanitary sewer main and service connections shall be approved by the city engineer and installed to serve all lots in the subdivision. Lot service connections shall be the minimum distance necessary. Service cleanouts and inspection manholes shall be provided as directed by the city. Sanitary sewer mains shall be extended to the subdivision property line as may be required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-138. - Storm drainage. 
    A system that will adequately accommodate surface water runoff within the subdivision shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-139. - Stormwater detention. 
    The surface water discharge rate from the subdivision is to be retained at the predevelopment rate for a 100-year, 24-hour storm event through the use of surface water detention/retention facilities or other appropriate means as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-140. - Other utilities. 
    All utility lines, including those for telephone and electrical service, shall be placed underground. Utility lines, to the extent practical, shall be located in the rear yards. In areas where topography or vegetative conditions restrict, utility boxes shall be located no closer to the street than the building setback lines for that district. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-141. - Sediment and erosion control. 
    It is the policy of the city to control soil erosion and sedimentation caused as the result of development activities within the city. A minimum of six inches of topsoil shall be placed on all disturbed areas prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Erosion control plans shall be submitted for review and approval at the time of development plan review. 
b.  Development shall be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create the least potential for soil erosion. Areas of steep slopes and where high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible. 
c.  Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses and wetlands should be left undisturbed whenever possible. 
d.  Disturbed areas shall be stabilized no more than five days following grade determination. Disturbed areas in drainage ways or concentrated flow areas shall be stabilized no more than 72 hours following grade determination. 
e.  Sediment basins, debris basins, silt traps or filters must be installed and maintained to eliminate sediment run-off. 
f.  In the design of erosion control measures, the requirements of continuing maintenance shall be considered. 
g.  Drainage ways shall be designed so that final gradients and velocities will not create additional erosion. 
h.  Erosion and sediment controls may include, but are not limited to the following components: 
Silt fencing, gravel drives, straw mulch, vegetation, sediment basins, rock check dams, regular street sweeping. 
(2)  Maintenance. Soil erosion control shall be installed prior to issuance of a building permit Erosion control systems shall be maintained at all times. To guarantee maintenance of erosion control systems, the developer shall provide escrow funds or letter of credit in an amount determined from time to time by the city council. 
    Following an erosion event, i.e. rainfall, wind storm; the erosion control measures shall be inspected by the property owner. Erosion control measures shall be maintained as necessary, or within 48 hours following notification of maintenance requirements. 
    Such erosion control measures not employed or functional following such notification shall constitute a misdemeanor and may result in the use of the escrow funds, and or the issuance of a stop work order. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Division 2. - TREE PRESERVATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 305, § 1, adopted May 22, 2007, repealed § 52-142 in its entirety and added new provisions to read as herein set out. In keeping with the numbering style of the Code, these provisions have been set out as Art. III, Div. 2, §§ 52-142-52-148, and renumbered §§ 52-143, 52-144 as §§ 52-149, 52-150, at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. II, § 52-142, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from 0rd. No. 230, adopted Jun. 11, 2002 and Ord. No. 249, § 10, adopted Aug. 26, 2003. 

Sec. 52-142. - Tree preservation requirements. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the city to preserve natural landscaping and woodland areas throughout the city. All efforts shall occur in the architectural layout and site design of a proposed development to preserve existing trees, most especially mature trees, specimen trees, tree groves, and tree lines. It is therefore the purpose of this section to provide regulations related to the cutting, removal, or killing of trees on construction and development sites and to ensure the protection and preservation of the natural environment and the beauty of [the City of] Watertown. 
(b)  Clear cutting. No clear cutting of land shall be permitted except as approved by the city council as part of an approved development plan. 
(c)  Evaluation standards. The following standards shall be used in evaluating subdivisions and development plans: 
(1)  To the extent practical, site design shall preserve woodland areas and significant trees. Special priority for tree preservation shall be given to areas within floodplains, wetlands, stream corridors, wooded slopes, and along collector and arterial roadway corridors. 
(2)  Minimizing tree loss should be achieved by any combination of the following: 
a.  Realignment of streets, utilities and lot lines. 
b.  Consideration of alternative utility configurations such as the use of ejector pumps, force mains, or revised home elevations to minimize grading. 
c.  An increase in street grade up to ten percent when the applicant can demonstrate that significant trees preservation is directly related to the modification. 
d.  Variation in street radius and design speed. 
e.  Modified grading plans. 
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 52-143. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Caliper inches. See Stem caliper 
    Critical root zone of a tree means the area of a circle around a significant tree with a radius that is equal to 1.5 feet for every inch in stem diameter. 
    Developer means the developer, subdivider, owner of the land or person who is applying for tree removal and who does not meet the definition of a homeowner. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH) The diameter of a tree measured at four and one-half feet above the existing grade (or circumference divided by pi). Diameter at breast height or DBH is used in reference to established plantings in the field. Trees that branch below one foot will be considered to have multiple stems and the diameter of the tree will equal the sum of the diameters of each stem. 
    High tree density means a parcel of land containing six or more total caliper inches of significant trees per 1,000 square feet of land. 
    Homeowner means the owner or owner's agent of a single family house, duplex, or lot which was previously subdivided by a previous owner pursuant to Chapter 28 of the City of Watertown Municipal Code. 
    Homeowner significant tree means any deciduous or coniferous tree measuring ten caliper inches or greater in diameter (DBH) or greater which is not dead or actively infected with oak wilt or Dutch elm disease. 
    Low tree density means a parcel of land containing less than six total caliper inches of significant trees per 1,000 square feet of land. 
    Replacement tree means a tree planted as part of the tree replacement plan, which must be at least three caliper inches measured 12 inches from the ground and which otherwise meets the requirements of this section, except bur oak, swamp white oak, pagoda dogwood, ironwood and similar trees accepted by the city which may be two caliper inches. A coniferous tree seven feet high will meet the three minimum caliper inches required. (See exceptions for steep slopes.) 
    Developer significant tree means any deciduous or coniferous tree measuring six caliper inches in diameter (DBH) or greater which is not dead or actively infected with oak wilt or dutch elm disease, except bur oak, swamp white oak, red maple, sugar maple, black maple, pagoda dogwood, ironwood and similar trees designated by the city shall be considered significant at four caliper inches in diameter or greater. 
    Stem caliper means the diameter of a tree measured at six inches above the ground for stems less than or equal to four inches and at 12 inches for stems greater than four inches in diameter. 
    Tree removal means any excavating, grading, clearing, filling or other earth change or any cutting, which may result in removal or killing of more than ten percent of the significant tree caliper inches on any land within any period of five years. 
    Tree trunk means the stem portion of a tree from the ground to the first branch thereof. Any term used in this division and not defined in this section shall have the meaning as otherwise defined in this Code. 
Sec. 52-144. - Permit required. 
(a)  Required. It is unlawful for a homeowner to use land for, or to engage directly or indirectly in, tree removal of a significant tree unless the homeowner shall first have applied for and obtained from the city, in the manner provided in this section, a permit authorizing tree removal. Provided, however, that no permit shall be required by a homeowner for removal of a tree that was damaged due to a natural disaster or for excavation in conjunction with a building: 
(1)  For which there has been issued an appropriate building permit; and 
(2)  Which is to be constructed: 
a.  Upon land for which a permit for tree removal under this division has previously been issued; and 
b.  In accordance with such permit. 
(b)  Failure to obtain. Failure to obtain a permit shall be cause to deny issuance of a building permit, prohibiting continuation of any construction of the property, connection or extension of any utilities on the property or on any adjacent streets, issuance of a certificate of occupancy and to require remedial action in accordance with the tree replacement table to replace significant trees lost or expected to be lost as a result of activity on the site. 
(c)  Application. Application for a tree removal and replacement permit shall be made in writing using the form provided by the city. The application shall include: 
(1)  The name, address and signed concurrence from the owner of land. 
(2)  Using a current survey at a suitable scale of the property, include: 
a.  The existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site; 
b.  The location, size and type (species) of all significant trees on the property; 
c.  The location, size and type (species) of all significant trees proposed to be removed/lost; and 
d.  Location and type of protection measures used to prevent damage to the critical root zone of significant trees to be protected. 
Significant trees shall be considered lost as a result of grade change, including grading or filling, whether temporary or permanent, affecting 55 percent or more of the tree's critical root zone; cutting of 45 percent or more of the tree's roots within the critical root zone; mechanical injury to the trunk causing loss of more than 40 percent of the circumference of any portion of the tree bark; compaction to a depth of six inches or more of 45 percent or more of the surface of the soil within a significant tree's critical root zone. 
(3)  Trees designated for preservation shall be protected by snow fence (see tree protection fence diagram) or other means acceptable to the city. The protective measures must protect at least the entire root zone of the trees. 
(4)  The estimated period of time within which the tree replacement will be conducted. 
(c)  Replacement required. Tree replacement for homeowners shall be in accordance with the provisions established within section 52-142.5 unless subject to one of the following: 
(1)  Trees to be removed are diseased or dying. 
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 52-145. - Tree inventory. 
    A tree inventory shall be required to be submitted as a part of a preliminary plat submittal or as a part of the site plan review submittal to the city. The developer shall have a tree inventory prepared by a certified registered land surveyor, landscape architect or forester depicting: 
(a)  The size, species, condition and location on the land of all significant trees. On large wooded sites, forest mensuration methods may be used to determine the total diameter inches of trees on the property. 
(b)  Significant trees which will be lost due to the proposed activities. Significant trees shall be considered lost as a result of: 
(1)  Grade change, including grading or filling, whether temporary or permanent, affecting 55 percent or more of the tree's critical root zone. 
(2)  Utility construction (i.e., sewer, water, storm sewer, gas, electric, telephone, cable TV, fiber optics or similar facilities) resulting in the cutting of 45 percent or more of the tree's roots within the critical root zone. 
(3)  Mechanical injury to the trunk of a significant tree causing loss of more than 40 percent of the circumference of any portion of the trunk bark. 
(4)  Compaction to a depth of six inches or more of 45 percent or more of the surface of the soil within a significant tree's critical root zone. 
(c)  The location, number, type and size of replacement trees required to be replaced pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 52-146. - Tree preservation, protection and replacement. 
(a)  Tree preservation. Trees designated for preservation shall be protected by snow fence or other means acceptable to the city. The protective measures must protect the entire critical root zone of the trees, unless less protection is necessary due to the proximity of a structure, road or similar obstruction to be a part of the development, in which case at least 55 percent of the critical root zone of the tree must be protected. 
(b)  Developer required to replace lost trees. A developer shall replace live significant trees lost or reasonably anticipated to be lost as a result of grading, building upon or any other alteration of the land immediately or in the future, by the developer, developer's agent or subcontractor by planting that number of trees ("replacement trees") determined in accordance with the tree replacement table in addition to boulevard trees or others as required by chapter 28 of the city Code. 
(c)  Tree replacement table. The following table identifies the required amount of tree replacement. 
Percent of Significant Tree 
Caliper Inches Removed Total Required Replacement Tree Caliper Inches (for each one tree removed) 0-32.9 0.33 33-65.9 0.66 66-100 1  
Notes: 
(1) The amount to be replaced is to be measured in "replacement tree" caliper inches, measured 12 inches from the ground, and the amount removed is measured in caliper inches, (DBH). 
(2) The trees required to be replaced pursuant to this division shall be in addition to any other trees required to be planted pursuant to any other provision of the Code. 
(d)  Location of replacement trees. Replacement trees shall be planted: 
(1)  On the site based on the proposed use with special consideration to restoration areas including steep slopes, common areas, buffer zones between different land uses and/or activities and project entrance areas. 
(e)  Sizes and types of replacement trees. Replacement trees must be no less than the following sizes: 
(1)  Deciduous trees: no less than three caliper inches, except on steep slopes (i.e., greater than 3:1) deciduous trees may be two and one-half caliper inches, except bur oak, swamp white oak, pagoda dogwood, ironwood and similar trees acceptable to the city, which may be two caliper inches. 
(2)  Coniferous trees: no less than seven feet high, except on steep slopes coniferous trees may be six feet in height. 
Replacement trees shall be of a species similar to the trees which are lost or removed and shall include those species shown on the following tables. In most situations it is not recommended that more than 40 percent of the replacement trees be from the same species, when planting more than 20 trees. 
COMMON NAME 
DECIDUOUS TREES BOTANICAL NAME Red Maple or cultivar Acer rubrum, Northwood, Firedance Autumn Blaze Maple Acer x freemanil, 'Armstrong, Jeffersred' Sugar Maple or cultivar Acer saccharum, Green Mountain River Birch Betula nigra Hackberry Celtis occidentalis Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba (male only) Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Kentucky Coffeetree Gymnocladus dioica Ironwood Ostrya virginiana White Oak Quercus alba Swamp White Oak Quercus blcolor Pin Oak Quercus palustris Northern Red Oak Quercus rubra American Linden Tilia americana Littleleaf Linden or cultivar Tilia cordata, Glenleven, Greenspire Redmond Linden Tilia americana, 'Redmond' Elm (Dutch Elm Resistant Varieties) Ulmus sp. (Accolade, Discovery, Homestead) CONIFEROUS TREES COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME Balsam Fir Abies balsamea White Fir Abies concolor European Larch Larix decidua Black Hills Spruce Picea glauca 'Densata' Austrian pine Pinus nigra Ponderosa Pine Pinus ponderosa Norway Pine Pinus resinosa Scotch Pine Pinus sylvestris White Pine Pinus strobus Colorado Spruce Picea pungens  
(f)  Time to perform. Replacement trees shall be planted not less than 18 months from the date of issuance of the permit or by such other time allowed in the permit or developer's agreement with the city. 
(g)  Missing, dead or unhealthy trees. Any replacement tree which is not alive or healthy one year after the date that the last replacement tree has been planted shall be removed and a new, healthy tree of the same size and species shall be planted in place of the removed tree. A new, healthy tree of the same size and species shall be planted in place of any replacement tree missing one year after such date. Planting shall occur not later than the first fall or spring following such year. 
(h)  Sources of trees. Replacement trees shall consist of "certified nursery stock" as defined by M.S.A. § 18.46 and conform to the current standard for nursery stock ANSI-Z60.1, or other healthy trees obtained in a lawful manner which comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The lowest branch shall not be at a height above the surface of the ground more than one-half of the total height of the tree. (Example: A 16-foot tree must have a branch within eight feet of the surface of the surrounding ground.) 
(2)  The tree measured in caliper inches shall not exceed the maximum height as shown in the following table. 
Caliper Inches Maximum Height (feet) 2 16 2 1/2 16 3 18 3 1/2 18 4 22 5 26  
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 52-147. - Site plan approval required. 
    Site Plan approval shall be required in accordance with section 62-611 through 62-622 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 52-148. - Tree protection. 
(a)  Tree protection. Tree protection fencing shall be noted on engineering and site plans. Fencing shall be located at the limits of construction area. (NOTE: It may not always be outside of the critical root zone). 
(1)  The installation of fencing shall be in accordance with city requirements. The fence shall consist of and be installed in accordance with the tree protection fence diagram. All tree protection fencing shall be in addition to erosion control fence where the two overlap. The tree protection fence shall be installed on the tree side of the erosion control fence. Erosion control fence, in conjunction with tree protection fencing, must not be trenched into the ground. An alternative city approved method may be utilized. At a minimum, signs which are legible at ten feet shall be posted and maintained at intervals no less than 30 feet which clearly state "Tree Save Area. Do not enter. Do not move or alter fence. Violation subject to fine and work stoppage". The city may, at its option, install the fencing utilizing funds deposited with the city by the developer for that purpose. All tree protection fencing must be installed and maintained prior to any construction as approved by the city as part of the approval process. In no case shall tree protection fencing be removed, breached, temporarily removed, altered, or relocated without written authorization from the city. 
(2)  The removal, temporary removal, alteration, or relocation of an installed tree protection fence without written authorization from the city shall incur a penalty of $100.00 per occurrence. The developer and/or builder shall be responsible for paying this penalty. 
(3)  Entering a tree protection area that was required to be fenced shall result in an additional penalty of $50.00 per diameter inch for any tree that is damaged in the opinion of the city, including, but not limited to, grading, trenching, limb or bark removal, storage of materials or parking of vehicles. The cost of any necessary remedial tree care action, in the opinion of the city, shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or builder. 

Tree Protection Fence Diagram 
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 52-149. - Landscaping. 
    Landscaping shall be as provided in the landscaping chapter of the Watertown Municipal Code. 
All required trees shall be installed prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy. If it is determined that permitting occupancy prior to completion and acceptance of required improvements is in the best interest of the city, financial guarantees acceptable to the city shall be provided to ensure timely installation. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Cross reference- Landscaping, ch. 28. 
Note- See editor's note for Art III, Div. 2. 
Sec. 52-150. - Wetland protection. 
    It is the purpose of this section to preserve and protect the natural amenities, including vistas, timber areas, flood ways and wetlands in and adjacent to watertown. it is important to the community's character that these areas be retained as public amenities in perpetuity. 
(1)  No subdivision of land shall occur which creates a lot extending into a delineated wetland. 
(2)  A buffer of no less than that currently required by watershed district shall completely surround a wetland. Such buffer shall remain free from development, including grading, filling, excavation, and accessory structure construction. The buffer shall protect the wetland from inadvertent encroachments due to soil, water erosion, public and private development. 
(3)  For all buildings and structures, accessory and otherwise, a minimum setback of 50 feet shall be maintained from the delineated edge of the wetland. 
(4)  No subdivision of land shall occur which creates a lot extending into a delineated floodway. 
(Ord. No. 249, 11, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 305, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Note- See editor's note for Art III, Div. 2. 
Secs. 52-151-52-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DONATIONS 

Sec. 52-166. - Parks. 
(a)  Parkland dedication requirements. 
(1)  As a prerequisite to subdivision approval, the developer shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces and trails. The city may accept a cash equivalent in lieu of land dedication. The city will determine whether land or cash will be accepted. 
(2)  Land to be dedicated shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access, and location. The city shall determine location of parkland. 
(3)  When a proposed park or other public ground is to be dedicated to the city, such land shall be designated on the plat as an outlot. 
(4)  When a proposed park, or other public ground has been indicated in the city's official map or comprehensive plan and is located in whole or in part within a proposed plat, or will otherwise be dedicated to the city, it shall be designated and dedicated as an outlot on such plat. If the developer elects not to dedicate an area in excess of the land required hereunder for such proposed public site, the city may consider acquiring the site through purchase or condemnation. 
(5)  Land area conveyed or dedicated to the city shall not be used in calculating density requirements of the city zoning ordinance and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements as applicable. 
(6)  Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision, such areas may be used for credit, at the discretion of the city council, against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, provided the city council finds it in the public interest to do so. 
(7)  The city, upon consideration of the particular type of development, may require larger or lesser parcels of land to be dedicated if the city determines that present or future residents would require greater or lesser land for park and playground purposes. 
(b)  Park dedication. 
(1)  Residential. 
a.  Neighborhood parks. In residential plats, one acre of usable land area shall be provided for every 25 residential units, or 1,750 square feet per dwelling unit shall be conveyed to the city by warranty deed for a neighborhood park. Such park shall be sited to provide active and passive recreational facilities for the immediate neighborhood. 
b.  Community parks. In residential areas, land area equal to five percent of the gross land area shall be conveyed to the city for use as a community park. Such park shall be sited to reflect the access, active and passive recreational needs of the community as a whole. 
(2)  Commercial/industrial. In plats other than residential plats ten percent of the gross area of land being platted shall be conveyed to the city. 
(3)  Cash in lieu of land. In lieu of a parkland donation, at its discretion, the city may require an equivalent cash donation based upon the fair market value of the undeveloped property. 
(4)  Determination of fair market value. "Fair market value" shall be determined as of the date of the final plat in accordance with the following: 
a.  The city and the developer may agree as to the fair market value, or 
b.  The fair market value may be based upon a current appraisal submitted to the city by the developer at the developer's expense. 
c.  If the city disputes such appraisal the city may, at the developer's expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by the qualified real estate appraiser, which appraisal shall be conclusive evidence of the fair market value of the land. 
(5)  Mixed use developments. Developments with mixed land uses shall make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this section based upon the percentage of land and dwelling units devoted to the various uses. 
(6)  Payment. The park and trail cash contribution, as required herein, shall be paid contemporaneously with the city's approval of the final plat. The cash contributions for parks and trails shall be used only for park acquisition or development and trail acquisition or development. 
(7)  Areas not considered as parkland dedication. Wetlands, floodplain, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the city shall not be considered in the parkland contribution to the city. 
(c)  Recreation facilities and equipment. For each new residential lot included within a final plat for which a preliminary plat did not receive approval prior to June 1, 2002, a fee shall be paid in accordance with the following: 
The developer shall pay a minimum of one-third of the total facility fee prior to recording of the final plat and may elect to defer the remainder of the total facility fee to be divided among the building sites to be paid by the builder of the individual lots upon receipt of the building permit for the principal structure. If the remainder is not deferred to the building permit, the total fee shall be collected at the time of final platting. In the event where a development is proposed in phases, the payment shall be collected in the same manner as the first phase for that particular development for all subsequent phases. Such payment shall be for the improvement of the city's recreational facilities and recreational property only. 
Such payment shall be as defined below: 
Density Payment Amount 0-1 units per acre $1,500.00 per acre 1.1-2.9 units per acre $3,500.00 per acre 3-4.9 units per acre $4,200.00 per acre More than 5 units per acre $6,000.00 per acre  
All land, including streets, parks, and private parcels will be used in calculating density. 
All land, including streets and private parcels, will be used in calculating per acre payment amount. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 249, § 12, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 52-167. - Trails. 
    The use and availability of trails and pathways throughout the community has been identified as an asset and is harmonious with the goals and ideals of the City of Watertown. Therefore, new developments within the city shall provide trails and pathways as directed by the City of Watertown Trail Map, or as otherwise directed by the planning commission and city council. Trails shall be sited to provide connections from new and established residential neighborhoods to new and existing commercial, cultural, recreational, and employment centers throughout the city. 
    Developers of land abutting property that has been designated in the city's comprehensive trail plan for the installation of a trail shall be required to dedicate the land for the trail to the city and construct the trail. 
    In lieu of a trail donation, trail construction, or trail easement dedication, the city may require a cash donation for the trail system. The cash dedication requirement shall be established annually by the city council. Trail or sidewalk construction shall not be used for the calculation of park dedication or cash in lieu of park dedication. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-168. - Dedication of land or contribution in cash for public purposes. 
    In every plat or subdivision the developer may be required to dedicate to the public streets, easements for sewers, electric, gas, water facilities, stormwater drainage, holding ponds and similar utilities and improvements. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-169. - Easements. 
(a)  All easements shall be dedicated by appropriate language on the final plat in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Easements at least ten feet wide along all street right-of-way lines, five feet along both sides of rear and side lot lines, shall be provided for utilities where necessary. If appropriate, easements of lesser or greater width may be required by the city. All utility easements shall have continuity of alignment from block to block. 
(c)  Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any watercourse or drainage channel, to a width sufficient to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for stormwater run-off from a 100-year storm of 24-hour duration. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding to lot lines shall be provided. Such easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than twenty feet in width. 
(d)  The construction of principal or accessory structures, including; but not limited to decks, fences, sheds, signs, shall not be permitted to encroach into a duly recorded easement. Therefore, the locations of easements shall be the minimum required to provide necessary services and access to the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 52-170-52-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 52-191. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Plans and specifications. The developer shall submit engineering plans and specifications satisfactory to the city for all required improvements, as listed or as specified in this chapter and as may be required in the development agreement. These improvements must be initiated within one year of final plat approval and completed within two years or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, which ever comes first. 
(b)  Required public improvements. The following public improvements are required in every subdivision: 
(1)  All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, road intersection corners and points of tangency and curvature shall be marked with durable iron or steel monuments meeting the minimum requirements of state law. The city may, when a subdivision is essentially complete, require a development to have the plat restaked to replace the original monuments destroyed or removed during the construction process. 
(2)  Surface discharge shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Sub-base shall conform to the requirements outlined within the City of Watertown Standards Manual. 
(4)  Concrete curb and gutter. 
(5)  Sidewalks and or a trail may be required. 
(6)  Water supply shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(7)  Street lighting of a type approved by the city shall be required at intersections and other locations. 
(8)  Public sanitary sewer main and service connections shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(9)  Street signs shall conform to the requirements outlined within the City of Watertown Standards Manual. 
(10)  All utility lines for cable, electric, telephone and electrical service shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(11)  Utility services shall be provided in the rear yard. Where existing vegetation, topography renders this requirement unreasonable, utility services shall be installed in the side yard no closer to the street the appropriate front yard building setback line. 
(12)  All buffer requirements as required by the landscaping code. 
(c)  Guarantee. Prior to the city signing the final plat and prior to the construction of any improvements, the developer shall provide the city with a letter of credit or cash escrow to insure that all improvements required by this chapter will be installed and paid for at no city expense. For improvements to be installed by the developer, the developer is obligated to install and complete all such improvements at his own expense and under the supervision and inspection of the city. For improvements that the city agrees to install, the developer shall pay the cost of such improvements through payment of special assessments. As security to the city for installation of the improvements of the payment of special assessments, the developer shall be required to file a cash escrow or letter of credit in an amount and form acceptable to the city to cover the cost of all public improvements and special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 52-192-52-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES 

Sec. 52-211. - Intent and scope. 
    The intent of this article is to establish minimum standards for the design and construction of buildings and related structures in all zoning districts. The quality of architecture and building construction shall be considered important to the preservation and enhancement of building and property values, prevention of the physical deterioration of buildings and the promotion of the image of the community and the general welfare of the city. 
    It is not the intent of the city to restrict design, however, it is in the best interest of the city to promote standards for architectural design and compatibility with other development. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-212. - General regulations. 
(a)  As part of the submittal for development plan approval within any zoning district, architectural plans shall be submitted for review by the planning commission and approved by the city council. 
(b)  Architectural elevations showing the building's design and a description of structural and exterior material proposed shall be provided in accordance with this chapter and consistent with the requirements as outlined herein. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-213. - Design standards. 
(a)  Building orientation. The orientation of any proposed building shall be carefully considered so as to mitigate the visual and audible impact of service areas, loading areas, or similar operations on the adjoining properties and general public. 
(1)  Buildings shall not be designed or oriented to expose loading docks, service areas, or nonresidential overhead doors to the public right-of-ways. 
(2)  Buildings proposed in commercial districts that are adjacent to residential developments shall not be designed or oriented to expose loading docks, service areas, or similar operations towards the adjacent residential developments. 
(3)  If it is not feasible to design or orient the loading docks, service areas, or similar operations away from the residential developments, additional landscape buffering, screening walls, fences, and setbacks in addition to those required may be approved by the city council provided a favorable recommendation from the planning commission is provided. 
(b)  Exterior material selection. The building's exterior material shall be compatible with other buildings and structures in adjoining developments. The use of metal for all or a majority of the exposed building surface area shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section, calculation of the building surface area shall not include glazed surfaces or roof. The use of metal may only be used as trim or an accent to other materials. Other minimum requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Metal roofs shall be permitted in R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts, provided: 
a.  The metal roof shall not have exposed fasteners, semi-concealed fasteners, or any fastener system that does not adhere directly to the support system. 
b.  Any metal roof that is not a high-quality commercial thickness/weight is prohibited. 
c.  Any metal roof that has not been treated with a factory applied color-coating system against any applicable degradation is prohibited. 
(2)  Residential districts. In R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts, primarily residential construction materials such as brick, stone, wood, lap siding, and architectural shingles, shall be utilized in the design. 
a.  All attached dwelling structures (townhomes, twin homes) shall incorporate, at a minimum, 20 percent brick, stone, or similar substantial material in the overall building design. The percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces. 
b.  Multiple family structures shall incorporate at a minimum, 30 percent brick, stone, or similar substantial material into the overall building design. The percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces. 
(3)  Central business and industrial districts. In the "CBD" and "I" districts, the architectural material selection shall be dominated with permanency and strength of materials in proportion to the aesthetic characteristics of the building's bulk and shape. Structures in these districts shall incorporate at a minimum, 30 percent brick, stone, or other similar substantial material into the overall building design. The percentage requirement shall be calculated on the total exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces. 
(c)  Architectural elements. In order to reduce the negative aesthetic impacts of large buildings, additional architectural elements shall be incorporated into the overall building design. Physical offsets when used in columns shall be 12 inches minimum, in all other cases, shall be three feet minimum. 
(1)  Commercial. 
a.  Commercial buildings shall incorporate architectural design elements, materials, and colors into the side and rear building elevations, similar to those used in the front building elevation. 
b.  Commercial buildings shall incorporate facade modulation in all building elevations in order to preserve building scale and reduce the aesthetic impact of long, large expansive wall surfaces. The variation in wall surfaces can be accomplished either by physical offsets or by the use of color, pattern, or texture. 
(2)  Central business district. 
Reserved. 
(3)  Industrial. 
a.  Industrial buildings shall incorporate architectural design elements, materials, and colors into the side and rear building elevations, similar to those used in the front building elevation. 
b.  Industrial buildings shall incorporate facade modulation in all building elevations in order to preserve building scale and reduce the aesthetic impact of long, large expansive wall surfaces. The variation in wall surfaces can be accomplished either by physical offsets or by the use of color, pattern, or texture. 
(4)  Residential. The use of building designs that minimize the visual impact of garage doors on the streetscape is encouraged. 
a.  Attached single-family. 
Townhome [row house] development guidelines: 
No more than two adjacent dwelling units in a single family attached structure shall have the same front or rear building lines. The minimum variation in building line shall not be less than four feet. Each structure shall encompass at least three dwelling units but not more than eight dwelling units. 

Townhome 
b.  Other attached single-family residential. 
A distance not less than 25 feet shall separate attached single-family buildings within a complex. 
(5)  Commercial adjacent to residential. Buildings proposed in commercial districts that are adjacent to residential developments are recommended to include an articulated roofline, giving emphasis to architectural elements that will help divide the mass of a large building into smaller, identifiable pieces. Flat roof buildings shall not be encouraged, and only be approved by the city council following a favorable recommendation from the planning commission. 
(6)  All districts. 
a.  Roof-mounted mechanical units, satellite dishes, or other similar equipment shall be screened from the public view by the extension of a parapet wall or other roof structure. 
b.  In the case where the parapet wall cannot feasibly screen the roof-mounted equipment, point-in-place or other appropriate screening shall be required. Such screening shall have similar design features as the building including material, shape, and color considerations. Wooden fences or similar screen shall not be considered appropriate. 
Understanding the operational requirements of satellite dishes and antennas, such units shall be screened to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties. 
(d)  Exterior color selection. The building's exterior color scheme shall utilize primarily muted, neutral, or earth tone type colors. The primary use of bright, intense, or extreme colors not consistent with the adjoining developments shall not be permitted in any zoning district. This regulation is not intended to restrict the use of contrasting color in architectural detailing. 
    The city council reserves the right to waive or modify to a lesser restriction any provision or requirement of architectural design elements contained in this chapter in any redevelopment of property within the city, provided a favorable report on such change is approved by the planning commission, and further provided said waiver or modification does not adversely affect the intent of these regulations to adequately safeguard the general public and surrounding property. Exceptions will only be considered for those areas where special circumstances warrant a change and where the modification or waiver is determined to be in the best interest of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 344, § 1, 9-22-09) 
Secs. 52-214-52-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SITE DESIGN AND OPERATION 

Sec. 52-236. - General regulations. 
(a)  Key boxes. Structures in all districts, except one and two family dwellings shall provide a key box in a location specified by the fire chief. Such box shall provide emergency personnel access to the building at all times. 
(b)  Fire lanes. Structures in all districts, except one- and two-family residential dwelling units shall provide a fire lane as required by the fire chief, promoting safe and efficient access to the site while preserving the health and safety of the inhabitants and surrounding properties. 
(c)  Address identification. Address identification shall be maintained so as to be legible from the street at all times. 
(d)  Corner and double frontage lot enlargement. Due to additional setback constraints on double frontage and corner lots, the following must be maintained. 
(1)  Corner lots shall be platted with 20 additional feet of front yard width. 
(2)  Double frontage lots shall be platted with a minimum of 30 feet between a buffer and the rear of the house to permit usable yard area with screening and buffering. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 249, § 13, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 52-237. - Occupancy. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy will be granted upon completion of new construction or completion of alterations or additions to existing structures. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such time as all site improvements and building construction is completed in compliance with all provisions identified on the approved development plan and within all applicable building codes. 
(b)  Temporary certificates of occupancy. 
(1)  Temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to completion of the project if, in the opinion of the city planner or city administrator, the remaining items could not be completed due to circumstances beyond the applicants control and the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy will not inhibit the completion of the total project, nor have an adverse effect on persons in the immediate area or nearby properties, or affect the safety of the occupants. 
(2)  The applicant will be required to sign an agreement to complete and post sufficient security to complete the remaining items. The security will be returned to the applicant with the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. The agreement to complete shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-238. - Fees. 
    Each development application shall include the appropriate fees. Fees shall be in an amount determined by the city council from time to time. 
    In addition to the application fee, the applicant for development plan review must also pay all costs incurred by the city including city staff time, legal, engineering, administrative, building inspection services, and services of other persons or entities employed or contracted by the city for, or in any way involved in, the review and inspection of the development plan and public utility extensions contemplated thereby, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, trails, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, street lights, electric and gas lines, water retention areas and all other improvements intended for public use or benefit constructed or caused to be constructed by the owner and under no condition shall the fee be refunded for the failure of the city to approve the development plan. All charges incurred for this review shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 332, § 1, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 52-239. - Waivers. 
    The planning commission may recommend and the city council may grant a waiver from the regulations contained in this chapter, provided such waiver shall not violate the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 52-240. - Violations and penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The city may withhold, revoke or deny any permits, approvals or any action may be stopped if there is a violation of this chapter. Each day during which the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. The city may apply to the district court for injunctive relief for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 230, 6-11-02) 
Chapter 54 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Possession of open containers in vehicles prohibited, § 6-3; vegetation which prevents an unobstructed clear view of all traffic declared public nuisance, § 26-30; junked, wrecked, abandoned vehicles, § 26-66 et seq.; planning, ch. 46.5. 
State Law reference- Traffic regulations, M.S.A. ch. 169; local authority, M.S.A. § 169.04. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - State highway regulations adopted. 
    The Minnesota Highway Traffic Regulation Act (M.S.A. ch. 169) is hereby adopted in its entirety as the law governing the driving, operation and control of motor vehicles within the city, and such act is hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter by reference, except that M.S.A. §§ 169.23 and 169.24 are hereby specifically excepted. There shall be kept in the office of the clerk-treasurer a copy thereof, marked "City of Watertown." 
(Ord. No. 49, § 6, 2-7-67) 
State Law reference- State highway traffic regulation act, M.S.A. ch. 169; uniform traffic ticket, M.S.A. § 169.99. 
Sec. 54-2. - Bus stops and taxi stands. 
(a)  The city council may from time to time, by motion adopted by a majority vote, designate bus stops and/or taxicab stands in the city. 
(b)  The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle operated by him or under his control upon any street or public thoroughfare in the business area of this city at any place other than a bus or taxicab stand, respectively, if such stand has been designated by the council under subsection (a) of this section, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated by appropriate signs posted on each end thereof, except that no person is hereby prohibited from temporarily stopping the vehicle operated by him in such stop or stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 10, 2-7-67) 
Sec. 54-3. - Vehicles with lugs or sharp-shod horses prohibited on improved streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any tractor, engine or other machine having metal lugs upon the outside surface of its wheels upon any street, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk which has been improved by having a surface covering placed thereon of concrete, asphalt, or any other such surfaces or to drive or permit to be driven any horse or other draft animal shod with sharp spikes, cleats or other sharp attachments along any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks in this city which have been so improved. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 16, 2-7-67) 
Sec. 54-4. - Skateboards, rollerskates and similar devices. 
(a)  The operation of skateboards, rollerskates, rollerblades, skate-type shoes, skis running on wheels, and similar devices within the corporate limits of the city shall be regulated pursuant to M.S.A. § 169.222. 
(b)  In addition, it shall be unlawful to operate skateboards, rollerblades, rollerskates, skate-type shoes, skis running on wheels and similar devices under the following circumstances: 
(1)  On private property without the express permission to do so by the owner or occupant of such property. 
(2)  In any careless, reckless or negligent manner, so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property. 
(3)  Upon any public sidewalk, street and parking lot in the downtown area without permission of the city council. The downtown area is defined as an area bounded on the west by Angel Street, to the north by State Street, to the east by the Crow River, and to the south by Kieffer Street. 
(4)  On a public street, sidewalk or alley after sunset and before sunrise. 
(c)  Impoundment. Violation of this section shall be punishable by impoundment of such device by a law enforcement officer for storage and safekeeping for a period of three days for the first offense, seven days upon the second offense, and 30 days for the third offense. Subsequent offenses are punishable as a petty misdemeanor. Such device may be recovered upon an impound fee payment of $25.00 to the city; and if the owner thereof is under age 18, the accompaniment of a legal guardian is also required. 
(Ord. No. 171, §§ 1-3, 4-11-89) 
State Law reference- State highway traffic regulation act, rollerskates, etc., M.S.A. § 169.222. 
Sec. 54-5. - Posting of traffic control signs restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of the state highway department, county highway department, or city engineer or county sheriff's department to erect, post, maintain or display any traffic control sign or signal, or parking restriction or limitation sign, on any of the streets, highways, public alleys, public parking lots or public thoroughfares in the city. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 17, 2-7-67) 
Sec. 54-6. - Posting of signs resembling traffic control devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than a state highway department employee, county employee, or city employee to erect, post, maintain or display any signs resembling any state highway department, county highway department or city traffic control sign or signal or parking limitation sign upon any of the streets, highways, public parking lots, public alleys or public thoroughfares in the city. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 18, 2-7-67) 
Secs. 54-7-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic-control devices, M.S.A. § 169.06; right-of-way, M.S.A. § 169.20. 

Sec. 54-31. - Careless driving off highways. 
    Any person who drives any vehicle in such a manner on any public or private grounds or parking lot or on the frozen surface of any body of water within the corporate limits of the city or adjacent to the corporate limits of the city so as to indicate a disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be guilty of careless driving. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 7, 2-7-67) 
Sec. 54-32. - Unnecessary speed; exhibition driving. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle with unnecessary exhibition of speed on any public or private way within the city limits. Prima facie evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be any or all of the following: 
(1)  Unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires; 
(2)  The throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the vehicle; 
(3)  Unreasonable skid, sway or slide upon acceleration or stopping. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2, 4-20-76; Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-14-06) 
Secs. 54-33-54-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing, parking, M.S.A. § 169.32 et seq. 

Sec. 54-56. - Designation of no parking zones and limited parking zones. 
    The city council may, from time to time, by resolution adopted by a majority vote, designate certain streets or portions thereof as no parking zones or as limited parking zones as to period of time and purpose (such as snow removal and otherwise) and direct the public works superintendent or the county sheriff's department to accordingly place proper signs thereon and/or appropriately paint the curbs thereby to indicate their character. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 13, 2-7-67) 
Sec. 54-57. - Special parking provisions. 
(a)  Overnight parking generally. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any public street, avenue, alley or municipal parking lot within the city for a period of time longer than 24 consecutive hours. 
(b)  Winter parking. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any public street, avenue, alley or municipal parking lot within the city between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 1 to April 1. 
(c)  Downtown business district. The following restrictions apply in the areas as noted in the downtown business district: 
(1)  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any part of Lewis Avenue between the intersection of Fremont Street SW and Angel Avenue SW and Territorial Street or upon the south side of Territorial Street between Angel Avenue and the Crow River Bridge, as marked, for a period of more than two hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and holidays. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be parked or left standing at any time on the north side of Territorial Street between Angel Avenue and the Crow River Bridge. 
(d)  Trucks, trailers, buses, recreational vehicles and commercial vehicles. No person shall park or leave standing any truck of one ton or larger, trailer, bus, recreational or commercial vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any public street, avenue, alley, or municipal parking lot within the city unless it is in the actual process of being loaded or unloaded and only for the reasonable time of such loading or unloading. 
(e)  Loitering in municipal parking lots. No person shall loiter or congregate in any municipal parking lot within the city. 
(Ord. No. 147, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-84; Ord. No. 386, § 1, 5-26-15) 
State Law reference- Manner of parking, M.S.A. § 169.35. 
Sec. 54-58. - Disposing of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Notice of impoundment. Any person who owns or is in control of any vehicle which is in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be subject to having the vehicle ticketed and towed by the county sheriff's department and removed. All costs incurred in the removal and the storage of any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter and the fine for the parking violation shall be paid prior to the release of the vehicle. When a vehicle is removed and stored pursuant to provisions of this section, the clerk-treasurer or county sheriff's department shall give or cause to be given, within ten days of the taking, written notice setting forth the date and place of taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the vehicle, if such information can be reasonably obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held; shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under subsection (b) of this section and shall state that failure to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle at public auction in accordance with the provisions of section 26-77, relating to abandoned and inoperative vehicles. Any notice required in this section may be made in person or by mail addressed to the last known home address that can be reasonably obtained. 
(b)  Right to reclaim. The owner or any lienholder of a vehicle removed pursuant to provisions of this section shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges and an administrative fee of $10.00 and payment of all fines for the parking violation within 15 days after the date of the notice required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 3, 12-18-84) 
Sec. 54-59. - Parking tickets and fines, county's responsibility. 
    All parking tickets, fines, and the collection thereof shall be issued, processed and collected by the county and the county sheriff's department according to methods for issuance, amount of fines, and the processing and collection policies which have been established by the county pursuant to an agreement between the city and county. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 4, 12-18-84) 
State Law reference- Uniform traffic ticket, M.S.A. § 169.99. 
Secs. 54-60-54-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 54-91. - Authority to designate; posting of signs. 
(a)  The city council may from time to time, by resolution adopted by a majority vote, designate certain streets as through highways and/or truck routes and indicate school stops at street intersections or indicated school crossings, or vacate prior through highways and/or truck routes and school stop designations, and direct the public works superintendent or the sheriff's department to accordingly place or remove proper signs upon such streets and their intersections to indicate their character and notify the drivers of vehicles of the requirement to stop. 
(b)  Except for any necessary utility, gas, fuel, refuse, building construction, bus, automobile service, fire and emergency vehicles in the act of providing services, no person shall operate any farm vehicle, commercial vehicle or truck greater than one ton upon any public street other than those streets designated and posted as truck routes within the city without written permission from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 112, § 1, 6-28-79; Ord. No. 120, § 1, 6-17-80) 
Sec. 54-92. - Enumerated. 
(a)  The following streets or portions of streets in the city are hereby designated as truck routes: 
(1)  All of State Highway No. 25 within the city limits. 
(2)  All of C.S.A.H. No. 10 within the city limits. 
(3)  That part of Lewis Avenue from Kieffer Street to the northerly city limit. 
(4)  That part of Mill Avenue from Territorial Street (C.S.A.H. No. 10) to the northerly city limit. 
(5)  That part of Newton Avenue N.E. from Carter Street to C.S.A.H. No. 20. 
(6)  That part of Madison Street from Jefferson Avenue (State Highway No. 25) to Lewis Avenue. 
(7)  That part of C.S.A.H. No. 20 from the easterly city limit to Territorial Street (C.S.A.H. No. 10). 
(b)  The city shall forthwith place and install proper signs upon the streets designated as truck routes under this section to identify the portions of such streets as are so designated as truck routes. 
(Res. of 6-19-79; Ord. No. 203, § 1, 8-8-95) 
Secs. 54-93-54-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SNOWMOBILES, ATVs, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 380, § 1, adopted Oct. 28, 2014, changed the title of Art. II from "Snowmobiles and ATVs" to read as set out herein. 
State Law reference- Recreational vehicles, M.S.A. § 84.81 et seq.; authority to regulate, M.S.A. § 84.87. 

Sec. 54-116. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to supplement M.S.A. §§ 84.81-84.928, and M.S.A. ch. 169, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles, ATVs, and recreational vehicles. Such statutes are incorporated in this article by reference. This article is not intended to allow what the state statutes prohibit. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 54-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All-terrain vehicle (ATV) means a motorized flotation tired vehicle of not less than three low-pressure tires, but not more than six tires, also known and referred to in this article as an ATV. 
    Deadman throttle or safety throttle means a device which, when pressure is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving mechanism. 
    Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or all-terrain vehicle. 
    Operator means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or all-terrain vehicle. 
    Owner means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or all-terrain vehicle, or entitled to the use or possession thereof. 
    Recreational vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes, including but not limited to snowmobiles, trail bikes all-terrain vehicles, mini-bikes, pocket bikes, motorized scooters, hovercrafts, or motor vehicles licensed for highway operation, which is being used for off-road recreational purposes. 
    Right-of-way means the entire strip of land traversed by a street in which the public owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes. 
    Snowmobile means a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice, steered by skis or runners. 
    Street means a public thoroughfare, highway, roadway, alley or trail used for motor vehicle traffic. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 2, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-118. - Owner responsible. 
    It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV to permit the snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV to be operated in any manner contrary to any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 10, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 54-119. - Prohibited operation; exceptions. 
    Except as specifically permitted and authorized in this article, it is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV within the limits of the city: 
(1)  On any public street, except that a snowmobile may operate upon the most right-hand lane of a street and may, in passing or in making a left turn, operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the same direction, for the purpose of going in the most direct, practicable route possible from a point outside the city to a specific destination within the city, or from a point within the city to a specific destination outside the city limits. Operation of a snowmobile without regard to a specific destination and on an aimless, nondirect route constitutes a violation of this article. 
(2)  On a public sidewalk or boulevard within any public right-of-way, provided that a snowmobile operator may cross a public sidewalk, boulevard or other public right-of-way to obtain access to a street if such crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the sidewalk, boulevard or right-of-way and, provided further, that such operator yields the right-of-way to all pedestrians or vehicle traffic. 
(3)  On private property, except that an ATV may be operated for home maintenance such as snow removal, lawn maintenance, and moving of trailers. 
(4)  On private property for recreational purposes for more than 15 minutes per day. 
(5)  On private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in control of such property. 
(6)  Upon any school grounds, except as permission is expressly obtained from responsible school authorities. 
(7)  On public property, playgrounds, parks and recreation areas without the express provision or permission to do so by the proper public authorities. 
(8)  On streets as permitted by this article at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour. However, in no event shall the rate of speed be greater than reasonable or proper under all of the surrounding circumstances. 
(9)  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the personal property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto. 
(10)  While under the influence of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or drugs, as prohibited in state law. 
(11)  In such a manner so as to create loud, excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise or in any way which shall unduly disturb the peace and privacy of the residents of the city or in any manner create a public nuisance. 
(12)  Without a lighted headlight and taillight when required for safety. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 3, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 54-120. - Traffic ordinances and laws to be observed. 
    City traffic ordinances and state laws shall apply to the operation of snowmobile, recreational vehicles, and ATVs upon all streets, if permitted by this ordinance to operate on public streets within the city limits. In addition thereto, no snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making a complete stop. The operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so close as to constitute a hazard. All streets shall be crossed at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street. If more than one snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV is traveling in the same direction, they shall travel in a single file. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 4, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 54-121. - Operation by minors. 
    No person under 14 years of age shall operate on the streets or make a direct crossing of a city street as the operator of a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV on streets as permitted under this article and state law, and make a direct crossing of such streets, only if he complies with the licensing provisions as may be required in state law. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 5, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S.A. § 84.872. 
Sec. 54-122. - Towing. 
(a)  No sleds, toboggans and sleighs or similar items, shall be towed behind a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV permitted to be upon any public street within the city limits between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise unless it is equipped with at least one taillamp meeting the requirements of the equipment for a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV as provided in the regulations in state law. 
(b)  No snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV should be used for towing unless it shall have attached to the rear of the snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV a rigid tow bar. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 6, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 54-123. - Equipment. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV any place within the limits of the city unless it is equipped with the following: 
(1)  Brakes adequate to control the movement of, and to stop and hold, the snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV under any condition of operation. 
(2)  A safety or so-called deadman throttle in operating condition. 
(3)  When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility, lights shall be used as provided in state law. Such lights shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped with a red taillamp as required in state law. 
(4)  Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side, forward of the handlebars, so as to reflect lights at a 90-degree angle. 
(5)  All other equipment and safety requirements as prescribed by M.S.A. § 84.81 et seq. and the rules and regulations of the state. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 7, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 54-124. - Emergency use of streets permitted. 
    Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this article, a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV may be operated on a public street in an emergency situation during the period of time when, and at locations where, snow upon the street renders travel by automobile impractical. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 8, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 54-125. - Securing. 
    Every person leaving a snowmobile, recreational vehicle, or ATV on a public place shall lock the ignition, remove the key and take the key with him. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 9, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Secs. 54-126-54-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 54-146. - Traffic rules to be observed. 
    Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or public thoroughfare in the city shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto as the same are set forth in M.S.A. ch. 169, and all laws supplemental thereto or amendatory thereof, as the same are incorporated by reference by section 54-1, including, but not being limited to, the regulations set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 21, 2-7-67) 
Sec. 54-147. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Definition: As used in this section, the "downtown business district" is defined as Lewis Avenue from Kieffer Street to Territorial Street. 
(b)  No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, rollerskates, rollerblades, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon any roadway. 
(c)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk within the downtown business district. 
(d)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk other than in the downtown business district, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. 
(e)  Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public thoroughfare in the city shall also be subject to the following: 
(1)  No bicycle shall carry more than one person, unless it has more than two driving sprockets, in which event as many riders as driving sprockets shall be allowed, or unless there shall be a specially constructed seat mounted on the rear fender of the bicycle, in which event an adult driver of a bicycle may carry one child in such seat. 
(2)  No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the operator and all other persons upon the sidewalks, streets and other public thoroughfares of the city. 
(3)  Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public thoroughfare in the city shall turn only at intersections and shall signal all turns. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 21, 2-7-67) 
Chapter 58 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; planning, ch. 46.5; solid waste, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 52. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Contract with city. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a part of a contract with every person or owner of the property supplied with water or sewer through the water and sewer systems of the city and every such water and/or sewer user shall be considered as having consented to be bound by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 1, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-2. - Permit to connect to system required. 
    No person shall make, construct or install any water or sewer installation or make use of any water or sewer service connected to the city water and sewer system, except those connected on December 16, 1975, to the system by permission of the city, without application and permit as provided by the city. No person shall otherwise make use of any installation connected to the city water and sewer system contrary to the regulations of this chapter. No person except an authorized city employee shall turn on any water supply at any valve or stop box without a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 2, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-3. - Application for service. 
    All applications for service installations and for water and sewer service shall be made to the city on forms prescribed by the city and shall contain the name of the owner; description of the property to be served by lot, block and addition; the name of the street upon which the property fronts; the official street number assigned to the premises as shown by the records of the city, if any; and the signature of the applicant. Every person applying for water and/or sewer service, and every owner of property for which such application is made, shall be deemed by such application to consent to this chapter and all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city relating to the municipal water and sewer systems. All service connections shall be made and installed according to regulations established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 3, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-4. - Accounts in name of owner; lien. 
    All utilities accounts shall be in the name of the owner of the property served by the water or sewer service. The city, at its option, upon request of the owner or applicant, may for the convenience of billing send bills in the name and address of the agent or tenant of the owner. The owner shall at all times be liable for water and sewer service consumed upon the premises whether he is occupying the premises or not and any charges not paid promptly shall be a lien upon the premises and may be certified and collected as taxes as set forth in section 58-187. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 4, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-5. - Connections outside city limits. 
    The city council may make such further rules and regulations pertaining to connections and rates for srvice for water and sewer to premises lying outside the city limits as the council shall deem appropriate. However, it is the general policy of the city to not provide water or sewer service to premises not located within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 19, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-6. - Taking services without authority; violations. 
    It is hereby declared a violation of this chapter for any person to take any service described in this chapter without proper authority therefor or for any violation of this chapter and upon conviction thereof in addition to other penalties provided herein, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 20, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-7. - Additional rules and regulations. 
    The city council shall have authority to make and adopt any other rules and regulations in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter as it deems appropriate not inconsistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 21, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-8. - Establishment of fees, rates and charges. 
    All fees, rates or charges of any kind or however described as set forth, referred to or contemplated by chapter 58 of this Code may be established, modified or changed from time to time by resolution adopted by the city council and shall be effective as of the date set forth in such resolution. 
    The establishment of such fees, rates or charges by resolution of the council shall supersede any such fees, rates or charges that may be set forth in this chapter as of the date of the adoption of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 208, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 208, § 1, 9-23-97) 
Secs. 58-9-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Public nuisances affecting health, § 26-29. 
State Law reference- Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Public Law 92-500 and Public Law 93-243), or as modified by M.S.A. chs. 115 and 116. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
    Building drain means that point of a building which conveys wastewater to the building sewer, beginning immediately outside the building wall. 
    City means the area within the corporate boundaries of the city. When used in this article, the term "city" may also refer to the city council or its authorized representative. 
    Connection charge means a service connection charge assessed against all new sanitary sewer service connections. 
    Debt service charge means a charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment facility for the purpose of repaying system capital costs. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means a debt service billing unit used to equate nonresidential users to residential users for the purpose of assigning a debt service charge. The unit represents a wastewater volume of 100 gallons per day at a strength not greater than NDSW. 
    Industrial user means: 
(1)  Any entity as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (latest edition), as categorized, that discharges wastewater to the public sewer. 
Division A: Agriculture, forestry and fishing. Division B: Mining. Division D: Manufacturing. Division E: Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary sewers. Division I: Services.  
(2)  Any user whose discharges, singly or by interaction with other wastes: 
a.  Contaminate the sludge of the wastewater treatment system; 
b.  Injure or interfere with the treatment process; 
c.  Create a public nuisance or hazard; 
d.  Have an adverse effect on the waters receiving wastewater treatment plant discharges; 
e.  Exceed NDSW limitations; or 
f.  Exceed normal residential unit volumes of wastewater. 
    Infiltration/inflow (I/I) means water other than wastewater that enters the sewer system from the ground or from surface runoff, as defined in Minnesota Rules. 
    Liquid waste hauler means a licensed hauler that transports waste for the purpose of discharge to the wastewater treatment facilities and who has obtained a waste disposal permit from the city. 
    MPCA means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
    National categorical pretreatment standards means federal regulations establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly owned wastewater treatment facilities (section 307(b) of the act). 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit means a permit issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally discharge, pursuant to sections 402 and 405 of the act. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers, which flows into a body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Nonresidential user means a user of the treatment facility whose building is not used as a private residence, and discharges NDSW. 
    Normal domestic strength waste (NDSW) means wastewater that is primarily introduced by residential users with BOD concentrations not greater than 300 mg/l and total suspended solids (TSS) concentrations not greater than 300 mg/l. 
    Operation, maintenance and replacement costs (OM&R) means expenditures necessary to provide for the dependable, economical and efficient functioning of the treatment facility throughout its design life, including operator training and permit fees. "Replacement" refers to equipment replacement costs, not the cost of future replacement of the entire facility. 
    Residential user means a user of the treatment facility whose building is used primarily as a private residence and discharges NDSW. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also referred to as a service connection. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer designed to carry only liquid and water-carried wastes from residential, nonresidential and industrial sources, together with minor quantities of I/I. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer intended to carry unpolluted surface and subsurface water from any source. 
    Sewer service charge means the total of the user charge and debt service charge. 
    Slug means a discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operations. 
    State disposal system (SDS) permit means a permit issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S.A. § 115.07 for a disposal system as defined by M.S.A. § 115.01, Subd. 8. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) means the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association (latest edition). 
    Unpolluted water means water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria then in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards. An example could be noncontact cooling water. 
    User charge means a charge to users of a treatment facility for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement. 
    Wastewater means liquid and water-carried wastes from residential, nonresidential and industrial users, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater treatment facilities or treatment facilities means the land, devices, facilities, structures, equipment and processes owned or used by the city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal wastewater, and the disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. I, §§ 1-26, 2-23-93; Ord. No. 357, § 2, 4-12-11) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-27. - Control by authorized representative. 
    The city council shall appoint the public works superintendent to provide control and general supervision of all public sewers and service connections in the city and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this article to ensure that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained. The authorized representative may delegate responsibilities to designated representatives. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. II, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-28. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  Within 30 days of receiving official notification, the owners of all properties within 500 feet of a sanitary sewer collection system shall install a suitable service connection, at their own expense, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in compliance with a notice given pursuant to this article, the city will have such connection made and shall assess the cost against the benefitted property. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any private facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. III, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-29. - Damaging facilities. 
    No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater treatment facilities. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest and punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VII, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-30. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, repair and maintenance in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Industrial users shall be required to provide information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the collection system. An industry may withhold information considered confidential. However, the industry must establish that the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors and that the industrial process does not have deleterious results on the treatment process. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VIII, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-31. - Notice of violation; penalties. 
(a)  Upon determination that a user has violated or is violating applicable provisions of this article or related permits, the authorized representative may issue a notice of violation. Within 30 days of such notification, the violator shall submit to the authorized representative an adequate explanation for the violation and a plan for the correction and prevention of such occurrences, including specific action required. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after the issuance of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Any violation of this article is subject to a penalty as prescribed in section 1-13. Each day in which any such violation occurs shall be deemed as a separate offense. Such penalty or fines may be added to the user's next sewer service charge, and will hence be subject to the same collection regulations as specified in section 58-125(f) of this article. Users desiring to dispute a fine must file a request for the authorized representative to reconsider within 30 days of the issuance of the fine. If the authorized representative believes that the request has merit, a hearing on the matter shall be convened within 30 days of the receipt of the request. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. XIII, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-32. - Violation; additional penalty. 
    In addition to the penalty provided in section 58-31, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. XIII, § 4, 2-23-93) 
Secs. 58-33-58-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTION CHARGE AND CONNECTION DESIGN 

Sec. 58-41. - Connection permit required. 
    No person shall make any alterations to the public sewer or any appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. In the case of a new building, the sewer connection permit is part of the building permit. No private building drain shall extend beyond the limits of the building or property for which the permit has been given. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. V, § 1, 2-23-93) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured housing, ch. 30. 
Sec. 58-42. - Service connection charge; requirement for new connections. 
(a)  A service connection charge will be assessed at the time a building permit or sewer connection permit is issued for all buildings to be constructed or connected to the sewer system. No charge shall be due upon issuance of a connection permit if a charge was paid upon issuance of a building permit. The connection charge for each building or structure shall be equal to the number of equivalent residential units as outlined by the provisions of this article multiplied by $750.00. 
(b)  Any new connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities, including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD and TSS, as determined by the authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. V, § 2, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-43. - Independent building sewers required; exception; elevation. 
(a)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each building. Old building sewers may be used to service new buildings only when they are found to meet all requirements of this article. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. V, § 3, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-44. - Construction specifications. 
    The construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the state building and plumbing code, applicable rules and regulations of the city, and materials and procedural specifications set forth in the American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by the proper testing to prevent I/I. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. V, § 4, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-45. - Unpolluted water sources. 
    No unpolluted water sources shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. V, § 5, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-46. - Supervision of connection by city. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the public works superintendent or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. V, § 6, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-47. - Construction license. 
(a)  Required. An appropriate construction license is required to install a service connection. Any person desiring a license shall apply in writing to the city council, providing satisfactory evidence of the applicant's qualifications. If approved by the council, the license shall be issued by a designated representative upon the filing of a bond as provided in this section. 
(b)  Bond. A license for sewer service connection installation shall not be issued until a $2,000.00 bond or a $300.00 cash bond to the city is filed and approved by the council. The licensee will indemnify the city from all suits, accidents and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in the streets, alleys or public grounds made by the licensee or by those in the licensee's employment. 
(c)  Fee. The cost of a license for making service connections is $100.00. The license shall be in effect indefinitely, but is not transferable. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation. The council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this article for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Giving false information in connection with the application for a license. 
(2)  Incompetence of the licensee. 
(3)  Willful violation of any provisions of this article or any rule or regulation pertaining to the making of service connections. 
(4)  Failure to adequately protect and indemnify the city and the user. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. V, §§ 7-10, 2-23-93) 
Secs. 58-48-58-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-60. - Certain discharges prohibited. 
(a)  Unless otherwise permitted by section 58-72 herein, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or waste from on-site disposal systems into the sanitary collection system of the city. No person shall have a roof drain, sump pump, unauthorized swimming pool discharge, cistern overflow pipe or surface drain connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer and shall have disconnected and removed any piping or system conveying such water to the sanitary sewer system before October 1, 1991. 
(b)  A surcharge as established by resolution of the city council is imposed and shall be added to every sewer billing mailed on or after October 1, 1991, to properties not in compliance with this section. The surcharge shall be added to every quarterly billing until the property is in compliance. Compliance shall occur through inspection by authorized city employees or agents of all properties or structures connected to the sanitary sewer system. Upon verified compliance with this section, the city reserves the right to inspect such property or structure at least yearly to confirm continued compliance. Any person refusing to allow their property to be inspected shall immediately become subject to the surcharge. Any owner of property found to violate this section shall make the necessary changes to comply with this section and such changes shall be verified by authorized city employees or agents. 
(c)  All sump pumps shall have a discharge pipe installed to the outside wall of the building with a one inch inside minimum diameter. The pipe attachment must be a permanent fitting type such as PVC pipe with glued fittings. The discharge pipe shall extend at least three feet outside of the foundation and must be directed toward the front yard or rear yard of the property. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in compliance with applicable codes. 
(d)  The imposition of the surcharge shall not limit the right of the city to seek an injunction in district court ordering the person to disconnect the nonconforming connection to the sanitary sewer or from pursuing any other available legal remedies. 
(Ord. No. 185, § 1, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 357, § 1, 4-12-11) 
Sec. 58-61. - Stormwater, unpolluted water restricted. 
    No unpolluted water or stormwater shall be discharged to the sanitary sewer. Such water shall be discharged only to storm sewers or natural outlets approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 1, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-62. - Prohibited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge any of the following substances to the public sewer: 
(1)  Liquids, solids, gases, or other substances which singly or by interaction with others may cause fire or explosion. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer. 
(3)  Wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive or caustic property capable of causing damage or hazard. 
(4)  Wastewater containing toxic pollutants, as defined in section 307(a) of the water pollution control act and M.S.A. § 115.01, Subd. 14. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 2, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-63. - Discharge limitations. 
    Discharges of the following substances shall be limited to concentrations or quantities which will not harm the wastewater facility, streams, soils, vegetation or groundwater, and will not otherwise create a hazard or nuisance. The authorized representative may set limitations lower than the prohibition limits outlined below. Consideration will be given to such factors as the quantity of waste in relation to flows and velocities, materials of construction, the city's NPDES and SDS permits, capacity of the treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes and other pertinent factors. 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65.6 degrees Celsius), or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at the treatment facilities to have a temperature exceeding 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius), or having heat in amounts which will be detrimental to biological activity in the treatment facilities. 
(2)  Wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees and 65.6 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  A discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
(4)  Food wastes not properly shredded to such a degree that all articles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(5)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids. 
(6)  Wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process. 
(7)  Wastewater containing inert suspended solids in such quantities that would cause disruption to the wastewater treatment facilities. 
(8)  Radioactive wastes or isotopes in concentrations that exceed limits established by applicable state and federal regulations. 
(9)  Wastewaters with BOD or suspended solids levels that require additional treatment, except as may be permitted by specific written agreement with the city subject to section 58-61. 
(10)  Wastewater containing substances which cannot be treated to produce effluent quality required by the permit or which cause a violation of any applicable local, state or federal regulation. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 3, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-64. - Pretreatment requirements or refusal of prohibited discharges by representative. 
(a)  In the event of discharges to the public sewer which contain substances or possess characteristics prohibited in section 58-62 or 58-63, or which, in the judgement of the representative, may have a deleterious effect to the treatment facility, receiving waters, soils, vegetation, or which create a hazard or nuisance, the representative may: 
(1)  Refuse to accept the wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer, pursuant to section 307(b) of the act and all addenda thereof. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover all of the added costs of handling, treating and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
(b)  If the representative permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design, installation, maintenance and efficient operation of the facilities and equipment shall be at the owner's expense and shall be subject to review and approval by the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 4, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-65. - Dilution of discharges prohibited. 
    No user shall increase the use of process water or in any manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this article, the national categorical pretreatment standards, and any state or local requirement. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 5, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-66. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided at the owner's expense when, in the opinion of the representative, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of interceptors, including proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the representative. 
(b)  Any material removal and hauling must be performed by the owner's personnel or a currently licensed waste disposal firm and in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 6, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-67. - Control manholes. 
    Where required by the representative, industrial users shall install and maintain at their own expense a suitable structure or control manhole with such necessary meters and other testing equipment needed to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastewater. The manhole will be safe and accessible at all times. The city may require submission of laboratory analyses to illustrate compliance with this article and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or responsible regulatory agency. All measurements, tests and analyses to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and kept for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 7, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-68. - Accidental discharges; notice requirements. 
(a)  Where required by the representative, users shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of substances regulated by the article. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans and operating procedures of such facilities shall be submitted to the representative for review and approval prior to construction of the facility. Approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to meet the requirement of this article. 
(b)  Users shall notify the representative immediately if a slug or accidental discharge of wastewater occurs in violation of this article. Notification will allow measures to be taken to minimize damage to the treatment facilities. Notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the treatment facilities, or for fines imposed on the city by any state or federal agency as a result of their actions. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of the emergency notification procedure in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 8, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-69. - Obstructions to flow. 
    No person shall permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit or obstruction of flow to be discharged into the public sewer. Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall make repairs as directed by the representative. Each day after 30 days that the owner neglects to make such repairs shall constitute a separate violation of this section. The representative may then cause the work to be done and recover related expenses from the owner or agent by an action in the name of the city. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 9, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-70. - Assessment of costs for damages. 
    In addition to penalties that may be imposed for violation of any provision of this article, the city may assess against the user/owner the cost of repairing or restoring sewers and associated facilities damaged as a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes and collect the assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 10, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-71. - Agreements between city and industrial users for acceptance of certain wastes. 
    No statement contained in this article shall prevent any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial user. Industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the facility for treatment, subject to adequate payment by the industrial user, provided that national categorical pretreatment standards and the city's NPDES and SDS permit limitations are not violated. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. VI, § 11, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-72. - Hauled wastewater. 
    Any person seeking to transport and subsequently discharge residential waste into the Watertown Wastewater Treatment Facilities (WWTF) shall comply with the applicable requirements specified in this section: 
(1)  Permit: Liquid waste haulers shall obtain a liquid waste disposal permit prior to discharging any waste at the WWTF and shall comply with applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Permit fee: An annual permit fee is due at time of issuance or reissuance of liquid waste hauler permit in the amount established by the city council resolution. 
(3)  Proof of insurance: The license waste hauler must maintain minimum insurance coverages as set forth in the license waste hauler permit. 
(4)  Proof of state permits: Liquid waste haulers must provide proof satisfactory to the city of appropriate licenses and/or permits from the State of Minnesota (MDEQ) and/or state or local health department permits. 
(5)  Load charge: Liquid waste haulers shall pay load charges to the city by the 10 th of every month unless other arrangements have been made with the city. Load charges are specified in the liquid waste hauler permit as established by the city council. 
(6)  Approved disposal sites: Liquid waste haulers shall discharge only at approved disposal sites as designated by the city. No load may be discharged without prior written approval of the city. The city may, but is not required to, collect samples of each hauled load. In addition, the city may require the hauler to provide samples and waste analysis of any load prior to disposal to ensure compliance with this chapter and the permit conditions. 
(7)  Approved liquid waste: The following wastes may be disposed of in the WWTF: domestic septage such as from home septic tanks, recreational vehicles, portable toilets, and type III marine sanitation devices. 
(8)  Disposal of unauthorized waste: No person may dispose of unauthorized waste, including but not limited to, food establishment septage, grease interceptor, industrial waste, grease, oil, sand or any substance or liquid that is not permitted by the liquid waste hauling permit into the WWTF. Disposal of unauthorized hauled waste will cause for immediate permit revocation. Revocation of the permit does not preclude the city from taking additional enforcement action including criminal prosecution. 
(9)  Permit suspended or denied: The city may suspend, revoke or deny a liquid waste permit application for the failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the conditions of the liquid waste hauling permit, or if there is a general disregard of the orderly, efficient and sanitary use of the city's WWTF. The city may deny a permit request or suspend a permit if there is an enforcement action or pending enforcement action being taken for failing to comply with this chapter, the liquid waste hauling permit conditions, or violation of any other environmental waste regulation. In the event an enforcement action is taken, the permit suspension may last a minimum of six months. To reinstate a permit at the end of the suspension period, the hauler must apply for a new permit. 
(10)  Load tickets: A load ticket completed by the hauler must be submitted to the city prior to disposal. The load ticket must contain the hauler's name, permit number, truck identification, the name and address from the originators of the hauled waste, and the volume and general characteristics of the waste. The form shall also be signed and certified that only domestic waste is being disposed, and that the load does not contain any prohibitive waste as stated in this article. 
(11)  No person shall undertake, authorize, or permit any disposal of waste in the WWTF which violates or is not in compliance with this chapter or the liquid waste hauling permit issued by the city, including all terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 357, § 3, 4-12-11) 
Secs. 58-73-58-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 58-91. - When authorized. 
    Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of section 58-28, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. IV, § 1, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-92. - Permit required; inspections. 
    Before beginning construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall obtain a written permit signed by the authorized representative. The permit shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the representative's satisfaction. A designated representative shall be allowed to inspect such system at any stage of construction. The applicant for the permit shall give notification when ready for the system's final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. IV, § 2, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-93. - Compliance with state and local specifications. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Minnesota Rules, chapter 7080 and applicable local ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. IV, § 3, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-94. - Maintenance by owner. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. IV, § 4, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-95. - Connection to public sewer system. 
    When the public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days, in compliance with this article, and within 30 days private wastewater disposal systems will be cleaned of all sludge. The bottom shall be broken to permit drainage, and the tank or pit filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. IV, § 5, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-96. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA, the state department of health, or other responsible federal, state or local agencies. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. IV, § 6, 2-23-93) 
Secs. 58-97-58-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND CHARGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 58-106. - Establishment of sewer service charge system. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes a sewer service charge system whereby all revenue collected from users of the wastewater treatment facilities will be used to pay all expenditures incurred for annual operation, maintenance, replacement and debt service on capital expenditure incurred in constructing the wastewater treatment facility. 
(b)  Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation, maintenance and replacement costs of the treatment facility, based on the user's proportionate contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users. 
(c)  Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital costs as determined by the city. 
(d)  Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment facility shall be determined in a sewer service charge system developed according to the provisions of section 58-107. The sewer service charge system shall be adopted by resolution upon enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives. Upon adoption, the sewer service charge system shall be published in the local newspaper and shall be effective upon publication. Subsequent changes in sewer service rates and charges shall be adopted by city resolution and shall be published in the local newspaper. 
(e)  Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a separate fund known as the "sewer service fund." Income from revenues collected will be expended to offset the costs of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement for the facility and to retire the debt for capital expenditure. The sewer service fund will function according to the provisions of division 6 of this article. 
(f)  Sewer service charges and the sewer service fund will be administrated in accordance with the provisions of section 58-125. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. IX, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-107. - Determination of sewer service charges. 
(a)  Classification of users. Users of the city wastewater treatment facility shall be assigned to one of the following classes: 
(1)  Residential. 
(2)  Nonresidential. 
(3)  Industrial. 
The assignment of users to these categories for the purpose of assessing user charges and debt service charges shall be the responsibility of the city. Assignment of users to user classes shall be based on the substantive intent of the definitions of the classes contained in this article. 
(b)  Operation, maintenance and replacement costs. Each user shall pay operation, maintenance and replacement costs in proportion to the user's contribution of wastewater flows and loading to the treatment plant, with the minimum rate for loading of BOD and TSS being the rate established for normal domestic strength wastewater (NDSW). Those industrial users discharging only segregated NDSW can be classified as nonresidential users for the purposes of rate determination. 
(c)  Calculation of billable wastewater flow charges for residential and nonresidential users. The charges for residential and nonresidential users assessed proportionally shall be determined according to billable wastewater flow. 
(1)  Residential users. Billable wastewater volume for residential users shall be calculated on monthly metered water usage. 
a.  Billable wastewater volume for the months of November through April shall be calculated on 100 percent of the metered water usage for those months. The monthly billable wastewater volumes for the months of November through April shall be based on meter readings as submitted by the residential user or an estimated volume as determined by the city. 
b.  Billable volume for the months of May through October shall be calculated at 100 percent of the average metered water usage for the months of November through April. 
(2)  Nonresidential users. Billable wastewater volume of nonresidential users shall be determined in the same manner as for residential users, except that if the city determines there are significant seasonal variations in metered water usage resulting in a proportionate increase in wastewater volume, the billable wastewater volume may then be: 
a.  Calculated on the basis of actual metered water usage throughout the year; or 
b.  Calculated on the basis of metered wastewater flow. 
The city may require nonresidential users to install such additional water meters or wastewater flow meters as may be necessary to determine billable wastewater volume. 
(d)  Determination of user charges. User charges for producers of normal domestic strength wastewater shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Calculation of unit cost for treatment of normal domestic strength wastewater: 
Uomr = OM+R 
Tbwv  
Where: Uomr = Unit cost for operation, maintenance and equipment replacement in $/Kgal. OM+R = Total annual OM+R costs. Tbwv = Total annual billable wastewater flow in Kgal.  
(2)  Calculation of user charges: 
UC = Uomr * Bwv 
Where: UC = User charge. Uomr = Unit cost for operation, maintenance and replacement in $/Kgal. Bwv = Billable wastewater volume of a particular user in Kgal.  
(e)  Recovery of local construction costs. Local construction costs of the wastewater treatment facility will be recovered through a debt service charge calculated using monthly billable wastewater volume above 2,000 gallons and equivalent residential units, as follows: 
(1)  Calculation of monthly debt service unit cost per equivalent residential unit: 
Ueru =   Ceru   
12 * Teru  
Where: Ueru = Unit cost per equivalent residential unit in $/month/ERU. Ceru = Cost of annual debt service assigned to connections based on equivalent residential units. Teru = Total number of equivalent residential units.  
Equivalent residential units shall be assigned to system users consistent with the methods contained in this section within the following ERU assignment table (table 1). If a user is not categorized in the table, the city will assign the equivalent residential units to the user based on the provisions of this division in consideration of the definition provided in section 58-26. A request for determination should be made prior to issuance of a building permit or sewer service connection permit. A request for reevaluation of assigned equivalent residential units may be made to the city by individual users. Any reassignment will be based on clear violation of the substantive intent of the definition of ERU contained herein. 
Table 1. ERU Assignment Method 
Facility ERU assignment method Agricultural retail 1 ERU/10 employees Apartment complexes 
(common laundry area) 1 ERU/1.25 dwelling units Apartment complexes 
(individual laundry hookups) 1 ERU/dwelling unit Automobile service 1 ERU/2 service bays Bank 1 ERU/10 employees Barber shop 1 ERU/4 chairs Beauty salon 1 ERU/4 cutting stations Body repair shop 1 ERU/2 bays Bowling alley 1 ERU/3 alleys Car wash (self-service) 3 ERU's/stall Car wash (automatic) 6 ERU's/stall Churches 1 ERU/275 seats Clinic (medical) 1 ERU/exam room Cocktail lounge (bar, no food service) 1 ERU/23 seats Daycare (based on number of children licensed for) 1 ERU/14 children Dental office 1 ERU/chair Dry cleaners 1 ERU/each Elderly apartment housing 1 ERU/1.25 dwelling units Elderly assisted living facility 1 ERU/1.25 dwelling units Elderly board and lodging facility with special services 1 ERU/1.50 dwelling units Electrical appliance shop 1 ERU/3,000 sf (deduct mechanical rooms, elevator shafts, stairwells, restrooms and storage) Fire station (volunteer department force) 1 ERU/14 volunteers Fitness center/gym/dance/aerobics 1 ERU/2,060 sf plus one per 14 lockers or one per shower Funeral home (with allowed dwelling unit) 2 ERU's/each Funeral home (no allowed dwelling unit) 1 ERU/each General commercial and retail (facilities not explicitly named herein) 1 ERU/10 employees, plus 
1 ERU/allowed dwelling unit General office 1 ERU/2,400 sf (deduct mechanical rooms, elevator shafts, stairwells, restrooms and storage) Government buildings 1 ERU/each Laundromats 1 ERU/2 machines Library 1 ERU/each Manufactured housing 1 ERU/each Manufacturing 1 ERU/7,000 sf of assembly areas, 1 ERU/2,400 sf office space Motels and hotels 1 ERU/2 rooms Multiple-family housing units 1 ERU/dwelling unit Nursing home 1 ERU/3 beds Plumbing shop 1 ERU/7,000 sf of warehouse plus 1 ERU/2,400 sf office space Restaurants (fast food, disposable paper plates, glasses and silverware) 1 ERU/22 seats Restaurants (full service, washable silverware, glasses and dishes) 1 ERU/8 seats Schools (nursery to grade 7) 1 ERU/18 students Schools (grade 8 to grade 12) 1 ERU/14 students Service station (convenience center and gas pumping only) 1 ERU/each Service station (with service center and pumps) 1 ERU/each, plus 
1 ERU/2 service bays Single-family residence 1 ERU/each Theater 1 ERU/64 seats Trade/business of commercial school 1 ERU per 18 students Veterinary clinic 1 ERU/exam station Warehouse 1 ERU/10 employees  
All fractional ERU's obtained by using the determination methods outlined herein shall be rounded to one full equivalent residential unit. 
(2)  Calculation of unit debt service cost for billable wastewater volume above 2,000 gallons per month usage: 
Uvol =    (Cds - Ceru)    
Tbwv - (24 * Conn)  
Where: Uvol = Unit cost for annual debt service in $/Kgal for use above 2,000 gallons per month. Cds = Total cost of annual debt service. Ceru = Cost of annual debt service assigned to connections based on ERU's. Tbwv = Total annual billable wastewater volume (Kgal). Conn = Total number of service connection in the sewer system.  
(3)  Calculation of debt service charge: 
DC = Ueru * ERU + Uvol * (bwv - 2) 
Where: DC = Debt service charge. Ueru = Unit cost per equivalent residential unit in $/month/ERU. ERU = Number of equivalent residential units for a particular user. Uvol = Unit cost for annual debt service in $/Kgal for use above 2,000 gallons per month. bwv = Monthly billable wastewater volume for a particular user in Kgal.  
(f)  Determination of sewer service charge. The sewer service charge for a particular connection shall be determined as follows: 
SSC = UC + DC 
Where: SSC = Sewer service charge. UC = User charge. DC = Debt service charge.  
(g)  Additional charges for industrial discharges. The sewer service charges established in this division will not prevent the assessment of additional charges to users who discharge wastes in concentrations greater than NDSW or of unusual character (industrial users). Special contractual agreements can be made with such users, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The user pay OM+R costs in proportion to the user's contribution of wastewater flows and loading to the treatment facility, and no user is charged at a rate inferior to the charge for normal domestic strength wastes. 
(2)  The sampling of wastewater shall be conducted in accordance with the techniques established in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition, published by the American Public Health Association. 
A study of unit costs of collection and treatment processes attributable to flow, BOD, TSS, and other significant loading shall be developed and used to determine the proportionate allocation of costs to flows and loading for industrial users. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. X, 2-23-93; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 306, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-108. - Collection of delinquent accounts. 
    To collect delinquent sewer service charge accounts, the city may file a civil action suit or levy an assessment against the violator. Related attorneys fees fixed by court order shall also be collected. The violator shall be liable for interest on all unpaid balances at a rate of eight percent annually. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. XIII, § 3, 2-23-93) 
Secs. 58-109-58-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SEWER SERVICE FUND 

Sec. 58-121. - Established; accounts. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes a sewer service fund as an income fund to receive all revenues generated by the sewer service charge system, and all other income dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement and construction of the wastewater treatment facility, including taxes, special charges, fees and assessments intended to retire construction debt. 
(b)  The city shall also establish the following accounts no later than 60 days prior to initiation of the wastewater facilities operation as income and expenditure accounts within the sewer service fund: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance account. 
(2)  Equipment replacement account. 
(3)  Debt retirement account. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. XI, § 1, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-122. - Disposition of revenue from sewer service charge system; transfer of funds. 
    All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and all other income pertinent to the treatment system, including taxes and special assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by the city separate and apart from all other funds of the city. Funds received by the sewer service fund shall be transferred to the operation and maintenance account, the equipment replacement account, and the debt retirement account in accordance with state and federal regulations and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. XI, § 2, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-123. - Operation and maintenance account. 
    Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient for operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in the operation and maintenance account. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. XI, § 3, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-124. - Equipment replacement account. 
    Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient to ensure adequate replacement throughout the useful life of the wastewater treatment facility shall be held separate and apart in the equipment replacement account and dedicated to paying replacement costs. Interest income generated by the equipment replacement account shall remain in the equipment replacement account. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. XI, § 4, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 58-125. - Administration of fund. 
(a)  The sewer service charge system and sewer service fund shall be administrated according to the provisions set out in this section. 
(b)  The clerk-treasurer shall maintain a proper system of accounts suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment replacement and debt retirement costs of wastewater treatment facilities, and shall furnish the city council with a report of such costs annually in January. 
(c)  The city council shall annually determine whether or not sufficient revenue is being generated for the effective operation, maintenance, replacement and management of the wastewater treatment facility, and whether sufficient revenue is being generated for debt retirement. The city council will also determine whether the user charges are distributed proportionately to each user in accordance with section 58-106(b) of this article and section 104(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended. 
The city shall thereafter, but not later than the end of the year, reassess, and as necessary revise, the sewer service charge system then in use, by resolution, to ensure the proportionality of the user charges and to ensure the sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity and performance to which the facilities were constructed, and to retire the construction debt. 
(d)  In accordance with federal and state requirements, each user will be notified annually in conjunction with a regular billing of that portion of the sewer service charge attributable to operation, maintenance and replacement. 
(e)  In accordance with federal and state requirements, the city shall be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to document compliance with the sewer service charge system adopted. 
(f)  Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a monthly basis succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and shall be due 30 days from the date of rendering. Any bill not paid in full after the due date will be considered delinquent. At that time the city shall notify the delinquent owner/occupant in writing regarding the delinquent bill and subsequent penalty. The penalty shall be computed as ten percent of the original bill. 
(g)  The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable therefor to the city. 
(h)  Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment works of toxins or other incompatible wastes, including the cost of restoring wastewater treatment services, cleanup and restoration of the receiving waters and environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the dischargers of such wastes, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 190, art. XII, 2-23-93) 
Secs. 58-126-58-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER 

Sec. 58-151. - Water to be metered. 
    Except in emergencies for extinguishing fires, no person except authorized city employees shall use water from the city municipal water supply system or permit water to be drawn therefrom, unless such water be metered by passing through a meter supplied or approved by the city. No person unauthorized by the city utility department shall connect, disconnect, take apart or in any manner change, or cause to be changed, or interfere with any such meter or the operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 5, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-152. - Meters property of the city; fee. 
    The city shall establish a meter fee to be made to customers for water meters, and payment for the use of the meter fee shall be made in advance before delivery and installation of the meter. The amount of the fees shall be on file in the city offices. Such fees shall not be refunded upon change of ownership of the property served, but may be transferred to a subsequent owner if the meter is in good operating condition. All water meters shall be and remain the property of the city and may be removed, replaced or changed as to size and type by the city whenever deemed necessary. Meters shall be available for inspection and testing at reasonable times by authorized city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 6, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-153. - Meter maintenance. 
    The city shall maintain and repair all meters when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and shall replace them if necessary. Where replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter is rendered necessary by the act, neglect, or carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises, any expense caused to the city thereby shall be charged against and collected from the water consumer and water service may be discontinued until the cause is corrected and amount charged collected. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 7, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-154. - Meter reading and inspection. 
    City employees assigned for the purpose of meter reading shall have free access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with the city water system for reading meters and inspections. The city may, at its option, use other methods of meter reading such as mailing of requests to users for self-reading and returning such readings to the city for billing. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 8, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-155. - Nonmetered water, estimated amount. 
    If it is not possible to meter water used in certain circumstances such as, but not limited to, temporary disconnected or defective meters or use of water from city hydrants with permission of the city, the clerk-treasurer may estimate the amount used during that period using any reasonable method for determining such amount, but in no event shall the charge be less than the minimum amount as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 18, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-155.1. - Testing of faulty meters. 
    Upon the written request of a property owner or a consumer of water on the property, the city will test the water meter supplying water to the subject property or premises. Prior to the test a deposit in an amount established by the city council shall be made with the city to cover the expenses of the test. The deposit will be returned if the meter is found not to be registering correctly according to American Water Works Association Standards. The city may also at its own expense test any meter at any time that it determines necessary or appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 315, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 58-155.2. - Faulty meters-Refunds of previously paid consumption charges. 
    If the testing of a meter shows that that it fails to meter correctly and may have registered more water usage than actually consumed, the charge for water consumed shall be on the basis for the corresponding period of the previous year under the same or similar water usage conditions and any excess charge will be refunded to the consumer or otherwise equitably adjusted. 
(Ord. No. 315, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 58-155.3. - Temporary connection to hydrants. 
    The city may permit water to be drawn temporarily from a fire hydrant by attaching a meter/valve provided by the city. The meter/value and the amount of water drawn will be billed to the user according to the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 315, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 58-156. - Turning on water after service has been disconnected. 
    A service charge which is established by resolution of the city council shall be made for turning on water where service has been turned off for nonpayment of water charges, failure to repair a leak, discontinuance of service or any other cause. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 11, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-157. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 208, § 2, adopted Sept. 23, 1997, repealed § 58-157, which pertained to water service fees, rates and charges and derived from Ord. No. 87, § 9, adopted Dec. 16. 1975. For similar provisions see § 58-8. 
Sec. 58-158. - Deficiency in supply of water and shutting off water for repairs or emergencies. 
    The city shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections, or from any other cause whatsoever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire or other emergency, water may be shut off to insure a supply for firefighting, or in making repairs or construction of new water works. In such events, water may be shut off at any time and kept off so long as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 15, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-159. - Outdoor water conservation. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote outdoor water consumption conservation measures, to conserve water resources, and to assist the City of Watertown in effective utilization of its annual water appropriation permit limits established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 
    A reduction in the level of outdoor water consumption demand during peak demand periods will assist in maintaining sufficient amounts of water storage for fire fighting, and reduce the urgency for the construction of additional storage facilities, wells and water filter facilities. 
(b)  Conservation measures; time of day conservation. To conserve water resources and prevent the wasteful and harmful effects of irrigation and sprinkling during mid-day hours, no person shall irrigate or sprinkle using the public water supply or a private well water source between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day of any week. This conservation measure applies to established lawns, vegetation, shrubs, trees and gardens. 
(c)  Implementation of emergency conservation measures; odd/even conservation and temporary ban. 
(1)  If the city administrator in consultation with the public works director determines that a shortage of water exists, the city administrator is authorized to declare a water shortage emergency. In such situations, in addition to the time of day conservation, the city administrator may impose an odd/even conservation measure or a complete temporary ban on all irrigating, watering or sprinkling. 
(2)  Notice of such emergency measures may be given by publication or posting or such other manner as determined appropriate for the situation. Such emergency measures shall continue until notice of discontinuance is given by the city. 
(3)  If an odd/even conservation measure is imposed to reduce water demand, no person shall irrigate or sprinkle using the public water supply or a private well water source except on an odd/even property address basis. If the property address is an even number, irrigation or sprinkling may take place on the even numbered day of the week. If the property address is an odd number, irrigation or sprinkling may take place on the odd numbered day of the week. 
(d)  Exceptions. Except for emergency conservation measures as may be determined pursuant to subsection (c), exceptions to time of day conservation are allowed as follows: 
(1)  Hoses that are hand held by a person. 
(2)  Employees and agents of the city, in such instances herein lawn, grass or turf used for play fields or areas owned and operated by the city need more frequent watering to prevent unreasonable damage thereto. 
(3)  Upon written request and approval by the city administrator, or his/her designee, and subject to such terms and conditions imposed by the city administrator, or his/her designee, with respect to such approval, any person owning or operating a commercial or business enterprise whose economic well-being is dependent upon sprinkling, irrigation or watering of lawn, grass, or turf owned, leased or operated by it, may be authorized to sprinkle, irrigate or otherwise utilize water from the city's municipal water system. 
(4)  New sod and seed are exempt for a period of 30 days only from date of installation. An exemption for this purpose must be first obtained by calling the city utility department at 952-955-2856. 
(e)  Violations, fines and penalties. A violation of this section shall subject the property owner to the following fines and penalties: 
(1)  First offense. Citation and letter of warning indicating the violation and describing the remedy and fines for future violations. 
(2)  Second offense. Citation and fine of $75.00 added to the property's utility bill. 
(3)  Third and subsequent offenses. Citation and fine of $250.00 each occurrence, added to the property's utility bill. 
(e)  Appeals. Any person desiring to contest an administrative citation must appeal the citation in writing to the city administrator within five days of its issuance. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regular scheduled city council meeting. The decision of the city council is final. Appeals must be mailed or personally delivered to City Administrator, 309 Lewis Avenue South, P.O. Box 273, Watertown, MN 55388. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 16, 12-16-75; Ord. No. 272, §§ 1-6, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 58-160. - Repair of leaks. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the consumer or owner of the property to maintain the service line from the point of connection with the city water main into the house or building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in his service line within 24 hours after written notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on until repairs are made and the sum as established by resolution of the city council has been paid. 
(b)  When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to result in a leak, the water will be turned off if repair is not commenced immediately upon the giving of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 17, 12-16-75) 
Secs. 58-161-58-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BILLING 

Sec. 58-186. - Procedure and penalty. 
(a)  Charges for sewer and water service shall be billed to consumers on a monthly basis in such form and manner as determined most appropriate and efficient by the city utility department. A statement specifying the amount of water consumed and the charges for such water and sewer service in accordance with the rates as determined by the city council together with any other unpaid charges and penalties shall be rendered monthly and mailed to each user according to the name and address on file with the clerk-treasurer. 
(b)  All charges shall be due and payable by the 15th day of the month following the month of such billing. If payment is not made by that date, the account shall be deemed delinquent. A penalty of ten percent of any unpaid balance shall be added to each monthly statement until paid in full. Payments made by check or other written instrument shall be first subject to collection. 
(c)  There shall be only one bill or statement for each water meter and the city shall not split bills between or among multiple users of one water meter. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 12, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-187. - Certifying delinquent accounts to county auditor for collection with taxes. 
(a)  By November 1 of each year the clerk-treasurer shall make a complete list of all water and sewer bills remaining delinquent and shall notify the consumer. If the consumer is not the owner of the property, the owner, if his address is known, is also notified that the water and sewer bill is delinquent and that if not paid it will be presented to the city council for adoption as part of an assessment roll of delinquent accounts to be certified to the county auditor for collection with real estate taxes against the property served. 
(b)  The clerk-treasurer shall prepare and present to the city council on or before December 1 of each year an assessment roll of all delinquent accounts providing for assessment of delinquent accounts against the respective properties served. Upon adoption by the city council, the clerk-treasurer shall certify the assessment roll to the county auditor to be extended on the proper tax lists of the county for collection in the same manner as provided by law for municipal taxes. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 13, 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-188. - Discontinuance of service-For nonpayment of bills. 
    In addition to all other methods of collecting delinquent accounts including legal action, the city shall have the right to shut off the water service to any delinquent customer when satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been made. Such action shall be taken only after following the procedure as set forth in section 58-189. Whenever water service to any premises has been disconnected, service shall not be restored except upon the payment of all delinquent amounts due plus any penalties, interest and reconnection charges. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 14(1), 12-16-75) 
Sec. 58-189. - Same-Notice and hearing. 
(a)  The water shall not be shut off under section 58-15 until notice and an opportunity for a hearing shall have first been given the occupant of the premises involved. Such notice shall be personally served when possible, or notice shall be served by certified mail. The notice shall state the amount delinquent and any penalty and interest due and that if payment is not made before the date stated in the notice, but not less than ten days after the date on which the notice is given, the water supply to the premises will be shut off. 
(b)  The notice shall also state that the occupant may, before such date, demand a hearing in writing delivered to the clerk-treasurer on the matter. If a hearing is requested, the water supply will not be shut off until after the hearing is held. If the customer or occupant requests a hearing before the date specified, the hearing shall be held on the matter by the city council within at least ten days after the date on which the request is made. If as a result of the hearing the city council finds that the amount claimed to be owing is actually due and unpaid and that there is no legal reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may not be shut off in accordance with this article, the city may shut off the water supply. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 14(2), 12-16-75) 
Secs. 58-190-58-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 58-216. - Statutory authorization. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to M.S.A. § 462.351. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 1, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-217. - Findings. 
    The City of Watertown hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources and hindering the ability of the city to provide adequate water, sewage, flood control, and other community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required for the protection of persons and property in such areas and in areas which may be affected by unplanned land usage. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 2, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-218. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the city and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities by regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging compatibility between land disturbing and development activities and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed review standards and procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and development and protection of water quality and natural areas. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 3, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-219. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meaning stated below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive. 
    Applicant. Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or subdivision approval. 
    Control measure. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant pollution. 
    Detention facility. A permanent natural or manmade structure, including wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which contains a permanent pool of water. 
    Flood fringe. The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. 
    Floodplain. The areas adjoining a watercourse of water basin that have been or may be covered by a regional flood. 
    Floodway. The channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge floodwater and provide water storage during a regional flood. 
    Hydric soils. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. 
    Hydrophytic vegetation. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. 
    Land disturbing or development activities. Any change of the land surface including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading, and the construction of any structure. 
    Person. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, association or governmental entity. 
    Public waters. Waters of the state as defined in M.S.A. § 103G.005, Subd. 15. 
    Regional flood. A flood that is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of a 100-year recurrence interval. 
    Retention facility. A permanent natural or man made structure that provides for the storage of stormwater runoff by means of a permanent pool of water. 
    Sediment. Solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other liquids. 
    Structure. Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas. 
    Wetlands. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface of the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following three attributes: 
(1)  Have a predominance of hydric soils; 
(2)  Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adopted for life in saturated soil conditions; and 
(3)  Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 4, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-220. - Scope and effect. 
(a)  Applicability. Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a permit to allow land disturbing activities must submit a stormwater management plan to the zoning administrator. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the stormwater management plan or a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this article. The provisions of section 58-224 apply to all land, public or private, located within the city. 
(b)  Exemptions. The provisions of this article do not apply to: 
(1)  Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the city council on or before the effective date of this article; 
(2)  Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been approved by the watershed management organization within six months prior to the effective date of this article; 
(3)  A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this article; 
(4)  Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; or 
(5)  Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property. 
(c)  Waiver. The city council, upon recommendation of the planning commission, may waive any requirement of this article upon making a finding that compliance with the requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of such requirement will not adversely affect the standards and requirements set forth in section 58-221. The city council may require as a condition of the waiver, such dedication or construction, or agreement to dedicate or construct as may be necessary to adequately meet said standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 5, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-221. - Stormwater management plan approval procedures. 
(a)  Application. A written application for stormwater management plan approval, along with the proposed stormwater management plan, shall be filed with the zoning administrator, and shall include a statement indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use is permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will confirm to the standards set forth in this article. Prior to applying for approval of a stormwater management plan, an applicant may have the stormwater management plans reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city. 
    Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of drawings and required information shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the clerk/treasurer evidencing the payment of all required fees for processing and approval as set forth in subsection 58-222(e), and a bond when required by subsection 58-222(d) in the amount to be calculated in accordance with that section. Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed. At a minimum the scale shall be one inch equals to 100 feet. 
(b)  Stormwater management plan. At a minimum, the stormwater management plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions showing the site and immediately adjacent areas, including: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, north point, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets; 
2.  Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the location of the property and giving such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other landmarks; 
3.  Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet; 
4.  A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a description of all vegetation which may be found in the water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and/or the United Stated Army Corp of Engineers; 
5.  Location and dimensions of existing stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland, and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects; 
6.  A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the developer to render the soils suitable; 
7.  Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal; and 
8.  100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways. 
b.  Site construction plan. A site construction plan including: 
1.  Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and any phasing of those activities; 
2.  Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles; 
3.  Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this article; 
4.  Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each land disturbing activity including the installation of construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this article; and 
5.  Provisions for maintenance of the construction site erosion control measures during construction. 
c.  Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes including: 
1.  Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining features; 
2.  A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the development; 
3.  A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater will be conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be allowed to collect; 
4.  The proposed size, alignment and intended use of any structures to be erected on the site; 
5.  A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be used; and 
6.  Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the opinion of the applicant is necessary for the review of the project. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 6, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-222. - Plan review procedure. 
(a)  Process. Stormwater management plans meeting the requirements of section 58-221 shall be submitted by the zoning administrator to the planning commission for review in accordance with the standards of subsection 58-223. The commission shall recommend approval, recommend approval with conditions, or recommend denial of the stormwater management plan. Following planning commission action, the stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the city council at its next available meeting. City council action on the stormwater management plan must be accomplished within 120 days following the date the application for approval is filed with the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Duration. Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this article shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the zoning administrator for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the requested extension, the planning department may grant one extension of not greater than one single year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be acknowledged by the zoning administrator within 15 days. The zoning administrator shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt. Any plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved. 
(c)  Conditions. A stormwater management plan may be approved subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to insure that the requirements contained in this article are met. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the work over tie, require alteration of the site design to insure buffering, and require the conveyance to the city or other public entity of certain lands or interests therein. 
(d)  Performance bond. Prior to approval of any stormwater management plan, the applicant shall submit an agreement to construct such required physical improvements, to dedicate property or easements, or to comply with such conditions as may have been agreed to. Such agreement shall be accompanied by a bond to cover the amount of the established cost of complying with the agreement. The agreement and bond shall guarantee completion and compliance wit conditions within a specific time, which time may be extended in accordance with section 58-222. 
    The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any agreement and bond shall be determined by the city council or any official of the city as may be designated by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Fees. All applications for stormwater management plan approval shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee to be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 7, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-223. - Approval standards. 
(a)  Failure to meet standards. No stormwater management plan which fails to meet the standards contained in this section shall be approved by the city council. 
(b)  Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators or other appropriate controls as appropriate. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or flooding of the site or receiving channels or a wetland. 
(c)  Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of off-site and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer system. 
(d)  Tracking. Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives and parking areas of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday. 
(e)  Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected during construction until control measures are in place with a straw bale, silt fence or equivalent barrier meeting accepted design criteria, standards and specifications contained in the MPCA publication "Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas". 
(f)  Site erosion control. The following criteria (a. through d.) apply only to construction activities that result in runoff leaving the site: 
a.  Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise, the channel shall be protected as described below. Sheetflow runoff from adjacent areas greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted around disturbed areas, unless shown to have resultant runoff rates of less than 0.5 ft. 3/sec. across the disturbed area for the one-year storm. Diverted runoff shall be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance and receiving channels. 
b.  All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence to minimize the area of base soil exposed at any one time. 
c.  Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be controlled by meeting either subsections 1. and 2. or 1. and 3. 
1.  All disturbed ground left inactive for fourteen or more days shall be stabilized by seeding or sodding (only available prior to September 15) or by mulching or covering or other equivalent control measure. 
2.  For sites with more than ten acres disturbed at one time, or if a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more temporary or permanent sedimentation basins shall be constructed. Each sedimentation basin shall have a surface area of at least one percent of the area draining to the basin and least three feet of depth and constructed in accordance with accepted design specifications. Sediment shall be removed to maintain a depth of three feet. The basin discharge rate shall also be sufficiently low as to not cause erosion along the discharge channel or the receiving water. 
3.  For sites with less than ten acres disturbed at one time, silt fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures shall be placed along all sideslope and downslope sides of the site. If a channel or area of concentrated runoff passes through the site, silt fences shall be placed along the channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel. The use of silt fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures must include a maintenance and inspection schedule. 
d.  Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards of material should not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than 25 feet from the toe of the pile to a roadway or drainage channel. If remaining for more than seven days, they shall be stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps or other means. Erosion from piles which will be in existence for less than seven days shall be controlled by placing straw bales or silt fence barriers around the pile. In-street utility repair or construction soil or dirt storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a roadway or drainage channel must be covered with tarps or suitable alternative control, if exposed for more than seven days, and the storm drain inlets must be protected with straw bale or other appropriate filtering barriers. 
(g)  Stormwater management criteria for permanent facilities. 
a.  An applicant shall install or construct, on or for the proposed land disturbing or development activity, all stormwater management facilities necessary to manage increased runoff so that the ten-year, and 100-year storm peak discharge rates existing before the proposed development shall not be increased and accelerated channel erosion will not occur as a result of the proposed land disturbing or development activity. An applicant may also make an in-kind or monetary contribution to the development and maintenance of community stormwater management facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant. 
b.  The applicant shall give consideration to reducing the need for stormwater management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales and depressions as they exist before development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or pond. 
c.  The following stormwater management practices shall be investigated in developing a stormwater management plan in the following descending order of preference: 
1.  Infiltration of runoff on-site, if suitable soil conditions are available for use; 
2.  Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions; 
3.  Stormwater retention facilities; and 
4.  Stormwater detention facilities. 
d.  A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements specified in subsection a. above. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for the method selected. 
(h)  Design standards. Stormwater detention facilities constructed in the city shall be designed according to the most current technology as reflected in the MPCA publication "Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas", and shall contain, at a minimum, the following design factors: 
a.  A permanent pond surface area equal to two percent of the impervious area draining to a pond or one percent of the entire area draining to the pond, whichever amount is greater; 
b.  An average permanent pool depth of four to ten feet; 
c.  A permanent pool length-to-width ratio of 3:1 or greater; 
d.  A minimum protective shelf extending ten feet into the permanent pool with a slope of 10:1, beyond which slopes should not exceed 3:1; 
e.  A protective buffer strip of vegetation surrounding the permanent pool at a minimum width of one rod (16.5 feet); 
f.  All stormwater detention facilities shall have a device to keep oil, grease, and other floatable material from moving downstream as a result of normal operations; 
g.  Stormwater detention facilities for new development must be sufficient to limit peak flows in each subwatershed to those that existed before the development for the ten-year storm event. All calculations and hydrologic models/information used in determining peak flows shall be submitted along with the stormwater management plan; 
h.  All stormwater detention facilities must have a forebay to remove coarse-grained particles prior to discharge into a watercourse or storage basin. 
(i)  Wetlands. 
a.  Runoff shall not be discharged directly into wetlands without presettlement of the runoff. 
b.  A protective buffer strip of natural vegetation at least one rod (16.5) feet) in width shall surround all wetlands. 
c.  Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value. Replacement must be guided by the following principles in descending order of priority: 
1.  Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or diminish the wetland; 
2.  Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation; 
3.  Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland environment; 
4.  Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity; and 
5.  Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute wetland resources or environments. 
(j)  Steep slopes. No land disturbing or development activities shall be allowed on slopes of ten percent or more. 
(k)  Catch basins. All newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins shall be provided with a sump area for the collection of coarse-grained material. Such basins shall be cleaned when they are half filled with material. 
(l)  Drain leaders. All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings will route drain leaders to pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to infiltrate. The flow rate of water exiting the leaders shall be controlled so no erosion occurs in the pervious areas. 
(m)  Inspection and maintenance. All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide access for maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound. All stormwater management facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that assures continued effective removal of pollutants carried in stormwater runoff. The director of public works, or designated representative, shall inspect all stormwater management facilities during construction, during the first year of operation, and at least once every five years thereafter. The inspection records will be kept on file at the public works department for a period of six years. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain may necessary easements or other property interest to allow access to the stormwater management facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes. 
(n)  Models/methodologies/computations. Hydrologic models and design methodologies used for the determination of runoff and analysis of stormwater management structures shall be approved by the director of public works. Plans, specification and computations for stormwater management facilities submitted for review shall be sealed and signed by a registered professional engineer. All computations shall appear on the plans submitted for review, unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. 
(o)  Watershed management plans/groundwater management plans. Stormwater management plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed management plans and groundwater management plans prepared in accordance with M.S.A. §§ 103B.231 and 103B.255 respectively, and as approved by the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources in accordance with state law. 
(p)  Easements. If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all runoff of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any necessary easements or other property interests concerning flowage of water. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 8, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-224. - Lawn fertilizer regulations. 
(a)  Use of impervious surfaces. No person shall apply fertilizer to or deposit grass clippings, leaves, or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces, or within stormwater drainage systems, natural drainage ways, or within wetland buffer areas. 
(b)  Unimproved land areas. Except for driveways, sidewalks, patios, areas occupied by structures or areas which have been improved by landscaping, all areas shall be covered by plants or vegetative growth. 
(c)  Fertilizer content. Except for the first growing season for newly established turf areas, no person shall apply liquid fertilizer which contains more that one-half percent by weight of phosphorus, or granular fertilizer which contains more than three percent by weight of phosphorus, unless the single application is less than or equal to one-tenth pound of phosphorus per 1,000 square feet. Annual application amount shall not exceed one-half pound of phosphorus per 1,000 square feet of lawn area. 
(d)  Buffer zone. Fertilizer applications shall not be made within one rod (16.5 feet) of any wetland or water resource. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 9, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-225. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 dollars for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 10, 3-23-93) 
Sec. 58-226. - Other controls. 
    In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the provisions of an erosion control or shoreland protection ordinance adopted by the city council, the more restrictive standard prevails. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 11, 3-23-93) 
Secs. 58-227-58-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATERWORKS SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-250. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means area within the corporate boundaries of the city. When used in this article, the term "city" may also refer to the city council or its authorized representative. 
    Connection charge means a service connection charge assessed against all water service connections. 
    Debt service charge means a charge levied on users of the waterworks systems facility for the purpose of repaying system capital costs. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means a debt service billing unit used to equate non-residential users to residential users for the purpose of assigning a debt service charge. The unit represents a water volume of 100 gallons per day. 
    Nonresidential user means a user of the waterworks facility whose building is not used as a private residence. 
    Residential user means a user of the waterworks facility whose building is used primarily as a private residence. 
    User charge means a charge to users of the waterworks facility for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including repair and replacement. 
    Waterworks systems or waterworks facilities means the land, devices, facilities, structures, equipment and processes owned or used by the city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal water, including mains, valves, hydrants, service connections, wells, pumps, reservoirs, tanks, treatment plants, and other appurtenances of a waterworks system. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-251. - Control by authorized representative. 
    The city council shall appoint the public works superintendent to provide control and general supervision of all public water and service connections in the city and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this article to ensure that a proper and efficient public waterworks system is maintained. The authorized representative may delegate responsibilities to designated representatives. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-252. - Damaging facilities. 
    No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the waterworks facilities. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest and punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-253. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    Duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, repair and maintenance in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Secs. 58-254-58-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONNECTION PERMITS AND CHARGES 

Sec. 58-260. - Connection permit required. 
    No person shall make any connections or alterations to the public waterworks system facilities or any appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. In the case of a new building, the water connection permit is part of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-260.1. - Mandatory connection to municipal water system. 
    Within 30 days of receiving official notification from the city the owner of any house, building or property used for human occupation, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within 500 feet of an accessible public watermain shall, at the owner's expense, connect such property directly to the watermain in accordance with city standards and regulations. If such connection is not so made by the owner, the city may make such connection and assess the cost thereof as a special assessment against the property. 
(Ord. No. 315, § 2, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 58-261. - Service connection charge; requirement for new connections. 
(a)  A service connection charge will be assessed at the time a building permit or water connection permit is issued for all buildings to be constructed or connected to the waterworks system. No charge shall be due upon issuance of a connection permit if a charge was paid upon issuance of a building permit. The connection charge for each building or structure shall be equal to the number of equivalent residential units as assigned in section 58-107, Table 1, multiplied by the base connection charge for one unit as established by ordinance from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  Any new connection to the waterworks system shall be prohibited unless sufficient water capacity is available. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-262. - Supervision of connection by city. 
    The applicant for the building water permit shall notify the city when the building is ready for connection to the public water system. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the public works superintendent or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Secs. 58-263-58-269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 58-270. - Establishment of water service charge system. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes a water service charge system whereby all revenue collected from users of waterworks facilities will be used to pay all expenditures incurred for annual operation, maintenance, replacement and debt service on capital expenditure incurred in constructing the waterworks facility. 
(b)  Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation, maintenance and replacement costs of the facility, based on the user's proportionate use of the waterworks system. 
(c)  Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital costs as determined by the city. 
(d)  Water service rates and charges to users of the waterworks facility shall be determined by a water service charge system developed by the city council. 
(e)  Revenues collected for water service shall be deposited in a separate fund known as the "water service fund." Income from revenues collected will be expended to offset the costs of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement for the facility and to retire the debt for capital expenditure. The water service fund will function according to the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(f)  Water service charges and the water service fund will be administrated in according with the provisions of section 58-284. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-271. - Collection of delinquent accounts. 
    To collect delinquent water service charge accounts, the city may file a civil action suit or levy an assessment against the violator or discontinue water service all as provided by sections 58-186 to 58-189. Related attorneys fees fixed by court order shall also be collected. The violator shall be liable for interest on all unpaid balances at a rate of eight percent annually. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Secs. 58-272-58-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER SERVICE FUND 

Sec. 58-280. - Established; accounts. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes a water service fund as an income fund to receive all revenues generated by the water service charge system, and all other income dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement and construction of the waterworks facility, including taxes, special charges, fees and assessments intended to retire construction debt. 
(b)  The city shall also establish the following accounts as income and expenditure accounts within the water service fund: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance account. 
(2)  Equipment replacement account. 
(3)  Debt retirement account. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-281. - Disposition of revenue from [water] service charge system; transfer of funds. 
    All revenue generated by the water service charge system, and all other income pertinent to the waterworks system, including taxes and special assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by the city separate and apart from all other funds of the city. Funds received by the water service fund shall be transferred to the operation and maintenance account, the equipment replacement account, and the debt retirement account in accordance with state and federal regulations and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-282. - Operation and maintenance account. 
    Revenue generated by the water service charge system sufficient for operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in the operation and maintenance account. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-283. - Equipment replacement account. 
    Revenue generated by the water service charge system sufficient to ensure adequate replacement throughout the useful life of the waterworks facility shall be held separate and apart in the equipment replacement account and dedicated to paying replacement costs. Interest income generated by the equipment replacement account shall remain in the equipment replacement account. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 58-284. - Administration of fund. 
(a)  The water service charge system and water service fund shall be administered according to the provisions set out in this section. 
(b)  The clerk-treasurer shall maintain a proper system of accounts suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment replacement and debt retirement costs of waterworks facilities, and shall furnish the city council with a report of such costs annually. 
(c)  The city council shall annually determine whether or not sufficient revenue is being generated for the effective operation, maintenance, replacement and management of the waterworks facility, and whether sufficient revenue is being generated for debt retirement. The city council will also determine whether the user charges are distributed proportionately to each user in accordance with section 58-270 of this article. 
The city shall thereafter, but not later than the end of the year, reassess, and as necessary revise, the water service charge system then in use to ensure the proportionality of the user charges and to ensure the sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity and performance to which the facilities were constructed, and to retire the construction debt. 
(d)  The owner of the premises to which water services is provided shall be liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable therefore to the city. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-07) 
Chapter 60 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNA[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 221, §§ 1-12, adopted July 25, 2000, adopted provisions pertaining to wireless telecommunication services. Said ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as chapter 60, §§ 60-1-60-30, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 60-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Accessory structure means any structure subordinate to and serving the principal use on the same lot, attached or detached, and clearly and customarily incidental thereto. 
    Antenna means any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting, receiving, transmitting or radiating electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas. 
    Commercial receiving or transmitting antenna means any antenna erected for the commercial use of information. 
    Commercial wireless telecommunication services means licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communications services (pcs), specialized mobilized radio (smr), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (esmr), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
    Private receiving and/or transmitting antenna means any antenna erected for the noncommercial use of information. 
    Public utility persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the general public. For the purpose of this chapter, commercial wireless telecommunication services shall not be considered public utility uses, and are defined separately. 
    Tower means any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade (except amateur radio antennas). Towers or antenna towers shall be considered antennas by definition. 
    Tower, multi user means a tower to which is attached the antennas of more than one commercial wireless telecommunication service provider or governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 60-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish balanced regulations for the construction and maintenance of wireless communication equipment in order to accommodate the growth of wireless communication systems within the City of Watertown while protecting the public against adverse impacts on the city's aesthetic resources and the public welfare. In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community the city finds that these regulations are necessary in order to 1) facilitate provision of wireless communications services to the residents and businesses of the city 2) minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design, siting, and vegetative screening 3) avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures, and 4) maximize use of any new or existing communication tower to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Secs. 60-3-60-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 60-21. - Existing towers and antennas. 
    Antennas, towers and accessory structures in existence as of July 25, 2000, which do not conform to or comply with this chapter are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now existing but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in all respects with this chapter. 
(2)  If such towers are damaged due to any reason or cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location and physical dimension upon obtaining a building permit, except if it is destroyed to the extent of more than 50 percent of the assessed market value, then it shall not be restored unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 3, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-22. - Commercial telecommunication antennas/towers: general requirements. 
(a)  Towers and antennas less than 200 feet in height above ground level (AGL), for wireless communications facilities are permitted upon the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Antennas/towers shall be located on municipally owned land/structures or land within an industrial district, if such land is available, provided a lease agreement is entered into between the city and the proposed user. 
(c)  Antennas attached to existing structures shall not exceed 20 feet above the highest point of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 4, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-23. - Conditional use permit requirements. 
    Construction and maintenance of wireless communication services requires a conditional use permit issued by the city council. 
(1)  In reviewing an application for a conditional use permit for the construction and maintenance of wireless communication services and supporting towers and accessory structures, the city council shall consider the advice and recommendations of the planning commission and the effect of the proposed use upon the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of occupants of surrounding lands, the effect on property values of property in surrounding areas, and the effect of the proposed use on the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  In applying for a conditional use permit, the applicant shall provide the following information: 
a.  Documentation illustrating compliance or pending compliance with FAA and FCC authorization procedures. 
b.  Sufficient information to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance of the antenna and tower will not create a safety hazard or damage to the property of other persons. 
c.  Documentation of the area to be served including a search area for the antenna location. A narrative describing a search area (with not less than a 1 1/2 mile radius) clearly explaining why the site was selected, an environmental review including a summary of relevant conclusions, and what existing structures were available and why they are not suitable as locations or co-locations. 
d.  Documentation that the communications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within the search area due to one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced or modified to accommodate planned equipment at a reasonable cost; or 
2.  The planned equipment would cause interference with other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a qualified professional radio frequency (RF) engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost; or 
3.  No existing or approved tower industrial sites within a 1 1/2 mile radius meet the radio frequency (RF) design criteria; or 
4.  Existing or approved tower and commercial/industrial sites within a 1 1/2 mile radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified professional radio frequency (RF) engineer. 
5.  A good faith effort to co-locate on existing towers and structures within a 1 1/2 mile radius was made, but an agreement could not be reached. 
e.  A certified survey showing the location of the proposed tower/antenna 
f.  A detailed screening plan. 
g.  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which: 
1.  Describes the tower height and design with cross section and elevation; 
2.  Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation between antennas; 
3.  Describe the number and type of antennas that can be accommodated; 
4.  Documents the steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with public safety telecommunications; and 
5.  Includes the engineer's stamp and registration number. 
h.  A letter of intent committing all commercial wireless telecommunications service towers to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees, in writing, to meet reasonable terms and conditions for structures. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 5, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-24. - Conditional use permits; not required: 
(a)  Antennas and towers used by the city for city purposes. 
(b)  Adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antenna array affixed to a tower or antenna, provided that replacement does not reduce the safety factor. 
(c)  Antennas and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes or for emergency communications. Temporary antennas shall be removed within 72 hours following installation. 
(d)  Antennas mounted on water towers, public structures or on the roofs of existing public buildings not exceeding 20 feet above the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 6, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-25. - Fees. 
    Fees issued for a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter shall be set from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 7, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-26. - Standards for the issuance and continuation of a conditional use permit. 
    All antennas/towers constructed, and all wiring therefor, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Towers shall be certified by a registered professional engineer under the laws of the State of Minnesota and shall conform to the latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code and the Electronics Industry Association. 
(2)  An agreement providing for co-location and prompt removal of unused and/or obsolete towers shall be attached and become part of the permit. 
(3)  With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and connection lines approved by the issuing authority on part of any antenna or tower, no lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right-of-way of a public street or highway, sidewalk, or property line. 
(4)  Any ground mounted tower/antenna design shall be such that the antenna will withstand high velocity wind and seasonal storms. The tower/antenna shall be maintained by the applicant so as to assure that it remains upright. 
(5)  Applicant must obtain Federal Aviation Administration approval or provide documentation that Federal Aviation Administration approval is not needed. 
(6)  Applicant must obtain Federal Communication Commission licensure and approval as required for various communications applications. Applicant shall follow Federal Communication Commission regulations regarding the correction and/or prevention of any radio frequency interference problems. 
(7)  Complete screening shall be provided surrounding all towers in excess of 15 feet in height from ground level. The applicant shall also fence off the tower/antenna, with a minimum of a six-foot high fence or barrier with a locked gate to prevent public access. 
(8)  Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of a natural color, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(9)  Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a monopole design unless the city council determines that an alternative design would better blend in to the surrounding environment. 
(10)  No advertising or identification of any kind intended to be visible form the ground or other structures is permitted, except applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal, state, or local authorities. 
(11)  Applicant must submit proof of liability and Worker's Compensation insurance. All communication towers, their antennas, and associated equipment shall be adequately insured for injury or property damage caused by structural failure of the tower or associated equipment. 
(12)  The permit will be subject to annual administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 8, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-27. - Tower setbacks. 
    Towers shall conform to each of the following minimum setback requirements: 
(1)  Towers shall be set back from the lot line as shown on a registered land survey by a minimum distance equal to one half of the height of the tower including all antennas and attachments. In industrial zoning districts, towers may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another industrially zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any easements. 
(2)  A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied, at the sole discretion of the city council, to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line support device, or similar structure. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 9, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-28. - Lights and other attachments. 
    No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any way except during time of repair or installation, any lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission, nor shall any tower have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods of construction or repair. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 10, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-29. - Towers supporting amateur radio antennas/towers. 
    In residential, commercial and agriculture districts, private towers supporting amateur radio antennas/towers may be constructed subject to the following: 
(1)  That such structures are incidental to the principal use of the premises. 
(2)  Such structures shall not exceed 30 feet in height as measured from ground level. Any proposed structure in excess of 30 feet shall be by conditional use permit. 
(3)  Metal structures shall be constructed of or treated with corrosive resistant material. Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot-resistant, non-flammable substances. 
(4)  Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to discourage climbing of the tower. 
(5)  Such structures shall be screened to the greatest extent practicable to minimize visual impact on surrounding properties. Screening shall include landscape materials for ground-mounted tower/antenna structures. the planning commission shall approve screening plans. 
(6)  No tower/antenna shall have affixed or attached to it in any way lights, signs, flashers or reflectors unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or Federal Communications Commission. 
(7)  A building permit shall be obtained prior to construction of such tower/antenna. All towers may be inspected at least once a year by the city building inspector to determine compliance with original construction standards. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 11, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 60-30. - Violations. 
    Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner and the owner shall have 30 days from the date the notification is issued to correct the violation. The owner shall notify the building official that the corrections have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another inspection will be made and the owner notified of the results. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 12, 7-25-00) 
Chapter 61 - ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 61-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to promote the effective and efficient use of energy sources, herein referred to as "alternative energy systems" (AES) to reduce dependency on and consumption of fossil fuels as sources of energy. 
(b)  The intent of this chapter is to set forth installation and operation regulations for alternative energy systems by establishing location requirements and circumstances under which the use of alternative energy sources may be implemented without detriment to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 61-2. - Enforcement, violations, remedies, and penalties. 
    Enforcement of the alternative energy systems ordinance shall be done in accordance with process and procedure established in the City of Watertown Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 61-3. - Definitions. 
    Commercial wind energy conversion system (WECS) means a WECS of equal to or greater than 40kW in total nameplate generating capacity. 
    Community solar garden means a community solar energy system that generates electricity by means of a ground-mounted or building-integrated solar energy system and that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to multiple households or businesses residing or located off-site from the location of the solar energy system in accordance with the requirements of M.S.A. § 216B.1641 or successor statute. 
    Feeder line means a power line that carries electrical power from one or more wind turbines or individual transformers associated with individual wind turbines to the point of interconnection with the electrical power grid, in the case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission systems the point of interconnection shall be the substation servicing the WECS. 
    Horizontal axis wind turbine (HAWT) means a wind turbine that revolves around an axis which is parallel to the ground. 
    Meteorological tower means towers erected to measure wind speed and direction plus other data relevant to siting WECS. 
    Nameplate generator capacity means the maximum capacity of the generator as printed on the nameplate of the generator by the manufacturer. 
    Non-commercial wind energy conversion system (WECS) means a WECS of less than 40kW in total nameplate generating capacity. 
    Photovoltaic cell means a singular assembly of materials using the photovoltaic effect to generate electrical energy. 
    Solar energy system (SES) means a device or structural design feature, a substantial purpose of which is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, electricity generating, or water heating. 
    Solar energy system, building integrated means a solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building, examples of which are roofing materials, windows, skylights, and awnings. 
    Solar energy system, ground-mounted means a freestanding solar system mounted directly to the ground using a rack or pole rather than being mounted on a building. 
    Solar panels means a panel consisting of several packaged and interconnected photovoltaic cells. 
    Rotor diameter means the diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor blades. 
    Vertical axis wind turbine (VAWT) means a wind turbine which revolves around an axis which is perpendicular to the ground. 
    WECS total height means the highest point above ground reached by a rotor tip or any other part of the WECS. 
    WECS tower means a vertical structure that supports an electrical generator, rotor blades, and/or meteorological equipment used in the operation of a WECS. 
    Wind energy conversion system (WECS) means an electrical generating facility comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, included but not limited to: Power lines, transformers, substations and meteorological towers, that operated by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy. The energy may be used on-site or distributed into the electrical grid. 
    Wind turbine means any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy through the use of airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 61-4. - Conditional use. 
    Application for alternative energy systems (AES) shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with the conditional use permit procedures established in division 5 of the Watertown Zoning Ordinance or as otherwise set forth in this chapter. A conditional use permit may be granted by the city council after demonstration by evidence that: 
(1)  The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare; 
(2)  The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted; 
(3)  The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district; 
(4)  Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and necessary facilities have been or will be provided; 
(5)  Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; 
(6)  The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10) 
ARTICLE II. - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) 
    WECS may be either a horizontal axis wind turbine (HAWT) or a vertical axis wind turbine (VAWT). This chapter is not concerned and is not intended to regulate the design, performance, or cost of the WECS. This chapter is concerned only with the safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Watertown. 

Sec. 61-5. - Application procedures. 
    The following information is required in addition to the information required for a conditional use permit application: 
(1)  The application for all WECS shall include the following information: 
a.  The name(s) of project applicant. 
b.  The name(s) of the project owner. 
c.  The legal description and address of the project. 
d.  A description of the project including: number, type, nameplate generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total height of all wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical grid. 
e.  Property survey, including the location of property lines, wind turbines, electrical wires, interconnection points with the electrical grid, and all related accessory structures. The site layout shall include distances and be drawn to scale. 
f.  Evidence that the applicant can obtain and maintain adequate liability insurance for the WECS and subject property. 
g.  Engineer's certification. 
h.  Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property. 
(2)  The application for commercial WECS shall also include: 
a.  An FAA permit application, if required. 
b.  A decommissioning plan. 
c.  A noise study, prepared by a qualified professional, that demonstrate that except for intermittent episodes, the WECS shall not emit noise in excess of the limits established in Minnesota Rules 7030 governing noise. 
d.  A shadow flicker model that demonstrates that shadow flicker shall not fall on, or in, any existing residential structure. Shadow flicker expected to fall on a roadway or a portion of a residentially zoned property may be acceptable if the flicker does not exceed 30 hours per year; and the flicker will fall more than 100 feet from an existing residence; or the traffic volumes are less than 500 vehicles (ADT). The shadow flicker model shall: 
1.  Map and describe with a 1,000 foot radius of the proposed dispersed wind energy system the topography, existing residences and location of their windows, location of other structures, wind speeds and directions, existing vegetation and roadways. The model shall represent the most probable scenarios of wind constancy, sunshine constancy, and wind directions and speed; 
2.  Calculate the locations of shadow flicker caused by the proposed project and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations, calculate the total number of hours per year of flicker at all locations. 
3.  Identify problem areas where shadow flicker will interfere with existing or future residences and roadways and describe proposed mitigation measures, including, but not limited to, a change in siting of the WECS, a change in the operation of the WECS, or grading or landscaping mitigation measures. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 61-6. - Additional submittal requirements. 
(a)  Site plan drawing. All applications for WECS conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned, displaying the following information: 
(1)  Lot lines and dimensions. 
(2)  Location and height of all buildings, structures, above ground utilities and trees on the lot, including both existing and proposed structures and guy wire anchors. 
(3)  Locations and height of all adjacent buildings, structures, above ground utilities and trees located within 350 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property in question. 
(4)  Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures located on the property in question. 
(5)  Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed WECS and its relationship to structures on adjacent lots. 
(b)  The owner shall provide engineered drawings for tower mounted units which are over 30 feet in height, or manufacturers recommended erection or mounting drawings for structure mounted units or towers 30 feet high or less. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 61-7. - Horizontal axis wind turbine (HAWT) and vertical axis wind turbine (VAWT). 
(a)  Zoning. The construction, erection, and installation of a wind energy conversion systems (WECS) will be conditionally permitted or not permitted based on the generating capacity and land use district as established in table 1 below. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose conditions on the granting of the conditional use permit for a WECS as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter. 
TABLE 1 
Zoning District Non-Commercial WECS Commercial WECS Meteorological Tower C-1, C-2, C-3 Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted I-1, PUD-BP Conditionally Permitted Conditionally Permitted Conditionally Permitted A-1 Conditionally Permitted Not Permitted Conditionally Permitted R-1, R-2 Conditionally Permitted Not Permitted Conditionally Permitted R-3, R-4 Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted P-1, P-2 Conditionally Permitted Conditionally Permitted Conditionally Permitted PUD-FH Conditionally Permitted Not Permitted Conditionally Permitted PUD-RP, PUD-TV, 
PUD-G Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted  
(b)  Setbacks. 
(1)  All required setbacks shall be measured from the center of the base. 
(2)  No part of a WECS shall be located within or above any required front, side, or rear yard setback. 
(3)  Ground mounted WECS towers shall adhere to the setbacks established in table 2 below. Setbacks for rooftop-mounted WECS shall be consistent with the underlying zoning district in which in the WECS will be sited. 
TABLE 2 
Non-Commercial WECS Commercial WECS Meteorological 

Towers Property Lines 1.1 times the total height 1.1 times the total height 1.1 times the total height Neighboring 
Structures Setback to property lines of 1.1 times the total height 750 feet Guyed towers: The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer +10 feet 
Non-guyed towers: 1.1 times the total height Road right-of-way and other right-of-ways (railroads, power lines, etc.) Guyed towers: the fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer +10 feet;eo;Non-guyed towers: 1.1 times the total height 1.1 times the height Other existing WECS NA 600 feet 600 feet Wetlands, USFW, Types III, IV, and V NA 600 feet 600 feet  
(c)  Requirements and Standards. 
(1)  Total height. Ground mounted WECS shall have a total height of less than 150 feet, as measured from the base of the tower to the peak of the highest turbine blade. The pole cannot exceed 120 feet in height, as measured from the base to the hub of the tower, not including the turbine portion of the tower. A HAWT or VAWT that is mounted to the roof of a residence shall not exceed a height of five feet above the highest roof ridge of a residence. 
(2)  Tower configuration. All wind turbines, which are part of a commercial WECS, shall be installed with tubular, monopole type tower and shall be self-supporting and shall not use guy wires or chains. 
(3)  Scale. There shall be no more than one WECS per parcel and such parcel shall be large enough to accommodate the required setbacks as determined in table 2. A principal structure must be located on the parcel where the WECS is proposed. 
(4)  Color and finish. Towers shall be painted a non-contrasting color consistent with the surrounding area such as pale gray or white or another non-obtrusive color. Finishes shall be matt or non-reflective. The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and proposed mitigation that the WECS visual impacts will be minimized to the extent possible for surrounding neighbors and the community. This may include buffering, turbine design, or appearance, or site selection. 
(5)  Lighting. No tower shall have affixed or attached lights, reflectors, flashers, or any other illumination, except for any devices required by the FAA. 
(6)  Engineering certification. For all WECS, the manufacture's engineer or another qualified engineer shall certify that the turbine, foundation and tower design of the WECS is within accepted professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions. 
(7)  Rotor clearance. Blade arcs created by the WECS shall have a minimum of 30 feet of clearance over any structure or tree within a 200-foot radius. 
(8)  Rotor safety. Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic braking device capable of stopping the WECS operation in high winds (40 miles per hour or greater). 
(9)  Feeder lines. All communication and feeder lines installed as part of a WECS shall be buried. 
(10)  Decommissioning plan. Each commercial WECS shall have a decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing WECS at the end of their serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use. The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party; such as a professional engineer, a contractor capable of decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or experience with decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial resources that will be available to pay for the decommissioning and removal of the WECS and accessory facilities. 
(11)  Noise. All WECS shall comply with Minnesota Rules 7030, as amended, governing noise. 
(12)  Complaint resolution. The owner/operator of the WECS shall develop a process to resolve complaints from nearby residents. The process shall use an independent mediator or arbitrator and include a time frame for acting on a complaint. The owner/operator shall make every reasonable effort to resolve any complaint. 
(13)  Electrical code and standards. All WECS and accessory equipment and facilities shall comply with the Minnesota State Electrical Code and other applicable standards. The tower shall be grounded and shielded to protect against natural lightning strikes, in conformance with the Minnesota State Electrical Code. 
(14)  Uniform Building Code. All WECS shall comply with the Uniform Building Code adopted by the State of Minnesota. Standard drawings of the structural components of the wind energy conversion system and support structures, including base and footings shall be provided along with engineering data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the building code. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be certified by a Minnesota licensed engineer. 
(15)  Interference. The WECS shall be filtered, shielded or otherwise designed and constructed so as not to cause electrical, radio frequency, television, and other communication signal interference. 
(16)  Shadow flicker. Shadow flicker may not exceed 30 hours per year and shall not fall more than 100 feet from an existing residential property. 
(17)  If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a safety hazard, the owner shall take expeditious action to correct the situation. 
(d)  Federal and state code compliance. 
(1)  All WECS shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and county regulatory standards including but not limited to the FAA, FCC, EPA, and MPCA. 
(2)  Copies of any permits, applicable regulations, certifications, and inspection reports must be submitted to the city prior to the WECS being put into service. 
(e)  Utility company interconnection. 
(1)  No WECS shall be interconnected with a local utility company until the utility company has reviewed and commented upon it. 
(2)  The interconnection of the WECS with the utility company shall adhere to the Minnesota State Electrical Code. 
(f)  Tower access. All WECS shall be reasonably protected against unauthorized access or climbing of a tower. To prevent unauthorized access or climbing of a tower, the WECS shall comply with at least one of the following provisions: 
(1)  Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within 12 feet of the ground. 
(2)  A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower. 
(3)  The access to the WECS shall be restricted by a six-foot high non-climbable fence with a locking gate. The gate shall remain locked at all times except when providing access to appropriate personnel associated with the WECS. 
(g)  Signs. Electric warning signs are required to be posted on the tower, transformer and substation. Signs with emergency contract information shall also be posted on the turbine or at another suitable point. Painted aviation warnings are recommended on meteorological towers less than 200 feet. All signage on site shall comply with the City of Watertown sign ordinance. Additional signs may be required on the basis of individual applications as safety needs dictate. 
(h)  Discontinued use or abandonment. A WECS shall be considered abandoned if its use has been discontinued (no energy production) for 12 consecutive months or more unless the owner notifies the city in writing of the situation causing the shutdown of the WECS and the intention to put the WECS back into service when such situation has been corrected. Situations may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Difficulty obtaining repair parts. 
(2)  Compliance with interference regulations. 
(3)  Structural repairs. 
(4)  Mandated shut-down from the EPA, FAA, FCC, MPCA, Utility Company, or other entities that may have authority to require shut-down. 
(i)  Dismantling. Upon declaration of abandonment, the WECS shall be dismantled and removed within three months by the property owner in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A demolition permit is required for the dismantling of any WECS regardless of size, unless otherwise instructed by the city building code inspector. 
(2)  Upon demolition and removal of the WECS, the property shall be restored as close as possible to its condition prior to the construction of the WECS, or to a condition compatible with the function, use, and aesthetics of the property, whichever is more appropriate as determined by the zoning administrator, planning commission, and city council. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 61-8. - Temporary meteorological equipment. 
(a)  Temporary meteorological equipment located upon a temporary tower used on an interim basis to gather wind and meteorological data to determine feasibility of the WECS shall require the processing of an interim use permit and shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No more than one such temporary tower shall be permitted on a lot at one time. 
(2)  The tower shall be placed on the property for no longer than 24 months from the date of interim use permit issuance. Any abandoned or obsolete temporary tower shall be removed within 30 days from the cessation of operation at the site. 
(3)  The tower shall be temporary by nature and shall not have permanent foundations. Guy wires may be used as long as the connections to the ground are temporary and the wires are designed to support the wind and ice load of the tower. 
a.  The tower and any related guy wires shall be protected against unauthorized climbing. 
(4)  The tower shall meet the minimum wind and ice load design required by City Code and the Minnesota State Building Code. 
(5)  The tower shall be grounded and shielded to protect against natural lightning strikes, in conformance with the Minnesota State Electrical Code. 
(6)  No tower shall have affixed or attached lights, reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for those devices required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Secs. 61-9-61-12. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 61-13. - Solar equipment. 
    Solar energy systems are permitted in accordance with table 3 and pursuant to the regulations of this chapter. 
Table 3 
Zoning District Building 
Integrated Ground- 
mounted Community 
Solar Gardens C-1, C-2, C-3 P, A C C I-1, PUD-BP P, A C C A-1 P, A C NP R-1, R-2 P, A C NP R-3, R-4 P, A C NP P-1, P-2 P, A C NP PUD-FH, PUD-RP, PUD-TV, PUD-G P, A C NP P - Permitted 
A - Accessory 
C - Conditional 
I - Interim 
NP - Not Permitted  
Any equipment or device that utilizes operates or supplies energy derived from the sun shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  The equipment or device must be designed and constructed in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes. 
(2)  The equipment or device must be in compliance with all state and federal regulations regarding co-generation of energy. 
(3)  All solar arrays or panels shall be installed or positioned so as not to cause any glare or reflective sunlight onto neighboring properties or structures, or obstruct views. 
(4)  The zoning administrator may require compliance with any other conditions, restrictions or limitations deemed reasonably necessary to protect the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(5)  A solar energy system or structure which, when installed, cannot prevent abutting properties from being developed in conformance with all applicable codes and regulations. 
(6)  Design guidelines in section 61-16 have been provided to help owners think about appropriate locations and methods for installing a solar energy system. The location of solar energy systems should consider visibility from adjacent properties, which shall be reduced to the extent possible while still maintaining solar access. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 61-14. - Conditional use. 
(a)  Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall require a conditional use permit in accordance with table 3. 
(b)  Community solar gardens shall require a conditional use permit in accordance with table 3. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 61-15. - Application procedures. 
    The application for all solar energy systems and structures shall include the following information: 
(1)  The names of project applicant. 
(2)  The name of the project owner. 
(3)  The legal description and address of the project. 
(4)  A description of the project including: Property survey with location of the solar panel system indicated on the plans including roof plan, elevation and mounting details for panel installation. The site layout shall include distances and be drawn to scale. For ground mounted solar systems, provide dimensions from existing structure on lot to solar unit edge. Provide details of solar unit's maximum height from grade and overall size of panel array. 
(5)  Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property. 
(6)  Solar applications located in a multi-family zoning district (R-2, R-3, R-4) will require a homeowner's association or management approval letter with plan submittal, if applicable. 
(7)  A decommissioning plan shall be submitted outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing the solar equipment at the end of their serviceable life. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 61-16. - Solar energy systems placement design guidelines. 
(a)  The following guidelines are to be used in the design and placement of solar energy systems for the purpose of compatible design. 
(1)  Building integrated solar energy systems shall conform to the following standards: 
a.  Solar panels (photovoltaic and solar thermal systems) can be located on pitched and flat roofs of all principal and accessory buildings within the city. 
b.  Solar panels mounted on a pitched roof shall not have a highest finished pitch more than five percent steeper than the roof pitch on which the system is mounted, and shall be no higher than 12 inches above the roof. Solar panels mounted on a flat roof shall not extend more than five feet above the roof surface. Solar panels cannot exceed the maximum structure or accessory building height for the structure they are mounted on. 
c.  Solar panels, mounting structures and all accessory components shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the outside edge or peek of a peaked roof to minimize visibility and allow roof access. 
d.  Solar panels, mounting structures and all accessory components shall be set back a minimum of four feet from the outside edge (or inside edge of the parapet) of a flat roof to minimize visibility and allow roof access. 
e.  Solar panels, solar devices, mechanical equipment and mounting structures shall have non-reflective finishes to eliminate glare. 
f.  Solar panel frames and support structures should be constructed of a neutral color and compatible with the roof surface color. 
g.  Solar panels shall be placed in a uniform manner. Consider the panels as part of the overall roof configuration. Match the slope and proportions of the array with the shape and proportions of the roof. 

(2)  Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall conform to the following standards: 
a.  Ground-mounted systems shall only be permitted in residential zoning districts on lots larger than one acre with a principle structure. 
b.  Ground-mounted systems shall be considered as a conditional use permit on property used for schools and churches with a valid conditional use permit. There is no minimum acreage requirement for school or church property. 
c.  Ground-mounted systems shall only be allowed on a parcel with an existing principal structure. 
d.  Ground-mounted systems shall be located only in rear or side yards. 
e.  Ground-mounted systems shall be wholly screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent residential structures. Methods for screening shall include berming, fencing, landscaping and/or combination thereof. 
f.  Ground-mounted systems shall be setback 50 feet from the rear yards. 
g.  Ground-mounted systems shall be setback 30 feet from the side yards. 
h.  Ground-mounted systems shall have a maximum area of 500 square feet. 
i.  The maximum height for any component of the system shall be 15 feet. 
j.  Ground-mounted systems shall be in compliance with any applicable local, state and federal regulatory standards, including building, electrical and plumbing codes. 
k.  Ground-mounted systems and their support structures shall be designed by a certified professional to meet applicable professional standards for the local soil and climate conditions. 
l.  Ground-mounted systems located on or integrated with public light and utility poles and approved by the city, can be located within the city's right-of-way. 
(3)  Community solar gardens shall conform to the following standards: 
a.  Shall be located on a parcel of at least five acres. 
b.  Shall be setback 100 feet from the front yard. 
c.  Shall be setback 150 feet from the rear and side yards. 
d.  Shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
e.  Shall be wholly screened from view from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential structure. Methods for screening shall include berming, fencing, landscaping and/or combination thereof. 
f.  Shall be subject to stormwater management and erosion and sediment control best practices and NPDES permit requirements, and shall obtain requisite permits from the MPCA, local watershed district, city and other regulatory agencies. 
g.  Shall not require the removal of existing tree stands or other significant natural resources as determined by the city. 
h.  Shall be in compliance with any applicable local, state and federal regulatory standards, including building, electrical and plumbing codes. 
i.  Shall be designed by a certified professional to meet applicable professional standards for the local soil and climate conditions. 
j.  Power and communication lines that are not defined in this section as essential services and running between banks of solar panels to electric substations or interconnections with buildings that are on adjacent parcels shall be buried underground. 
k.  Shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward inhabited buildings on adjacent properties and adjacent rights-of-way. 
l.  The limitation on the number of cumulative generating capacity of community solar garden facilities is regulated by M.S.A. § 216B.164 and related regulations. 
m.  The applicant shall submit a decommissioning plan to ensure that facilities are properly removed after their useful life. If the solar energy system remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abounded and shall constitute a public nuisance. The plan shall include provisions for removal of all structures and foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation, and a plan ensuring financial resources will be available to fully decommission the site. The city may require the posting of a bond, letter of credit or the establishment of an escrow account to ensure decommissioning. 
(Ord. No. 399, § 1, 9-13-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 399, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2016, repealed the former § 61-16 and enacted a new § 61-16 as set out herein. The former § 61-16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 351, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2010. 
Chapter 62 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-61 et seq.; planning, ch. 46.5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutting means making contact with or separated only by public thoroughfare, railroad, public utility right-of-way or navigable waters. 
    Accessory building or use means a building or use subordinate to and serving the principal building or use on the same lot, attached or detached, and clearly and customarily incidental thereto. 
    Accessory structure means an attached or detached structure or building which is subordinate to, and the use of which is subordinate to, and whose use is customarily incidental to, that of the main building, structure, or use on the same lot. 
(1)  There are seven kinds of accessory structures as follows: 
a.  "Accessory building" means an attached or detached structure ten square feet in size or greater (except storage sheds 150 feet 2 or less). Such structures are broken down into one of the following two categories: 
1.  Fully enclosed. Structures that are enclosed with walls for at least 50 percent of the perimeter of the building. These include but are not limited to garages (attached or detached), greenhouses, pool houses, sunrooms, workshops and other similar types of outbuildings; 
2.  Limited/no enclosure. Structures that are substantially open on all sides, including: 
- With solid roofs. These include but are not limited to carports, solid roofed patio/porch covers and gazebos, and lean-tos and similar outbuildings with solid roof construction; and 
- With substantially open roofs. These include but are not limited to trellis patio covers, arbors, pergolas, and similar structures constructed with a lattice-like roof structure. For purposes of this definition "substantially open" shall mean a minimum of 50 percent of the covered area is open to light and air. 
b.  "Storage shed" means a detached structure 150 square feet in size or less. 
c.  "Landscape feature" means a detached decorative structure that is placed outside of any other structure, with an open lattice-like roof or no roof. Such features are sometimes used in conjunction with plant materials for aesthetic enhancement. This definition includes but is not limited to trellises, pergolas and vertical lattice structures less than ten square feet in size, patios, retaining walls, fire pits, monuments, piers, statues, fountains/water features, and similar features. 
d.  "Pool/spa," is any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This includes but is not limited to in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas. Also includes incidental equipment and housing (e.g., pumps, heating equipment, etc.). 
e.  "Deck" means an exterior floor supported by posts, piers, or other independent supports. 
f.  "Play equipment" means any structure used for recreational purposes including but not limited to play structures, jungle gyms, swings and similar apparatus. 
g.  "Temporary structure" means a structure that is used for a temporary event, the temporary storage of household goods and for seasonal use such as a greenhouse (with a membrane roof and or sides). The maximum length of use during the calendar year shall be 180 days. This includes but is not limited to event tents, canopies, tarp garages, hoop buildings, and/or similar membrane structures. 

    Addition means a physical enlargement of an existing structure. 
    Agriculture means the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry, horticulture and gardening, the keeping or raising of domestic animals and fowl and including all activities and accessory uses incidental thereto. The term shall not include the raising and feeding of hogs by feeding garbage thereto, the raising of fur-bearing animals, nor the operation of riding academies, commercial stables or kennels. 
    Alley means a public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property, not to exceed 30 feet in width at its intersection with a street. 
    Alteration means any change in the size, shape, character or use of a building or structure. 
    Animal unit. The following animals constitute one animal unit equivalency: one cow or steer; one horse, donkey or burro; three sheep; three hogs; or 50 fowl. 
    Apartment. See Dwelling unit. 
    Apartment building. See Dwelling, multiple family. 
    Automobile repair, major, means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, frame work and major painting service. 
    Automobile repair, minor, means incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified under Automobile repair, major. 
    Automobile service station means any building or premises used for the dispensing or sale of automobile fuels, lubricating oil or grease, tires, batteries or minor automobile accessories. Services offered may include the installation of tires, batteries or minor accessories; minor automobile repairs; and greasing or washing of individual automobiles. When sales, services and repairs as detailed here are offered to the public, the premises will be classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations shall not include the sale or storage of vehicles; shall not include premises offering major automobile repairs, automobile wrecking or detached car washes. 
    Automobile wrecking. See Junkyard. 
    Auto reduction yard means a lot or yard where three or more unlicensed motor vehicles or the remains thereof are kept for the purpose of dismantling, sale of parts, sale as scrap, storage or abandonment. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having more than one-half of the clear floor to ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining finished grade. A basement shall be counted as a story when the ceiling of the basement extends more than five feet above the highest level of the adjoining finished grade, otherwise it shall not be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast means a private home which is used to provide accommodations for a charge to the public, with at most five lodging units in the principal structure and in which no more than two family-style meals per day are provided. Family-style meals consist of any meal ordered by persons at a bed and breakfast facility which is served from common food service containers, as long as any food not consumed by these persons is not reused. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by street, or a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, waterways or boundary lines of the corporate limits of the city. 
    Board means the zoning board of appeals. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodgings are provided for three or more persons, but not to exceed eight persons. 
    Broadcasting antenna, radio and television, means commercial or public broadcasting towers over 200 feet in height or more than one tower in each installation of any height or accessory use, noncommercial towers of any height if not located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use. 
    Brew pub, means a brewer who also holds one or more retail on-sale licenses and who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one licensed premises, the entire production of which is solely for consumption on tap on any licensed premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from those licensed premises as permitted by Minn. Stat. § 340A.24. 
    Buildable area means the space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum setbacks and open space requirements of this chapter are met. 
    Building means a structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land, and which provides permanent protection from the elements. When such a building is divided by party walls without openings, each portion of that building so separated will be called a separate building. 
    Building, completely enclosed, means a building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space or from other buildings or structures by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance and exit doors. 
    Building, detached, means a building surrounded by open space on the same lot as the principal building. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from curb level or its equivalent, to the highest point of the roof surface on a flat roof, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs. For buildings set back from the street line, the height of the building shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building, provided its setback from the street line is not less than the height of the finished grade above the established curb level. 
    Building line means an imaginary line separating buildable area and required yards. 
    Building, nonconforming, means any building or structure which does not comply with all the regulations of this chapter or any amendment thereto governing the zoning district in which such building or structure is located. 
    Building official means a city official appointed by the city council to provide for the enforcement of the building code. 
    Building, principal, means a nonaccessory building in which the primary use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
    Cellar means that portion of the building having more than one-half of the floor to ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining grade. 
    Church means a building, together with its accessory buildings, for public worship as the principal use and where the buildings and uses are maintained and controlled by an organized group for public worship. 
    Clinic, medical, means a building in which a group of physicians, dentists or combination thereof and professional assistants are associated for carrying on their profession. The clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory, but shall not include in-patient care or operating rooms for major surgery. 
    Cocktail room, means an accessory building or use that is located on or adjacent to a distillery that is used for the on-sale consumption of distilled liquor produced by the distiller as permitted by Minn. Stat. § 340A.22, Subd. 2. 
    Columbaria, means a place such as a vault for the respectful storage of cremated human remains within cinerary urns. Columbaria can be either free standing units, or part of another building. Columbaria are accessory to churches, places of worship or religious institutions. 
    Commerce, retail service, means an enterprise that involves the offering of a service or entertainment to the general public for compensation. 
    Commerce, retail trade, means an enterprise that involves the offering of a product to the general public for compensation. 
    Conditional use means uses which, although generally compatible with the basic use classification of a particular zone, should not be permitted to be located as a matter of right in every area included within a zone because of hazards in the use itself or special problems which its proposed location may present. 
    Condominium means a form of individual ownership with a multifamily structure which entails joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs; each dwelling unit is owned outright and each occupant owns a share of the land and other property. 
    Curb level means the level of the established curb in front of such building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb elevation has been established, the city engineer shall establish such a curb elevation. When a building has frontage on more than one street, the lowest curb level as determined above will apply. 
    District, zoning, means a portion of the corporate area of this city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the conditions of this chapter. 
    Duplex means a residential structure containing two dwelling units only, completely surrounded by open space. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwelling units; but not including hotels, motels, boardinghouses or roominghouses, recreational vehicles, tents or cabins. 
    Dwelling, detached, means one which is completely surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a single structure specifically constructed and designed for and containing four or more dwelling units, with more than one unit connecting to a common corridor or entrance way or with the dwelling units having two or more contiguous party walls. For example, four-plexes and apartment buildings but not including hotels, motels or boardinghouses. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a residential structure containing one dwelling unit only. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used exclusively as living quarters for one family or one individual only. Complete single kitchen facilities and individual bathrooms, permanently installed, shall always be included with each dwelling unit. 
    Efficiency unit means a dwelling unit with one primary room which doubles as a living room, dining room and bedroom. 
    Erosion means the wearing away of the land surface by the action of natural elements. 
    Essential services means underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution system; collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment or accessory equipment in conjunction therewith not including buildings. 
    Exotic animals means any wild mammal, reptile, or fowl, which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property. 
    Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children, or a group of not more than four persons not so related, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. 
    Farm means a tract of land which is principally used for agricultural activities such as the production of cash crops, livestock or poultry farming. Such farms may include agricultural dwellings and accessory buildings and structures necessary to the operation of the farm. 
    Feedlot means a lot, structure or building, or combination of contiguous lots, structures or buildings, intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals and specifically designed as confinement areas in which manure may accumulate. Open lots used for feeding and rearing of poultry (poultry ranges) and barns, dairy farms, swine facilities, beef lots and barns, horse stalls, mink ranches and domesticated animal zoos, shall be considered to be animal feedlots. Pastures shall not be considered to be animal feedlots. 
    Fence. Any lineal structure, including walls, or similar barriers, used to prevent access by persons or animals or prevent visual or sound transference, or visual barrier between adjacent property and the area enclosed. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or buildings on a zoning lot, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings. In particular, floor area will include: 
(1)  Basement space (see Basement. ) 
(2)  Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds 71/2 feet. 
(3)  Interior balconies and mezzanines. 
(4)  Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways. 
(5)  Stairwells at each level. 
(6)  Accessory structures. 
    Floor area, livable, means the same area as defined in floor area, excluding all areas occupied by basements, garages, porches, attics, stairways and storage, utility and heating rooms and other accessory uses. 
    Floor area ratio (F.A.R.) means the floor area of the building or buildings on a zoning lot divided by the area of the zoning lot, or in the case of planned development, by the net site area. The F.A.R. requirements, as set forth in each zoning district, shall determine the maximum floor area allowable (total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot. 
    Garage, private, means a detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles and/or recreational vehicles. 
    Garage, public, means a place where any or all of the services as set forth in the definition of automobile service station are offered to the public and the services or sales are made directly into or on the motor vehicle. 
    Garage sale means any display of used goods and sale of such goods on a property customarily used as a residence. The persons conducting the sale shall be residents of the property. 
    Grade means the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure. 
    Greenhouse means a structure used for the cultivation or protection of flowers, vegetables and nursery stock. 
    Home occupation means an accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or services. 
    Hospital means an institution providing persons with intensive medical or surgical care and devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases or mental illness. 
    Hotel means a building containing 12 or more guest rooms in which lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation and which is open to transient or permanent guests, or both, and where no provision is made for cooking in any guest room, and which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge. 
    Industry means an enterprise which involves the production, processing or storage of material, goods or products. 
    Interim use. A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until the use is no longer allowed by zoning ordinance. 
    Interim use permit. A permit issued by the city council in accordance with procedures specified in chapter 62, article II, division 8 of this Code. 
    Junkyard means an area where used, waste, discarded or salvaged equipment or materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber products, bottles and lumber. A junkyard includes an automobile wrecking or dismantling yard, but does not include uses established in conjunction with a permitted manufacturing process when within an enclosed area or building. 
    Kennel means a place where four or more dogs or four or more cats, or a combination of both, over four months of age are boarded, bred or offered for sale. 
    Loading space means that portion of a lot designed to serve the purpose of loading and/or unloading all types of vehicles. 
    Lot means a zoning lot, except as the context shall indicate a lot of record, in which case a lot is a lot of record. 
    Lot area means the area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines, measured within the lot boundaries, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly recorded lake or river. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets. 
    Lot coverage means the area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory structures. 
    Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured within the lot boundaries. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line, front, means that boundary of a lot abutting a street. On a corner lot, the shortest street lot line will be the front lot line. 
    Lot line, repair, means that boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line. 
    Lot line, rear, means any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds or register of titles prior to adoption of this chapter; or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of register of deeds or register of titles prior to adoption of this chapter. 
    Lot, through, means a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets. On such a lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the building setback line. 
    Lot, zoning, means a single tract of land which at the time of filing for a building permit is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. A zoning lot or lots may or may not coincide with a lot of record. 
    Manufactured home (modular, prefabricated) means a dwelling unit which is of closed construction and which is made or assembled in manufacturing facilities on or off the building site for assembly and/or installation on the building site. A manufactured dwelling unit may also mean a building of open construction, made or assembled in manufacturing facilities away from the building site for assembly and/or installation on the building site. Such a structure will be made permanently affixed to the building site and shall be considered congruous to a single-family dwelling. 
    Material, durable, means a hard-surfaced material such as concrete or asphalt but not including gravel or crushed rock. 
    Microdistillery, means a distillery operated within the state of Minnesota producing premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year. 
    Mobile home means a factory-assembled structure equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit on its own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit without permanent foundation; meaning that the support system is constructed with the intent that the mobile home placed thereon will be moved from time to time at the convenience of the owner. 
    Motel (motor court, motor hotel) means an establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom, located on a single zoning lot and designed for use by transient automobile tourists and furnishing customary hotel services. 
    Motor vehicle means any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer or recreational vehicle propelled or drawn by mechanical power. 
    Multiple-family dwelling. See Dwelling, multiple-family. 
    Noxious matter or material means material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. 
    Nursing, convalescent and retirement homes means a home for aged, chronically ill or convalescent persons in which two or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food, shelter and care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases or mental illness. 
    Obstruction means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property. 
    Odorous matter means any material or matter that yields an odor which is offensive in any way. 
    Open space means any open area not covered by structures owned by a person or persons, including but not limited to the following uses: required or established yard areas, parking areas, sidewalks, school walks, trails, recreation areas, groundwater recharge areas, floodplain, floodway, flood fringe, erodible sloped, woodland and soils with severe limitations for development. 
    Outdoor wood-burning boilers means any stand-alone, outdoor furnace device which burns wood or other solid, organic fuel, and which is used solely for the purpose of heating a primary or accessory structure(s) or building(s), including but not limited to residential or commercial structures or buildings, living and non-living spaces, swimming pools, hot tubs or whirlpool baths, saunas, and other uses. Such device typically conveys heat by means of distributing heated water or fluid through pipes which are connected from the outdoor wood-burning boiler to its respective structure or building. Stand-alone, wood-burning boilers or furnaces located and used indoors or inside a primary or accessory structure or building, and which are used for the purpose of providing heat to said structure or building, are not included in this definition. 
    Ornamental fence means a fence through which clear vision is possible from one side to the other for 50 percent or more of the structure, as viewed on a horizontal plane. Such fence may include picket, post and rail, split rail, but not chain link. 
    Parking space, automobile, means a suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area off the public street right-of-way, either within or outside of a building, of sufficient size to store one standard automobile, but in no event less than 180 square feet, exclusive of passageways, driveways or other means of circulation. 
    Particulate matter means dust, smoke or any other form of airborne pollution in the form of minute separate particles. 
    Party wall means a wall which divides a structure into two independent buildings. 
    Performance standards means criteria established to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, glare or heat, generated by or inherent in uses of land and buildings. 
    Planned unit development means a parcel of land which is of a minimum of ten acres, sufficient to create its own environment and which is under single ownership or unified control and which may be granted waivers from specific land use regulations and design standards in order to accomplish the purposes of the planned unit development regulations as specified in this chapter. 
    Principal structure means the main structure for which the premises is devoted and the primary purpose for which the premises exists. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the primary purpose for which the premises exists. 
    Property lines mean the lines bounding a zoning lot as defined in this section. 
    Quarter quarter section means a quarter of a quarter section as determined by the United States Rectangular Land Survey System usually consisting of approximately 40 acres. A government lot as determined by the rectangular land survey system shall be considered a quarter quarter section for the purposes of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, rights-of-way for public or private transportation shall not impact the completeness of a quarter quarter section. 
    Recreational vehicle means any type of vehicle, either self-powered or drawn by another vehicle, that is used primarily for purposes of recreation or transportation of recreational vehicles, equipment, etc., including but not limited to campers, motor homes, travel trailers, snowmobiles, camper trailers, motorcycle trailers, snowmobile trailers, horse trailers, etc. 
    Required yard means that portion of a front, side, or rear yard required by establishment of minimum setbacks. 
Required Yard 
    Secondary front yard means a yard fronting on a public street, not the front yard. On a corner lot, the yard with the longest street lot line shall be the secondary front yard, on a through lot, the yard opposite the street with the lot address shall be the secondary front yard. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the front, side, or rear lines of the building or structure (excluding steps, unroofed porches and overhangs) and the front, side, or rear lot lines, respectively (unless specifically designated otherwise). 
    Sexually oriented uses includes adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult motion picture sales/rentals, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bath house/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by M.S.A. § 617.241, as may be amended, are not included. 
(1)  Specified anatomical areas: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)  Specified sexual activities: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
b.  Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
d.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or 
e.  Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; or 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(3)  Sexually oriented uses, accessory: The offering of retail goods for sale which are classified as sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines, the sale and/or rental of adult motion pictures, the sale of adult novelties, and the like. 
(4)  Sexually oriented uses, principal: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as sexually oriented uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Sexually oriented use, body painting studio. An establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas." 
b.  Sexually oriented use, bookstore. A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, video tape, or motion picture film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
c.  Sexually oriented use, cabaret. A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
d.  Sexually oriented use, companionship establishment. A companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
e.  Sexually oriented use, conversation/rap parlor. A conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
f.  Sexually oriented use, escort service. A business that provides one or more persons to accompany a customer to places and/or activities that occur off-premises of the escort service operation, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
g.  Sexually oriented use, health/sport club. A health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
h.  Sexually oriented use, hotel or motel. Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
i.  Sexually oriented use, massage parlor, health club. A massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
j.  Sexually oriented use, mini-motion picture theater. A building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
k.  Sexually oriented use, modeling studio. An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in "specified sexual activities" or display "specified anatomical areas" while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
l.  Sexually oriented use, motion picture arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
m.  Sexually oriented use, motion picture theater. A building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
m.  Sexually oriented use, novelty business. A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation. 
n.  Sexually oriented use, sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
o.  Sexually oriented use, steam room/bath house facility. A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bath house facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Sight triangle means that triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the point of intersection of the right of way of two intersecting streets, thence 20 feet along one right of way line, thence diagonally to a point on the other right of way line 20 feet from the point of beginning, thence to the point of beginning. 
Sight Triangle 
    Sign means a name, identification, description, display, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view of the general public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
    Single-family dwelling. See Dwelling, single-family. 
    Site area means the area of a parcel of land to be developed under the R-2 and R-3 district regulations and to be developed as part of a single development action or a single stage of a staged development. 
    Small brewer, means a brewer that produces less than 20,000 barrels of malt liquor in a year. 
    Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment. 
    Stable means any building, structure or premises that allows horses to be boarded and available for rent or hire or allows any type of instruction and training. 
    Street, arterial, means a street which provides for traffic movement to and from municipalities and the surrounding areas, to and from freeways/expressways and collector streets, and between major parts of an urban area. Intersections are at grade and direct access to abutting property should be avoided. 
    Street, collector, means a street which collects and distributes the internal traffic within an area of a community such as a residential neighborhood or industrial district, and between arterial and local streets. It provides some access to abutting property. 
    Street, local, means a street of little or no continuity, designed to provide access to abutting property and ideally leading into collector streets. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which required a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but without limiting the generality of the foregoing advertising signs, billboards or fences. 
    Structural alteration means any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations. 
    Tap room, means an accessory building or use that is located on or adjacent to a brewery location producing no more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor that is used for the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by the brewer as permitted by Minn. Stat. § 340A.26. 
    Telecommunications antenna means the surface from which wireless radio signals are sent and received. 
    Telecommunications tower means a structure designed and constructed to support one or more telecommunication antennas and including all appurtenant devices. 
    Townhouse means a single-family dwelling unit horizontally attached to one or more similar dwelling units in a linear arrangement and structured on individual lots. Features of townhouses are their private yards and private entrances. A townhouse development normally includes common open space for athletic and recreational purposes. Townhouses by this definition do not include multiple units in a single structure such as triplexes, four-plexes or apartment buildings. 
    Toxic matter or material means those materials which are capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure, built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
    Usable open space means that required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by buildings, and available to all the occupants of the building. This space of minimum prescribed dimensions shall not be devoted to service driveways or off-street parking space and/or loading berths but shall be usable for greenery, recreational space and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or buildings thereon are designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this chapter. 
    Use, accessory, means a use subordinate to the principal use or building on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto as well as attached or detached therefrom. 
    Use, conditional, means a use, either public or private, which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district. After due consideration in each case of the impact of such use upon neighboring land, and the public need for the particular use at the particular location, such conditional use may or may not be granted. 
    Use, incompatible, means a use which is incapable to direct association with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruent or discordant. 
    Use, nonconforming, means any use of land, buildings or structures lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this chapter which does not comply with all the regulations of this chapter or any amendments hereto governing the zoning district in which such use is located. 
    Use, permitted, means a use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards, if any, of such district or districts. 
    Use, principal, means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. 
    Variance means a modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of property, except that modification in the allowable uses within a district shall not be considered a variance. 
    View means a range of sight including pleasing vistas or prospects or scenes. Views may include, but are not limited to, the sight of geologic features, lakes, rivers, woodlands, skylines, and distant cities. 
    View corridor means the line of sight identified as to height, width, and distance of an observer toward an object or objects of significance to the community (e.g. ridgeline, lakes, rivers, woodlands, skylines, distant cities); the route that directs a viewer's attention. 
    Warehousing means the commercial storage of merchandise and personal property. 
    Wholesaling means a business engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers. 
    Wireless support structure means a new or existing structure in a right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by the city. 
    Yard means an open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, which yard is unoccupied and unobstructed. A yard extends along a lot line and to a depth or width measured from the lot line specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which such zoning is located. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between the side lot lines. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard. 
    Zoning map means the map setting forth the boundaries of the zoning districts of the city which map is a part of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Zoning officer means the zoning officer of the city as duly appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 193, § B, 12-28-93; Ord. No. 206, § 1, 4-22-97; Ord. No. 235, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 242, § 1, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 244, § 1, 3-11-03; Ord. No. 290, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 334, § 1, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 355, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 7-14-15; Ord. No. 392, § 1, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 5-10-16; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-2. - Purpose. 
    The basic purpose of this chapter is to ensure public health, safety and general welfare in accordance with the official comprehensive plan of the city, and with adopted development goals, policies and proposals contained therein. Toward this end, this chapter shall divide the geographical area within the corporate limits of the city into districts and shall establish regulations pertaining to the use and location of structures and to the use of land within such districts. More specifically, such regulations shall be designed to achieve the following objectives: 
(1)  To protect existing urban development from potential negative effects of conflicting uses, but also to permit broad development opportunities with the substantial undeveloped portions of the community. 
(2)  To foster a strong and balanced tax base in response to municipal and school district financial requirements. 
(3)  To achieve an equitable balance between the rate and intensity of land development and the financial capability of the city and school district to provide necessary and desirable public facilities and services. 
(4)  To prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of land. 
(5)  To provide and maintain a safe and efficient traffic circulation system. 
(6)  To preserve the area's substantial natural amenities such as rivers, lakes, bluffs, hills, valleys and woodlands. 
(7)  To promote a visually pleasing environment throughout the community within urban as well as rural areas; within commercial and industrial as well as public and residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 193, § A(2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-3. - Geographic jurisdiction. 
    The geographic jurisdiction of this chapter shall be the entire area within the corporate limits of the city and will include all lands under orderly annexation agreements between the city and effected townships. Territory that may be added to the city by annexation, merger or other means shall be classified within the agriculture zoning district until such time that the city council, after referral to and recommendation by the planning commission, may rezone all or portions of the added territory to more appropriate classifications. 
(Ord. No. 193, § A(3), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-4. - Legal authority. 
    This chapter is enacted in accordance with the authority granted by M.S.A. § 462.357. 
(Ord. No. 193, § A(4), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-5. - Application of provisions. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of the chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. 
(c)  No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 193, § C(1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-6. - Separability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the several provisions of this chapter are separable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of such provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically included in such judgment. 
(Ord. No. 193, § C(2B), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-7. - Essential services. 
    Essential services shall be subdivided into two classes for consideration under this chapter: governmentally owned and operated or privately owned and operated. 
(1)  Governmentally operated and owned essential services (sewer, water, etc.) shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state law and ordinances of the city. It is the intention that these essential services are exempt from the application of this chapter. 
(2)  Privately owned and operated essential services (telephone, electric, gas, etc.) are subject to provisions of this chapter, unless specifically exempted by a provision of this chapter. These essential services are also subject to other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 193, § C(3), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-8-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-31. - Zoning officer/administrator. 
    The specific duties of the zoning officer include: 
(1)  Providing zoning information upon request. 
(2)  Receiving applications for conditional use permits, variances, amendments and appeals, referring such applications to the appropriate official body, notifying affected property owners of required public hearings, and publishing notice of such hearings. 
(3)  Notifying applicants for conditional use permits, variances, amendments and appeals of actions taken by the official bodies relative to their applications. 
(4)  Periodically inspecting buildings, structures, and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. In regard to performance standards, the zoning officer may require the services of a testing laboratory to determine compliance. The cost of employing such laboratory shall be paid for by the owner if a violation of this chapter is established, otherwise by the city. 
(5)  Investigating violations, notifying persons accused of violations and describing the nature of such, and initiating appropriate actions against violators as provided by law. 
(6)  Maintaining permanent and current records of this chapter and the official zoning map including but not limited to special use permits, variances, amendments, appeals and applications therefor. 
(7)  Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions, alterations; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(1), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-32-62-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 62-51. - Authority to establish. 
    M.S.A. § 462.354 requires any municipality having in effect a zoning ordinance to provide by ordinance for a board of appeals and adjustments. Such statute also states that the governing body may provide alternatively that there be a separate board of appeals and adjustments or that the governing body, the planning commission, or a committee of the planning commission serve as the board of appeals and adjustments, and it may provide an appropriate name for the board. The board may be given such other duties as the governing body may direct. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-52. - Establishment. 
    The city council is hereby established as the required board of appeals and adjustments, such board to be hereinafter referred to as the board of appeals or the board. The city council, acting as the board of appeals, shall be vested with such administrative authority as is hereinafter provided or as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(2A), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-53. - Duties. 
    The duties of the board of appeals shall be to: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning officer. 
(2)  Hear and decide requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Interpret the meaning of this chapter in cases of ambiguity and to make rulings with respect to the application of the ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(2B), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-54. - Proceedings. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may request the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(2C), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-55. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any official or department of the city affected by any decision of the zoning officer. Such appeals shall be taken within 60 days of such decision by filing with the zoning officer a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning officer shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(3), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-56-62-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 62-76. - Duties in zoning administration. 
    Planning commission duties in zoning administration shall be to: 
(1)  Hold public hearings on applications for amendments to this chapter. The commission shall not have the authority to make changes or amendments to this chapter, it shall act in a purely advisory manner to the city council making its recommendation in all cases referred to it, and transmitting them to the city council for final action. 
(2)  Consider applications for conditional use permits provided for within this chapter and to transmit its recommended action to the city council for final action. 
(3)  Consider applications for variances and appeals and to transmit a recommendation to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(4), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-77-62-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS AND OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 62-101. - Building permits. 
    Hereafter no person shall erect, alter, remodel, wreck or move any kind of a structure, building or part thereof without first securing a building permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(5.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-102. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    Hereafter, no new building or addition, and no land whose use has been changed, shall be occupied other than for a public utility use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued stating that the new occupancy complies with all applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(5.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-103. - Exhibits. 
    Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by the following exhibits unless waived by the zoning officer: 
(1)  Boundary survey of an area including the property in question and 100 feet beyond its outer boundaries showing existing utilities, lot boundaries and dimension, buildings and easements. Foliage, topography, waterways and soil boring are to be included if pertinent. 
(2)  Plot plan or certificate of survey indicating location, size and place of proposed structure and yards, parking and loading facilities, vehicular access and egress and utility plan including surface drainage. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(5.3), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-104. - Permit application procedure. 
    The procedure for applying for a building permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  The property owner or his agent shall meet with the zoning officer to explain his situation, learn the procedures and obtain an application form. 
(2)  The applicant shall file the complete application form, together with the required exhibits including building plans, with the zoning officer or building official. 
(3)  The building official shall review application and plans and determine their compatibility with the building code and ordinances. 
(4)  The zoning officer determines the permit fee and collects the fee from the applicant. The building permit will then be issued if the proposed project complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(5.4), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-105. - Expiration of building permit. 
(a)  If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance thereof, such permit shall expire; it shall be canceled by the zoning officer and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons effected. 
(b)  If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof, or if no work has been done on the building for 90 days, such permit shall expire and be canceled by the zoning officer, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons effected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(5.4), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-106. - Building permit stop order. 
    For discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures refer to section 62-31(7). 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(5.6), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-107-62-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 

Sec. 62-121. - Required. 
    Before a building or premises is devoted to any use classified under conditional uses in this chapter, a conditional use permit must be granted by the city council following a recommendation by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(7.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-122. - Exhibits. 
    The following exhibits shall be required for a conditional use permit: 
(1)  The boundary survey and plot plan as required for building permit applications. 
(2)  Elevation drawings indicating the design treatment of all proposed buildings and structures, and general floor plans of such buildings. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(7.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-123. - Procedures. 
    The procedure for obtaining a conditional use permit is as follows: 
(1)  The property owner or his agent shall meet with the zoning officer to explain his situation, learn the procedures and obtain an application form. 
(2)  The applicant shall file the completed application form together with the required exhibits with the zoning officer and shall pay the required filing fee. 
(3)  The zoning officer shall transmit the application and exhibits to the planning commission and shall place such matter on the next planning commission agenda. 
(4)  The planning commission shall study the application to determine possible adverse effects of the proposed conditional use and to determine what additional requirements may be necessary to reduce such adverse effects and within 45 days of filing shall recommend one of three actions: approval, denial, or conditional approval. The planning commission may hold such public hearings as it may consider necessary on a proposal for a conditional use permit. 
(5)  The planning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council for its official action. 
(6)  The city council shall act on the application within 45 days after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(7.3), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-124. - Standards for granting conditional use permits. 
    A conditional use permit may be granted by the city council after demonstration by evidence that: 
(1)  The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare. 
(2)  The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(3)  The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. 
(4)  Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary facilities have been or will be provided. 
(5)  Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. 
(6)  The conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. 
The planning commission may recommend, and the city council may stipulate such, conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the requirements specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(7.4), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-125. - Revocation of conditional use permits. 
(a)  Where a conditional use permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such permit shall become null and void without further action by the planning commission or the city council unless work thereon commences within one year of the date of granting such conditional use. A conditional use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular use and shall expire if that use shall cease for more than 12 consecutive months. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a conditional use permit shall be a misdemeanor and shall also constitute sufficient cause for the revocation of the conditional use permit by the city council following a public hearing. The property owner shall be notified in advance of the city council's review of the permit. 
(c)  Inspections will be conducted at least annually to determine compliance with the terms of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(7.5), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-126. - Uses by conditional use permit not nonconforming uses. 
    Uses authorized by conditional permit under this section shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use, but only in accordance with the conditions set forth in the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(7.6), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-127-62-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VARIANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 368, §§ 1-7, adopted Jan. 24, 2012, amended Div. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 6, §§ 6-142-62-144, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 193, § F(6.1)-(6.4), adopted Dec. 28, 1993. 

Sec. 62-141. - Purpose. 
    A variance from this chapter may be requested only by the owner of the property or the owner's approved representative to which the variance would apply. A variance may not be granted which would allow the use of property in a manner not permitted within the applicable zoning district. Variations from the provisions of this chapter may be granted by the board of appeals where practical difficulties in complying with such provisions are determined to exist. The board may impose such restrictions and conditions upon the premises benefited by a variance as it considers necessary so that the public health, safety and general welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 62-142. - Exhibits. 
    The following exhibits shall be required for a variance: 
(1)  A completed application form signed by the fee owner of the property or by the fee owner's authorized representative; 
(2)  The certificate of survey of the property; 
(3)  A preliminary site development plan which includes a utility plan, grading and erosion control plan, a lighting plan, a signage plan, and a landscaping plan; 
(4)  Evidence of ownership of the property or enforceable option to purchase the property; 
(5)  All necessary information to fully describe the nature of the request and use, its operation and intensity, location on the site, affect on abutting and adjacent properties and site improvements necessary to conduct the use; 
(6)  Any other information that may be required by the city to evaluate the application. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 2, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 62-143. - Procedure. 
    The procedure for applying for a variance from the regulations of this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  The property owner or his agent shall meet with the zoning officer to explain his situation, learn the procedures and obtain an application form. 
(2)  The applicant shall file the completed application form, together with the required exhibits, with the zoning officer and shall pay the required filing fee. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the application as complete, the zoning officer shall set the date for a public hearing. Public hearings on the granting of variances shall be held in the manner provided in M.S.A. § 462.357, Subd. 3. The zoning officer shall transmit the application and required exhibits to the planning commission. 
(4)  The planning commission shall consider application for variance and shall recommend to the board of appeals one of three actions-approval, denial, or conditional approval. 
(5)  The board of appeals may hold such public hearings as it may consider necessary on a proposed variance. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 3, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 62-144. - Standards for granting a variance. 
    A variance may be granted if all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Variances shall only be permitted when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter and when the variances are consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  When there are practical difficulties in complying with the zoning ordinance. "Practical difficulties," as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by this chapter. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. 
(3)  The purpose of the variance is not based upon economic considerations alone. 
(4)  The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner. 
(5)  The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
(6)  Variances shall be granted for each sheltered construction as defined in M.S.A. § 216C.06, Subd. 14, when in harmony with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 4, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 62-145. - Violations of conditions imposed upon variance; termination. 
    The violation of any written condition shall constitute a violation of this chapter. It is a condition of every variance that the property for which the permit is issued not be subdivided or the lot lines of the property altered. A variance, except a variance approved in conjunction with platting, shall become void within one year following issuance unless substantial action has been taken by the petitioner in reliance thereon. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 5, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 62-146. - Denial. 
    Variances may be denied by the board of appeals and such denial shall constitute a finding and determination that the conditions required for approval do not exist. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 6, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 62-147. - Fees. 
    Each application shall include the appropriate fees. Fees shall be in an amount determined by the city council from time to time. 
    In addition to the application fee, the applicant for plan review must also pay all costs incurred by the city including city staff time, legal, engineering, administrative, building inspection services, and services of other persons or entities employed or contracted by the city for, or in any way involved in, the review and inspection of the application for compliance with this chapter. Under no condition shall the fee be refunded for the failure of the city to approve the applicant's request. All charges incurred for this review shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 7, 1-24-12) 
Secs. 62-148-62-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 62-161. - Adoption. 
    This chapter may be amended, changed or altered only by a favorable (two-thirds) majority vote of all members of the city council, and only after a public hearing has been duly advertised and held by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(8.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-162. - Kinds of amendments. 
    An amendment to this chapter may be one of the following: 
(1)  A change in a district's boundary (rezoning). 
(2)  A change in a district's regulations. 
(3)  A change in any other provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(8.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-163. - Initiation of proceedings. 
    Proceedings for amending this chapter shall be initiated by at least one of the following three methods: 
(1)  By petition of an owner or owners of property which is proposed to be rezoned, or for which district regulation changes are proposed. 
(2)  By recommendations of the planning commission. 
(3)  By action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(8.3), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-164. - Exhibits. 
    Required exhibits for rezoning or district regulation changes initiated by property owner: 
(1)  The boundary survey and plot plan as required for building permit applications. 
(2)  Elevation drawings indicating the design treatment of all proposed buildings and structures, and general floor plans of such buildings. 
(3)  A list of all property owners within the affected area and within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the subject area. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(8.4), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-165. - Procedures. 
    The procedure for a property owner to initiate a rezoning or district regulation change applying to his property is as follows: 
(1)  The property owner or his agent shall meet with the zoning officer to explain his situation, learn the procedures and obtain an application form. 
(2)  The applicant shall file the completed application form together with the required exhibits with the zoning officer and shall pay the required filing fee. 
(3)  The zoning officer shall transmit the application and required exhibits to the planning commission. Written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed at least ten days before the date of the hearing to the property owners within the affected zone and within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the area in question; however, failure of any property owner to receive notification shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(4)  The zoning officer shall have notice of the required public hearing published in the official municipal newspaper not less than ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(5)  The planning commission shall hold the public hearing and shall, within 45 days of filing, recommend one of three actions: approval, denial or conditional approval. 
(6)  The planning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council for its official action. 
(7)  The city council shall act upon the application within 45 days after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(8.5), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-166. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for building permits, variances, conditional use permits and amendments shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public interest by the city council or by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(8), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-167. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $700.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(10), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-168. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city council or board of appeals acting pursuant to this chapter may have such decision or order reviewed by an appropriate remedy in the district court, subject to the provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 193, § F(11), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-169-62-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - INTERIM USE 

Sec. 62-175. - Purpose and intent. 
    In addition to the general purposes stated in this chapter, it is intended that the interim use permit procedures allow flexibility in the use of land or structures in the city when such uses are not permanent and when such uses meet appropriate conditions and performance standards that protect the public health, safety, and welfare. An interim use is a temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event or until zoning regulations no longer permit such use. The use must cease upon termination of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 2, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 62-176. - Procedures. 
    The information required and the procedure to be followed for all interim use permit applications shall be the same as that required for a conditional use permit as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 2, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 62-177. - Termination. 
    An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever comes first: 
(1)  The date stated in the permit. 
(2)  Upon violation of the condition under which the permit was issued. 
(3)  Upon change in the city's zoning regulations that render the use nonconforming. 
(4)  The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning district. 
Upon termination, an interim use shall subside and the user shall return the property to its original state. As a condition of approval, the city may request a deposit in the form of a cash escrow or letter of credit for security purposes to return the site to its prior condition. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 2, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 62-178. - Standards for granting interim use permits. 
(a)  The interim use must meet or exceed the performance standards set forth in this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The use is an interim use in the respective zoning district. 
(c)  The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty. 
(d)  The use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on the public. 
(e)  The user agrees to any conditions that the city council deems appropriate for permission of the use. Such conditions shall be set forth in a resolution approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 2, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 62-179. - Conditions of approval. 
    In permitting a new interim use permit, or amending an existing interim use permit, the planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose, in addition to the standards sand requirement expressly specified by this Code, additional conditions that the planning commission or city council consider necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding area or the community as a whole, to protect the value of other property, and to achieve the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. These conditions may include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions. 
2.  Limiting the height, size, or location of building. 
3.  Controlling the location and number of vehicular access points. 
4.  Increasing the street width. 
5.  Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces. 
6.  Limiting the number, size, and location and lighting of signs. 
7.  Requiring fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 2, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 62-180. - Interim uses. 
    Interim uses include any uses stated as a conditional use in each zoning district of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 2, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 62-181. - Violations and revocation. 
    An interim use permit may be revoked if: (1) the property is found to be in violation of the conditions listed in the interim use permit, or (2) if access to the property for purpose of making an inspection is denied. Prior to revocation the user shall be informed of the alleged violation and the city council shall hold a public hearing after at least ten days written notice to the user. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 2, 11-28-06) 
ARTICLE III. - CONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 

Sec. 62-191. - Generally. 
    This chapter establishes separate and distinct districts, each of which is appropriate for certain specified uses and conditions. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the regulation of existing structures, uses and lots that do not conform to the requirements of the district in which they are located and to specify the requirements, circumstances and conditions under which the nonconforming structure, use or lot may be continued. In furtherance of the goals and purpose of this chapter, it is also the intent of the article that all nonconforming uses shall eventually be eliminated or made to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 193, § C(4), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 369, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 62-192. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time of the adoption of an official control under this chapter, may be continued, including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement, but not including expansion, unless: 
(1)  The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or 
(2)  Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than 50 percent of its market value, as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged. In this case, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon a zoning or building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property or water body. 
(b)  Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy. The city may, by ordinance, permit an expansion or impose upon nonconformities reasonable regulations to prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health, welfare or safety. This chapter does not prohibit the city from enforcing an ordinance that applies to adults-only bookstores, adults-only theaters, or similar adults-only businesses, as defined by ordinance. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), the city shall regulate the repair, replacement, maintenance, improvement or expansion of nonconforming uses and structures in floodplain areas to the extent necessary to maintain eligibility in the national flood insurance program and not increase flood damage potential or increase the degree of obstruction to flood flows in the floodway. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any detached single-family dwelling that is on a nonconforming lot or that is a nonconforming use or structure may be altered, or expanded provided, however, that the nonconformity may not be increased. If a setback of a dwelling is nonconforming, no additions may be added to the nonconforming side of the building unless the addition meets setback requirements. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the placing of a structure in a safe condition when the structure is declared unsafe by the building official, provided that a building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is declared unsafe. 
(f)  Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful nonconforming residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, moved, or extended to occupy a greater area of land, but may continue at the size and intensity and in the manner of operation existing upon the date of its nonconformity. 
(1)  A nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended to occupy a greater area of land if any such enlargement or extension is required by the laws, rules, or ordinances of the county, state, or United States of America, or is necessary in order to comply with a written recommendation directed specifically to that use by any such governmental authority or an enforcement agency thereof having the written recommendation relates to the health, safety, and/or welfare of the general public. Allowed enlargements or extension s pursuant to this subsection including, but are not limited to, those done to comply with the requirements of American with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(2)  A nonconforming use allowed to enlarge or extend pursuant to subsection (g)(l) of this section may also enlarge or extend to regain any lost capacity to function in the manner the use is conducted, which capacity was lost as the result of compliance with any such law, rule, ordinance, or written recommendation of any such governmental authority. However, such recaptured capacity shall not exceed the area, size, height, or intensity of use of the original such capacity lost as a result of such compliance. 
(3)  A nonconforming use may be reconfigured if, in the discretion of the city, such reconfiguration would lessen the nonconformity, abate nuisances, and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. If a use is reconfigured, the property owner must enter into an agreement with the city, drafted by the city attorney, stating, among other things, the purpose of the reconfiguration and that the nonconforming use will remain a legal nonconforming use. 
(h)  No such nonconforming use or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was conducted at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, nor shall such use or structure be moved in whole or in part to any other lot except to bring it into conformance with the regulations of this chapter. 
(i)  A nonconforming use or structure that has been discontinued or abandoned for a period of one year shall not be re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(j)  A nonconforming use may be changed to lessen the nonconformity of that use. Thereafter the use may not be so altered as to increase the nonconformity. 
(k)  Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in the forgoing subsections of this section, if approved by the city council a nonconforming land use may be changed to another nonconforming land use of less intensity if it is in the public interest. In all instances the applicant has the burden of proof regarding the relative intensities of uses. 
(Ord. No. 193, § C(5), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 369, § 2, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 62-193. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  No variance shall be required to construct a detached single-family dwelling on a vacant nonconforming lot of record, excluding platted outlots, provided that it fronts on a public street or approved private street and provided that the proposed structure will meet the minimum setback requirements of this chapter which currently apply to the lot. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
(b)  Lots in same ownership. If two or more lots, or combinations of lots and portions of lots, with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of such parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliances with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter. If part of the parcel is sold, the sale shall constitute a self-created hardship under the variance provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Except as otherwise specifically provided for detached single-family dwellings, there shall be no expansion, intensification, replacement or structural changes of a structure on a nonconforming lot. 
(d)  Nonconforming lots containing a principal structure may add a permitted accessory structure provided that the accessory structure will meet all minimum setback requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Additions to principal or accessory structures located on nonconforming lots may be permitted provided that any such addition will meet all minimum setback requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 193, § C(7), 12-28-93) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, § 3, adopted Jan. 24, 2012, deleted former § 62-193 which pertained to nonconforming uses and derived from Ord. No. 193, § C(6), adopted Dec. 28, 1993. Said ordinance also redesignated former § 62-194 as § 62-193. 
Secs. 62-194-62-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-211. - Zoning map/districts. 
    The city is hereby divided into classes of zoning districts as listed below and as shown on the official zoning map, which together with all the explanatory and supplemental matter thereon is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
A-1 Agriculture/open space 
R-1 Low density residence 
R-2 Medium density residence 
R-3 High density residence 
R-4 Manufactured housing residence 
C-1 Limited commerce 
C-2 General commerce 
C-3 Downtown central business district 
I-1 Light industrial 
P-1 Parks/open space 
P-2 Public facilities 
PUD Planned unit development 
(Ord. No. 193, § C(8), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 235, § 2, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 62-212. - Zone boundary interpretation. 
    The location and boundaries of each zoning district established by this chapter are as set forth in zoning district sections of this chapter or are shown on the official zoning map. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules will apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits and orderly annexation boundaries shall be construed as following such city limits and orderly annexation boundaries. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines; and in the event of a change in the shore line, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, river canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (5) of this section, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the board of appeals may permit, as a special exemption, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 193, § C(9), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-213. - Table 1. 
Table 1. Lot Requirements and Standards 
  
Zoning 
Districts Principal 
height 
maximum 
(feet) Accessory 
height 
maximum 
(feet) Accessory 
structure 
maximum 
lot area Number of 
accessory 
structures 
per lot Lot size 
minimum 
(sq. ft.) Lot width 
minimum 
(feet) Front yard 
(feet) Corner 
side yard 
(feet) Side 
interior 
(feet) Rear yard 
(feet) Minimum 
site area 
per dwelling 
unit 
(sq. ft.) Maximum 
number of 
dwelling 
units per 
43,560 
sq. ft. Floor area 
ratio Garage w/ 
Access 
on alley 
(feet to alley) Usable open 
space per 
dwelling unit 
(sq. feet) Agriculture A-1 40 30 10% 3 43,560* 125 35 35 15 25 1 per 40 acres 1 0 25 n/a Residential R-1 30 17 10% 3 12,000 80 35 35 10 10 12,000 3.6 0.4 25 n/a R-2 *SFR-detach 30 17 10% 3 8,000 66 30 30 5 5 8,000 5.5 n/a 25 1,000 Townhouse 30 17 10% 3 2,500 25 30 30 5 5 5,000 8 Duplex 30 17 10% 3 6,500 80 30 30 5 5 13,000 6.5 Others 30 17 10% 3 8,000 100 30 30 5 5 R-3 *MFR, 1 bed 30 17 10% 3 21,780 130 35 35 10 20 2,700 16 n/a 25 400 MFR, 2 bed 30 17 10% 3 21,780 130 35 35 10 20 3,400 16 400 MFR, 3 bed 30 17 10% 3 21,780 130 35 35 10 20 4,600 16 400 Commercial C-1 35 PCR 10% 3 7,200 50 35 35 10 20 n/a n/a 1 25 n/a Commercial C-2 35 PCR 10% 3 15,000 90 45 45 10 10 n/a n/a 1 25 n/a C-3-CBD 35 PCR 10% 3 7,500 50 0 0 0 or 1/12 building height 20 n/a n/a 2 25 n/a I-1 Light Industrial 35 PCR 10% 3 20,000 100 50 50 10 20 n/a n/a 1 25 n/a PUD SFR-detach 30 17 10% 2 10,000 70 25 25 7.5 10 10,000 4.3 .25 25 1,000 SFR-attached 30 17 10% 2 PCR PCR 25 25 PCR 10 PCR PCR .25 25 500 Other PCR PCR PCR PCR PCR PCR 25 25 10 10 PCR PCR PCR PCR PCR  
Notes: 
43,560 sq. ft. = 1 acre 
*SFR = single-family residence 
*MFR = multifamily residence 
Floor to area to ratio = total floor area of principal and accessory structures in direct ratio to the gross area of the lot 
P1 and P2 are requirements subject to planning commission and city council approval. 
For R-4 requirements see Ordinance No. 65. 
*PCR=planning commission recommendation needed. 
*For garages placed with the entrance/exit onto the alley, the setback from the building to the alley shall be 25 feet. 
In the case where a structure was legally constructed prior to January 20, 1981, the side yard setback, front yard setback, and the corner side yard setback shall be the lesser of either the building setback as provided in Table 1, or the distance from the existing building and the adjacent property line. 
Planned unit development lot size and density requirements are recommendations. The city council may waive these requirements based on a proposed development satisfying the purpose and intent of the district, following planning commission recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D (table 1), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 235, § 3, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 267, § 1, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 401, § 1(Att.), 6-27-17) 
Secs. 62-214-62-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AGRICULTURE/OPEN SPACE (A-1) DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 239, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2002, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 62-231-62-250, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 193, § D(1.1-1.4) adopted Dec. 28, 1993. 

Sec. 62-231. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the agriculture/open space (A-1) district is to provide generally for a smooth and orderly transition of land from rural to urban in character, and more specifically to prevent the occurrence of premature scattered urban development which would be uneconomical from the standpoint of municipal services, utilities and schools until such time as: 
(1)  Necessary public facilities such as streets, water and sanitary sewer are available. 
(2)  The ability to objectively determine and project appropriate land use patterns makes orderly development possible and to retain as much genuinely rural area and agriculture land as can be accommodated and encouraged until urbanization is considered necessary. 
    Subdivision of property within the agriculture/open apace (A-1) district is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 1, 12-10-02) 
Sec. 62-232. - Permitted uses. 
    The following principal uses shall be permitted within the agriculture/open space (A-1) district: 
Uses: 
Agriculture and horticultural uses, including structures designed for the storage of products and machinery pertaining and necessary to agriculture and horticultural operations. 
Single-family residential. 
Public parks, recreation areas, game refuges, and open spaces. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 1, 12-10-02) 
Sec. 62-233. - Permitted principal and accessory structures. 
    No new principal structure shall be constructed within this district. In the event an existing permitted structure is destroyed beyond 50 percent of its assessed value, such structure may be replaced, subject to the conditions of section 62-235. 
(1)  Principal structures. The following principal structures shall be permitted: 
a.  Existing single-family residential dwellings. 
b.  Existing attached single-family residential dwellings. 
c.  One principal structure shall be permitted for each lot. 
d.  Agriculture and horticulture storage and maintenance structures. 
(2)  Accessory structures. The following accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted: 
a.  Sheds. 
b.  Garages. 
c.  Recreational buildings and structures, including but not limited to gazebos, decks. 
d.  Other accessory buildings as approved by city planner as being consistent with rural residential use. 
These structures shall be used only by the occupant(s) of the residence for personal storage, hobbies, recreation, entertainment, family uses, private maintenance and repair activities, and for the keeping of animals and appurtenant equipment and supplies. Guest quarters and/or additional dwelling units are strictly prohibited. No products or services shall be offered for sale or pay or similar compensation except as permitted for a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 1, 12-10-02) 
Sec. 62-234. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses may be allowed in the agriculture/open space (A-1) district, upon receipt of a conditional use permit. 
(1)  Recreation facilities of a commercial or semipublic nature, such as golf courses, sportsmen clubs and camping areas. 
(2)  Public utilities and service utility facilities and structures, as regulated by City Code. 
(3)  The keeping of animals including, but not limited to, those in stables or kennels according to the following density standards: 
These regulations apply to lots of less than 20 acres unless otherwise regulated by the Carver County Feedlot Management Ordinance, as amended from time to time. Lots of 20 acres or greater shall comply to the Carver County Feedlot Management Ordinance, as amended from time to time. A manure holding plan may be required when there are any domestic animals other than customary household pets. 
On lots of at least 2.25 acres, but less than 2.4 acres, one animal unit is permitted. 
On lots of 2.4-20 acres, one animal unit per acre or fraction thereof is permitted, with the number of animals rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
For the purposes of this section, an animal unit shall be defined as provided below: 
One Equine (horse, mules, cow, etc.) equals one animal unit. 
Five sheep, goats, or similar equals one animal unit. 
Ten dogs equals one animal unit. 
Twenty-five poultry (chickens, turkey, etc.) equal one animal unit. 
Fifty small animals (cats, rabbits, etc.) equal one animal unit. 
For animals not listed above, the number of animal units shall be defined as the average weight of the animal divided by 1,000 pounds. 
Manure must be handled in an environmentally sound and nuisance free manner as follows: Manure that is stored must be covered or placed in a container so that it will be protected from rainfall and surface run-off; manure must be removed from the property or spread at least once every six months so that flies, odors and other nuisances are kept to a minimum. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Mining, excavation, and land reclamation. 
(6)  Other uses similar in nature to the above uses and which, in the opinion of the city council, will not be detrimental to the integrity and intent of the agriculture/open space (A-1) district. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 1, 12-10-02) 
Sec. 62-235. - Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for the agriculture/open space (A-1) district is 2.25 acres. 
(b)  Yards and setbacks. The minimum yard and setback requirements for all structures within the agriculture/open space (A-1) district, are as follows: 
(1)  Front yard setback: The minimum horizontal distance as measured from the principal structure to the property line or public right-of-way line, whichever is closer to the principal structure. 
(2)  Rear and side yard setback: 15 feet. However, where an existing structure is located less than 15 feet from the lot line, a minimum of 30 feet shall be provided between structures. 
(c)  Maximum ground coverage. The sum total of ground area that may be covered by all structures located on a lot in the agriculture/open space (A-1) district shall not exceed 30 percent. The maximum footprint for attached garages shall be as defined accessory building size. 
(d)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for principal structures in the agriculture/open space (A-1) district is 35 feet. 
(e)  Accessory buildings and structures. The following standards apply for accessory buildings and structures. Accessory buildings and structures shall meet all location requirements and shall be constructed in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. 
(f)  Accessory building size: A total of 500 square feet for all accessory buildings shall be permitted for every acre or fraction thereof of lot size, to a maximum of 3,500 square feet. 
(1)  Existing agricultural structures are not included in the area calculations for total square footage unless the agricultural structure (such as a barn or machine shed) is suitable for use or used as a garage or residential accessory structure. 
(2)  The area calculation for an attached garage or accessory structure shall be made using the outside dimensions (footprint or foundation) of the structure only. Area calculations shall not include unenclosed porches. The area calculation for a detached building shall include the gross area for all levels of the structure. 
(3)  The footprint or foundation area of an attached garage shall not exceed 125 percent of the footprint of the attached dwelling. 
(g)  Setback. No accessory building shall be permitted in the front yard. All accessory buildings or structures shall maintain at minimum a 15-foot minimum side and rear yard setback. 
(h)  Height. The maximum height of an accessory building sidewall shall be 12 feet and the total height as defined in this Code shall not exceed 17 feet, however, for each 15 feet of setback provided over the minimum required setback, total height as defined in this Code may be increased five feet, to a maximum height of 32 feet. In all cases, sidewall height shall not exceed 70 percent of the total height of the building. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 1, 12-10-02) 
DIVISION 3. - RURAL ESTATE RESIDENTIAL 1 (ER-1) DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, §§ 2, 3, adopted June 27, 2017, added div. 3, §§ 62-236-62-245 and div. 4, §§ 62-246-62-250.5 as set out herein and renumbered former divs. 3-20 as divs. 5-22. 

Sec. 62-236. - Intent. 
    The intent of the estate residential 1 (ER-1) district is to provide an area within the city limits which can accommodate "estate type" single family detached dwellings. This district shall be characterized by the integration and preservation of exceptional natural amenities and open space into the developments that occur within. This district will be distinguished from the ER-2 district in that all lots will be required to have a primary and secondary on-site sewer location and, at the discretion of the city, be serviced by municipal water. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-237. - Qualifications. 
    Development of this nature is best suited for high amenity properties and shall have the following characteristics: 
(1)  The development parcel must be guided for estate residential in the city's comprehensive plan; 
(2)  The development parcel must be 40 or more acres in size; 
(3)  The majority (more than 50 percent of the total acreage) of the property has frontage on a designated lake or river; or 
(4)  The majority (more than 50 percent of the total acreage) of the property is covered in designated forest; 
(5)  Woodland, wetlands and topography must be preserved in a natural state, with modification allowed when no reasonable alternative exists; or, if the site lacks unique features such as woodlands and wetlands, the site must be designed and constructed in such a manner that residential building sites are integrated into a created natural environment including reforestation, wetlands enhancement, and vegetative screening of structures; 
(6)  Common space must be designated in the development as one or more outlots and must be owned either by a homeowners' association consisting of the owners of all of the residential lots in the development or by the owners of the residential lots, as tenants in common; 
(7)  The developer must record against the development a declaration of covenants that places responsibility for management of the open space in a homeowners association and provides for the assessment of management costs to the association members; 
(8)  All utilities must be placed underground; 
(9)  A development agreement must be entered into with the city. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-238. - Definitions. 
    Forest means a dense growth of mature trees, together with other plants, covering a large area and designated as such in the city's natural resource plan. A forest is a contiguous area of land which has trees that are confirmed to be of a desirable species, healthy and mature, shade or evergreen trees with a minimum height of ten feet. The distribution of the trees is such that there are no areas greater than one-quarter acre in size not covered by canopy in the summer months. A forest must cover a land area of 10,000 square feet or greater. 
    Other terms as defined in Section 62-1 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-239. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the estate residential 1 (ER-1) district: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Agricultural land uses as permitted and in compliance with all applicable provisions regarding land area. 
(3)  Public recreation facilities. 
(4)  Licensed residential daycare facilities. 
(5)  Essential structures and uses. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-240. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure and shall be constructed for the sole use of occupants of the principal structure. The following accessory uses are permitted in the estate residential 1 (ER-1) district: 
(1)  Private garages for single family dwellings. 
(2)  Home occupations operated in accordance with section 62-481 of this zoning code. 
(3)  Fences. 
(4)  Tennis courts. 
(5)  Swimming pools. 
(6)  Detached agricultural storage buildings, barns, or other structures, accessory to an existing single-family dwelling. Accessory structures that are 1,000 square feet or less shall be constructed using architecturally compatible materials to that of the principle structure. Colors and materials used for the exterior finishing of accessory structures shall be complimentary to the principle structure and be approved by the zoning administrator prior to approval of the building permit. The total square footage of all accessory structures permitted on the property shall be in accordance with section 62-477 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-241. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Alternative energy systems in accordance with chapter 61. 
(b)  Windmills or wind energy conservation systems (WECS). 
(c)  Cemeteries. 
(d)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(e)  Planned unit development, limited to detached single-family dwellings only and subject to the limitations of division 10 of this article. 
(f)  New wireless support structures for small wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 62-242 - Interim uses. 
(a)  Accessory dwelling unit and nonrental guest apartments. 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit means a secondary dwelling unit that is: 
a.  Physically attached to or within a single-family dwelling unit or within a detached* accessory building that has a principal structure on the parcel; and 
b.  Subordinate in size to the single-family dwelling unit; and 
c.  Fully separated from the single-family dwelling unit by means of a wall or floor, with or without a door; and 
d.  Architecturally compatible with the principal structure (using similar materials, finishes, style and colors similar to the principal structure); and 
e.  The lesser of 33 percent of the above ground living area of the principal structure (walk out basement and basement square footage not included) or 1,200 square feet. The total square footage shall not include a designated mechanical room or unfinished basement area below the accessory dwelling unit; and 
f.  Not in excess of the maximum square footage for accessory structures as permitted in this Code; and 
g.  Has permanent provisions for cooking, living and sanitation; and 
h.  Has no more than two bedrooms; and 
i.  Limited to relatives of the homesteaded owner occupants, the homesteaded owners of the principal structure or the homesteaded owner's caretaker. The total number of individuals that reside in both the principal dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit may not exceed the number that is allowed by the building code; and 
j.  Uses the existing on-site septic system or an approved holding tank if applicable or designed as to not add an additional connection to the city's public sewer line; and 
k.  Respectful of the future subdivision of the property. The city may require a sketch of the proposed future subdivision of a property; and 
l.  In compliance with the adopted building code relating to all aspects of the dwelling unit. 
*On lots less than two acres, the accessory dwelling unit must be attached to the principal dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-243. - Lot requirements and standards. 
(a)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in other sections of this chapter: 
(1)  Setbacks. 
Required Setbacks Minimum lot size Minimum lot width Front Yard Interior Side Yard Corner Side Yard Rear Yard Single-family detached dwellings 2 acres 150 feet 75 feet 50 feet 1 50 feet 50 feet Parks, playgrounds, and community buildings operated by municipal agencies-permanent structures Varies 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet  
1 The sum of the two side yard widths on each lot must total a minimum of 50 feet, with no side yard being less than 20 feet. 
(2)  Height. Maximum height of principal structure shall be 36 feet. 
(3)  Impervious surface area. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 50 percent. 
(4)  Subsurface sewage treatment systems. All requirements set forth in Carver County Chapter 52. 
(5)  Lot configuration. Flag lot prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-244. - Design and performance standards. 
    The following design and performance standards shall be required: 
(1)  All residential structures shall be built on approved frost footing as stated in the state building code. 
(2)  All residential structures shall be firmly anchored to a permanent foundation. Anchoring shall be of an approved method as stated in the state building code. 
(3)  Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: 
a.  Brick. 
b.  Natural stone. 
c.  Lap metal siding. Ribbed metal siding is not permitted except as an accent material. 
d.  Wood, provided surfaces are finished for exterior use and only woods of proven exterior durability are used such as cedar, redwood and cypress. 
e.  Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum, nonstructural, non-load bearing, provided such panels are factory fabricated and finished with a permanent, durable, non-fade surface and their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design, and provided further that no more than one-third of the wall surface abutting a public street, or adjacent to a residential or public area, consist of such panels. 
f.  Glass curtain wall panels. 
g.  Shakes, including cedar shakes. 
h.  Wood siding, including cement fiber products and LP SmartSide. 
(4)  Prohibited materials are as follows: 
a.  Face materials which rapidly deteriorate or become unsightly such as galvanized metal, unfinished structural clay tile and metal panels not factory finished with a permanent surface. 
b.  Buildings comprised exclusively of metal. 
c.  Buildings where wood poles or timbers are the primary support for the roof system and form the foundation structure, provided that wood foundations shall be permissible (pole buildings). 
d.  Sheet metal, plastic or fiberglass siding, unless such siding is a component of a factory fabricated and finished panel. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-245. - Variances, appeals and amendments. 
    Requests for variances from the provisions of this division shall be administered as provided by sections 62-141-62-144 of this Code. However, a request for a variance must be accompanied by a recommendation from the operative homeowners' association, if any, pertaining to the property that is the subject to the variance request. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 2, 6-27-17) 
DIVISION 4. - SUBURBAN ESTATE RESIDENTIAL (ER-2) DISTRICT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, §§ 2, 3, adopted June 27, 2017, added div. 3, §§ 62-236-62-245 and div. 4, §§ 62-246-62-250.5 as set out herein and renumbered former divs. 3-20 as divs. 5-22. 

Sec. 62-246. - Intent. 
    The intent of the estate residential 2 (ER-2) district is to provide an area within the city limits which can accommodate "estate type" single family detached dwellings. This district shall be characterized by the integration and preservation of exceptional natural amenities and open space into the developments that occur within. This district will be distinguished from the ER-1 district in that all lots will be required to be serviced by both municipal sanitary sewer and water. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-247. - Criteria. 
    Development of this nature is best suited for high amenity properties and shall have the following characteristics: 
(1)  The development parcel must be guided for estate residential in the city's comprehensive plan; 
(2)  The development parcel must be 20 or more acres in size; 
(3)  The majority (more than 50 percent of the total acreage) of the property has frontage on a designated lake or river; or 
(4)  The majority (more than 50 percent of the total acreage) of the property is covered in designated forest; 
(5)  Woodland, wetlands and topography must be preserved in a natural state, with modification allowed when no reasonable alternative exists; or, if the site lacks unique features such as woodlands and wetlands, the site must be designed and constructed in such a manner that residential building sites are integrated into a created natural environment including reforestation, wetlands enhancement, and vegetative screening of structures; 
(6)  Common space must be designated in the development as one or more outlots and must be owned either by a homeowners' association consisting of the owners of all of the residential lots in the development or by the owners of the residential lots, as tenants in common; 
(7)  The developer must record against the development a declaration of covenants that places responsibility for management of the open space in a homeowners association and provides for the assessment of management costs to the association members; 
(8)  All utilities must be placed underground; 
(9)  A development agreement must be entered into with the city. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-248. - Definitions. 
    Forest means a dense growth of mature trees, together with other plants, covering a large area and designated as such in the city's natural resource plan. A forest is a contiguous area of land which has trees that are confirmed to be of a desirable species, healthy and mature, shade or evergreen trees with a minimum height of ten feet. The distribution of the trees is such that there are no areas greater than one-quarter acre in size not covered by canopy in the summer months. A forest must cover a land area of 10,000 square feet or greater. 
    Other terms as defined in section 62-1 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-249. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the estate residential 2 (ER-2) district: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Agricultural land uses, except keeping livestock. 
(3)  Public recreation facilities. 
(4)  Licensed residential daycare facilities. 
(5)  Essential structures and uses. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-250. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure and shall be constructed for the sole use of occupants of the principal structure. The following accessory uses are permitted in the estate residential 2 (ER-2) district: 
(1)  Private garages for single family dwellings. 
(2)  Home occupations operated in accordance with section 62-481 of this zoning code. 
(3)  Fences. 
(4)  Tennis courts. 
(5)  Swimming pools. 
(6)  Detached agricultural storage buildings, barns, or other structures, accessory to an existing single-family dwelling. Accessory structures that are 1,000 square feet or less shall be constructed using architecturally compatible materials to that of the principle structure. Colors and materials used for the exterior finishing of accessory structures shall be complimentary to the principle structure and be approved by the zoning administrator prior to approval of the building permit. The total square footage of all accessory structures permitted on the property shall be in accordance with section 62-477 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 62-250.1. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Alternative energy systems in accordance with chapter 61. 
(b)  Windmills or wind energy conservation systems (WECS). 
(c)  Cemeteries. 
(d)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(e)  Planned unit development, limited to detached single-family dwellings only and subject to the limitations of division 10 of this article. 
(f)  New wireless support structures for small wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 3, adopted June 27, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 62-251-62-255. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 62-250.1-62-250.5. 
Sec. 62-250.2 - Interim uses. 
(a)  Accessory dwelling unit and nonrental guest apartments. 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit means a secondary dwelling unit that is: 
a.  Physically attached to or within a single-family dwelling unit or within a detached* accessory building that has a principal structure on the parcel; and 
b.  Subordinate in size to the single-family dwelling unit; and 
c.  Fully separated from the single-family dwelling unit by means of a wall or floor, with or without a door; and 
d.  Architecturally compatible with the principal structure (using similar materials, finishes, style and colors similar to the principal structure); and 
e.  The lesser of 33 percent of the above ground living area of the principal structure (walk out basement and basement square footage not included) or 1,200 square feet. The total square footage shall not include a designated mechanical room or unfinished basement area below the accessory dwelling unit; and 
f.  Not in excess of the maximum square footage for accessory structures as permitted in this Code; and 
g.  Has permanent provisions for cooking, living and sanitation; and 
h.  Has no more than two bedrooms; and 
i.  Limited to relatives of the homesteaded owner occupants, the homesteaded owners of the principal structure or the homesteaded owner's caretaker. The total number of individuals that reside in both the principal dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit may not exceed the number that is allowed by the building code; and 
j.  Uses the existing on-site septic system or an approved holding tank if applicable or designed as to not add an additional connection to the city's public sewer line; and 
k.  Respectful of the future subdivision of the property. The city may require a sketch of the proposed future subdivision of a property; and 
l.  In compliance with the adopted building code relating to all aspects of the dwelling unit. 
*On lots less than two acres, the accessory dwelling unit must be attached to the principal dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Note- See note at § 62-250.1. 
Sec. 62-250.3. - Lot requirements and standards. 
(a)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in other sections of this chapter: 
(1)  Setbacks. 
Required Setbacks Minimum lot size Minimum lot width Front Yard Interior Side Yard Corner Side Yard Rear Yard Single-family detached dwellings 1 acre 125 feet 40 feet 30 feet 1 30 feet 50 feet Parks, playgrounds, and community buildings operated by municipal agencies-permanent structures Varies 50 feet 30 feet 30 feet 50 feet  
1 The sum of the two side yard widths on each lot must total a minimum of 30 feet, with no side yard being less than ten feet. 
(2)  Height. Maximum height of principal structure shall be 36 feet. 
(3)  Impervious surface area. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 35 percent. 
(4)  Lot configuration. Flag lot prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Note- See note at § 62-250.1. 
Sec. 62-250.4. - Design and performance standards. 
    The following design and performance standards shall be required: 
(1)  All residential structures shall be built on approved frost footing as stated in the state building code. 
(2)  All residential structures shall be firmly anchored to a permanent foundation. Anchoring shall be of an approved method as stated in the state building code. 
(3)  Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: 
a.  Brick. 
b.  Natural stone. 
c.  Lap metal siding. Ribbed metal siding is not permitted except as an accent material. 
d.  Wood, provided surfaces are finished for exterior use and only woods of proven exterior durability are used such as cedar, redwood and cypress. 
e.  Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum, nonstructural, non-load bearing, provided such panels are factory fabricated and finished with a permanent, durable, non-fade surface and their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design, and provided further that no more than one-third of the wall surface abutting a public street, or adjacent to a residential or public area, consist of such panels. 
f.  Glass curtain wall panels. 
g.  Shakes, including cedar shakes. 
h.  Wood siding, including cement fiber products and LP SmartSide. 
(4)  Prohibited materials are as follows: 
a.  Face materials which rapidly deteriorate or become unsightly such as galvanized metal, unfinished structural clay tile and metal panels not factory finished with a permanent surface. 
b.  Building comprised exclusively of metal. 
c.  Buildings where wood poles or timbers are the primary support for the roof system and form the foundation structure, provided that wood foundations shall be permissible (pole buildings). 
d.  Sheet metal, plastic or fiberglass siding, unless such siding is a component of a factory fabricated and finished panel. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Note- See note at § 62-250.1. 
Sec. 62-250.5. - Variances, appeals and amendments. 
    Requests for variances from the provisions of this division shall be administered as provided by sections 62-141-62-144 of this Code. However, a request for a variance must be accompanied by a recommendation from the operative homeowners' association, if any, pertaining to the property that is the subject to the variance request. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 3, 6-27-17) 
Note- See note at § 62-250.1. 
DIVISION 5. - LOW DENSITY RESIDENCE (R-1) DISTRICT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 3 as div. 5. 

Sec. 62-251. - Intent. 
    The intent of the low density residence (R-1) district is to recognize fully or partially developed low density residential areas including supporting public and semipublic facilities, to provide for future development of a similar nature and to protect the desired low-intensity living environment from encroachment by conflicting land use. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(2.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-252. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the low density residence (R-1) district: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Customary accessory uses incidental to the permitted residential uses, such as private garages, screen houses and private recreational facilities such as swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(3)  Home occupations, as per section 62-478. 
(4)  Licensed daycare or residential facilities. 
(5)  Essential structures and uses. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(2.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-253. - Conditional uses. 
    Public and semipublic facilities such as churches, schools and parks of a noncommercial nature are conditional uses in the low density residence (R-1) district. 
(1)  Columbarium as an accessory use to churches, places of worship or religious institutions with a valid conditional use permit and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A columbarium is subject to site plan review in accordance with section 62-611. 
b.  The religious institution must own the property on which the columbarium is placed. 
c.  The exterior of the columbaria must be constructed to be consistent with existing building/church architecture. 
d.  Columbaria shall only be located in a side or rear yard. 
e.  Columbaria shall have a minimum side yard and rear yard setback of 50 feet. 
f.  Columbaria height shall not exceed 18 feet or that of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
g.  The construction, operation, maintenance, and disposition of a columbarium by the church, place of worship or religious institution, will be in accordance with all applicable state statutes and regulations. 
h.  If the church, place of worship or religious institution ceases operation, all urns and remains must be removed from the property within six months. 
(2)  New wireless support structures for small wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(2.3), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 392, § 2, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 62-254. - Lot requirements and standards. 
    For lot requirements and standards in the low density residence (R-1) district, refer to Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(2.4), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-255. - Ortloff residential overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The intent of the Ortloff residential overlay district (OR) is to provide for future development of residential uses within the R-1 zoning district while permitting flexibility from the setbacks for accessory structures permitted by the underlying zoning. The Ortloff addition subdivision was developed prior to the adoption of the current zoning standards. The city has determined that in some instances the zoning ordinance prohibits the development of residential properties beyond the intent of the current zoning standards. The overlay district will reduce the number of non-conforming lots within the city and to allow the development, expansion or re-development of residential lots without having to obtain a variance for each lot. The ordinance does not promote variance from the intent of the existing standards, but, rather, permits development assuming appropriate setbacks are in place and effect. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Zone A. Is that part of the land lying in Watertown within the following described area: 
All lots located within the Ortloff's Addition, Ortloff's Second Addition and Ortloff's Third Addition. 
(2)  Yard, interior side. Means a yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard and not abutting a public or private street. 
(3)  Area covered. The area covered by the Ortloff residential overlay district (OR) is that portion of zone A lying within the boundaries of [the City of] Watertown. The ordinance is intended to supplement or overlay the existing zoning of lots or parcels in the area covered, not to contradict or replace the existing zoning. 
(4)  Lot requirements and standards. For lot requirements and standards in the Ortloff Residential Overlay district, refer to Table 1. 
a.  Bulk regulations. All buildings shall be located as indicated on an approved site plan. 
b.  Principle structure. 
Minimum setback Setback shall be measured from the property line. Front yard setback: 35 feet Corner side yard setback: 35 Thirty-five feet Interior side yard setback: Ten feet Rear yard setback: Ten feet  
c.  Accessory buildings. 
Minimum setback Setback shall be measured from the property line. Front yard setback: 35 feet Corner side yard setback: Twenty feet Interior side yard setback: Ten feet Rear yard setback: Ten feet  
(Ord. No. 308, 8-28-07) 
Secs. 62-256-62-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENCE (R-2) DISTRICT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 4 as div. 6. 

Sec. 62-271. - Intent. 
    The intent of the medium density residence (R-2) district is to recognize a variety of new and emerging house types, lifestyles and development patterns and to provide for such housing to be developed at somewhat higher densities than the traditional single-family dwelling in response to consumer demands and market restraints, and in order to achieve greater efficiencies of land development and building construction than are possible within traditional single-family, low density districts. This type development should occur in areas as indicated in the comprehensive plan and where municipal sanitary sewer and water services are available. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(3.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-272. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses in the medium density residence (R-2) district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Duplexes. 
(3)  Townhouses-Minimum of three and a maximum of eight units per attached group. 
(4)  Customary accessory uses, incidental to the permitted residential uses such as private garages, screen houses and private recreation facilities such as swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(5)  Home occupations, as per section 62-478. 
(6)  Licensed daycare or residential facilities. 
(7)  Essential service structures and uses. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(3.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-273. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses for the medium density residence (R-2) district are as follows: 
(1)  Public and semipublic facilities such as churches, schools and parks of a noncommercial nature. 
(2)  Boarding of horse on individually owned tracts of land not less than three acres in area. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast lodging facilities, provided the following criteria are adhered to: 
a.  That a maximum of five bed and breakfast units may be established in a structure. 
b.  That the facility shall have a state license (hotel and food), and comply with building and fire codes as may be required or applicable. 
c.  That the facility shall be owner or manager occupied. 
d.  That the facility shall have a minimum size of 2,500 gross square feet. 
e.  That all bed and breakfast units shall be established within the principal structure. 
f.  That not more than the equivalent of two full-time persons shall be employed by the bed and breakfast facility who are not residents of the structure. 
g.  That the dining and other facilities shall not be used exclusively by the registered guests and residents unless allowed as a separate permitted or special use. 
h.  That one off-street parking space shall be provided for the home plus one space for each bed and breakfast unit. 
i.  That signs be consistent with the color and architectural style of the principal building and approved by the zoning administrator. One identification sign permitted on the premises subject to the following: 
a. Maximum area of sign: Two square feet Greater than two square feet but not more than six square feet of signage may be approved by the city council as a conditional use. A single structural component is counted as one sign and square footage is calculated using one side only. b. Maximum height of sign Five feet c. Minimum setback from street right-of-way: Ten feet d. Lighting limited to indirect beam, no internal illumination or flashing light.  
j.  That the lot on which a bed and breakfast facility is proposed shall have a minimum of 7,000 square feet plus 1,000 square feet for each unit in excess of five units. 
(4)  Columbarium as an accessory use to churches, places of worship or religious institutions with a valid conditional use permit and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A columbarium is subject to site plan review in accordance with section 62-611. 
b.  The religious institution must own the property on which the columbarium is placed. 
c.  The exterior of the columbaria must be constructed to be consistent with existing building/church architecture. 
d.  Columbaria shall only be located in a side or rear yard. 
e.  Columbaria shall have a minimum side yard and rear yard setback of 50 feet. 
f.  Columbaria height shall not exceed 18 feet or that of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
g.  The construction, operation, maintenance, and disposition of a columbarium by the church, place of worship or religious institution, will be in accordance with all applicable state statutes and regulations. 
h.  If the church, place of worship or religious institution ceases operation, all urns and remains must be removed from the property within six months. 
(5)  New wireless support structures for small wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(3.3), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 294, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 392, § 2, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 62-274. - Lot requirements and standards. 
    For the lot requirements and standards for the medium density residence (R-2) district, refer to Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(3.4), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-275-62-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENCE (R-3) DISTRICT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 5 as div. 7. 

Sec. 62-291. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the high density residence (R-3) district to recognize the demand for apartment, condominium and multifamily dwellings; to provide for such apartments upon fairly sizable tracts of land, hereby allowing increased design flexibility and a more compatible development pattern; and to permit such apartments at densities high enough to allow high quality development yet low enough to provide a desirable living environment for residents. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(4.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-292. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses for the high density residence (R-3) district are as follows: 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings of four or more dwelling units per structure. 
(2)  Customary accessory uses incidental to the permitted residential uses such as private garages, and private recreational facilities such as swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(4.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-293. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses for the high density residence (R-3) district are as follows: 
(1)  Essential service structures and uses. 
(2)  Public and semipublic facilities such as churches, schools and parks of noncommercial nature. 
(3)  Nursing, convalescent, retirement homes. 
(4)  Health care facilities, including hospitals, medical and dental clinics. 
(5)  Columbarium as an accessory use to churches, places of worship or religious institutions with a valid conditional use permit and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A columbarium is subject to site plan review in accordance with section 62-611. 
b.  The religious institution must own the property on which the columbarium is placed. 
c.  The exterior of the columbaria must be constructed to be consistent with existing building/church architecture. 
d.  Columbaria shall only be located in a side or rear yard. 
e.  Columbaria shall have a minimum side yard and rear yard setback of 50 feet. 
f.  Columbaria height shall not exceed 18 feet or that of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
g.  The construction, operation, maintenance, and disposition of a columbarium by the church, place of worship or religious institution, will be in accordance with all applicable state statutes and regulations. 
h.  If the church, place of worship or religious institution ceases operation, all urns and remains must be removed from the property within six months. 
(6)  New wireless support structures for small wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(4.3), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 392, § 2, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 62-294. - Lot requirements and standards. 
    For the lot requirements and standards for the high density residence (R-3) district, refer to Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(4.4), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-295-62-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENCE (R-4) DISTRICT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 6 as div. 8. 

Sec. 62-311. - Permitted uses. 
    The placement of and use of manufactured housing is governed by the provisions of chapter 30. All provisions contained in chapter 30 are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(5.1), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-312-62-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - LIMITED COMMERCE (C-1) DISTRICT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 7 as div. 9. 

Sec. 62-331. - Intent. 
    The intent of the limited commerce (C-1) district is to provide the opportunity for thoroughfare traffic and city residents living nearby to make convenience purchases at locations abutting major streets and easily accessible by automobile and on foot. The gross floor area of buildings is limited so that the intent of this zone does not give way to community-wide shopping center developments that are more desirable in other specific locations in the city (as per the city's comprehensive plan). 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(6.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-332. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses of the limited commerce (C-1) district are as follows: 
(1)  Commercial establishments serving convenience retail or service needs such as convenience stores, self-service laundromats, etc., provided the combined gross floor area of all buildings within a single C-1 district shall not exceed 10,000 square feet and the gross floor area of any single business establishment shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. 
(2)  Commercial establishments oriented to motor vehicles or drive-in establishments such as gas stations, car washes and drive-in restaurants. 
(3)  Restaurants. 
(4)  Essential service structures and uses. 
(5)  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(6.2), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 206, § 3, 4-22-97; Ord. No. 328, § 1, 9-18-08) 
Sec. 62-333. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in the limited commerce (C-1) district: 
(1)  Medical, dental, veterinary clinics, mortuaries. 
(2)  Auto repair shops (major and minor). 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(6.3), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-334. - Lot requirements and standards. 
    For the lot requirements and standards for the limited commerce (C-1) district, refer to Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(6.4), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-335-62-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - GENERAL COMMERCE (C-2) DISTRICT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 8 as div. 10. 

Sec. 62-351. - Intent. 
    The intent of the general commerce (C-2) district is to provide appropriate areas, preferably in clusters in proximity to major thoroughfares, for commercial retail and service establishments which require large sites for the display of merchandise or which are oriented to the motoring public, and which are not necessarily compatible with the desired character of downtown or limited commerce service area. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(7.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-352. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses for the general commerce (C-2) district are as follows: 
(1)  Commercial establishments requiring large sites for outdoor display and sales such as auto and truck dealers that include on-site vehicle maintenance facilities, mobile home sales and building material sales. 
(2)  Commercial establishments which are oriented to the motoring public such as restaurant, brew pub, microdistillery operating in conjunction with a cocktail room, small brewery operating in conjunction with a tap room, auto service stations, minor auto repair shops, car washes and motels. 
(3)  Other commercial sales and service establishments which are not necessarily compatible with the desired character of the limited commerce and downtown central business district service areas such as farm supply and service stores, plumbing and heating supply stores, lumberyard, building materials, internal vehicle and boat storage, auto parts sales and service stores. 
(4)  Essential service structures and uses. 
(5)  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(7.2), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 206, § 4, 4-22-97; Ord. No. 328, § 2, 9-18-08; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 62-353. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses for the general commerce (C-2) district are as follows: 
(1)  Medical, dental, veterinary clinics, mortuaries. 
(2)  Major auto repair shops. 
(3)  Mini-storage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(7.3), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-354. - Lot requirements and standards. 
    For the lot requirements and standards for the general commercial (C-2) district, refer to Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(7.4), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-355-62-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - DOWNTOWN-CENTRAL BUSINESS (C-3) DISTRICT[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 9 as div. 11. 

Sec. 62-371. - Intent. 
    It is the city's objective to have dense, pedestrian-oriented shops and services in the downtown area. It is intended that the downtown area serve as the social, cultural and commercial center of the city. Therefore, convenience goods and service businesses which are incompatible for the downtown should be situated in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(8.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-372. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses for the downtown-central business (C-3) district are as follows: 
(1)  Commercial establishments. In order to illustrate the types of establishments which the subsection is designed to cover, the following examples are set forth. These examples are not meant to illustrate the only establishments intended to be covered. 
a.  Retail establishments such as grocery, hardware, drug, clothing, appliances, furniture stores, restaurants. 
b.  Personal services such as laundry, barber, shoe repair, beauty salon, photography studio. 
c.  Professional services such as medical clinics, dental clinics, law offices, accounting offices. 
d.  Finance, insurance and real estate services. 
e.  General commercial office space. 
f.  Repair services such as jewelry, radio, television repair shops (not auto repair). 
(2)  Public and semipublic facilities serving all or portions of the city, such as municipal offices, library, post office. 
(3)  Apartments, if located above the street level in nonresidential structures. 
(4)  Commercial businesses such as on-sale or off-sale liquor establishments (taverns, pubs, brew pubs, small breweries operating with a tap room, microdistilleries operating with a cocktail room). 
(5)  Essential service structures and uses. 
(6)  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(8.2), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 206, § 5, 4-22-97; Ord. No. 328, § 3, 9-18-08; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 62-373. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses for the downtown-central business (C-3) district are as follows: 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(2)  Entertainment and amusement services such as movie theaters, arcades, billiards and bowling alleys. 
(3)  Hotel and lodging services. 
(4)  Cabinet shops. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(8.3), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 215, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 62-374. - Lot requirements and standards. 
    For the lot requirements and standards for the downtown-central business (C-3) district, refer to Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(8.4), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-375. - Downtown design standards and criteria. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The "downtown" of the city of Watertown is considered the "Heart of the city". All properties zoned CBD (central business district) located downtown on Lewis Avenue including the properties east of Lewis Avenue to the Crow River and those properties zoned I-1 (Industrial) between Stevens Street and Fremont Street on the Northwest Corner of Lewis Avenue South shall be considered the downtown of the City of Watertown for purposes of this section. 
(1)  The city feels a vibrant, energetic, stable central business district benefits the Watertown community and the region at large. The city desires to encourage development, redevelopment and reinvestment in an orderly and thematic manner. 
(2)  With this goal, the city has developed design standards and plans entitled "Downtown Design Standards" with the intent to identify certain features and aspects of the downtown urban environment. 
(3)  The goal is (1) to use the design standards and plans to improve the appearance and vitality of downtown by attracting more businesses and some housing, and (2) reintroducing the Crow River as an attractive component to downtown, which will give downtown a unique quality and attract more people. A vibrant, healthy downtown makes a significant contribution to the overall health and vitality and economy of the community. 
(b)  Use of the standards. These design standards apply to all properties zoned CBD (central business district) located downtown on Lewis Avenue including the properties east of Lewis Avenue to the Crow River and those properties zoned I-1 (Industrial) between Stevens Street and Fremont Street on the Northwest Corner of Lewis Avenue South. 
(1)  These design standards will be used to review building permits and site plans, evaluate applications for CDBG (community development block grant) funding, and to guide the city in making public improvements downtown. 
(c)  Application. The downtown design standards dated October 2004 and approved by the city council on October 26, 2004, shall be followed when reviewing building permits and land use applications for properties downtown including land use changes, on-site changes, building alterations, building remodeling, expansion, and redevelopment-retrofitting, new construction, public improvements-upgrades and new facilities. The standards will be used by the city of Watertown in preparing plans for public improvements. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-8-06) 
Secs. 62-376-62-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-1) DISTRICT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 10 as div. 12. 

Sec. 62-391. - Intent. 
    The intent of this district is to provide land in proximity to major thoroughfares for the development of certain activities that will strengthen local employment opportunity and tax base of the city. Such a zone will be characterized by a positive overall visual appearance that is compatible with the predominant residential aesthetic character of the city. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(9.1), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 223, § 1, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 62-392. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses for the light industrial (I-1) district are as follows: 
(1)  Fabricating, manufacturing, production, processing and storage of material goods and products. 
(2)  Warehouse wholesaling; all commodities except live animals. 
(3)  Scientific research facilities. 
(4)  Service-oriented adult use establishments, principal, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
(5)  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, principal, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
(6)  Service-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
(7)  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(9.2), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 206, § 6, 4-22-97; Ord. No. 223, § 1, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 328, § 4, 9-18-08) 
Sec. 62-393. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The permitted accessory uses for the light industrial (l-1) district are as follows: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading. 
(2)  Signs are regulated by chapter 48. 
(3)  Offices ancillary to the principal use. 
(4)  Tap rooms or cocktail rooms operating with a small brewer or microdistillery. 
(Ord. No. 223, § 1, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 62-394. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses for the light industrial (I-1) district are as follows: 
(1)  Contractor's yards. 
(2)  Screened outdoor storage. 
(3)  Commercial towers as regulated by Ordinance No. 221. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(9.3), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 223, § 1, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 62-395. - Special requirements. 
    The following special requirements shall apply to those uses in the light industrial (I-1) district: 
(1)  All uses shall comply with the performance standards set forth in section 62-471. 
(2)  Outdoor storage areas shall not be located between the principal structure and the public right-of-way or drive aisle. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(9.5), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 223, § 1, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 62-396. - Lot requirements and standards. 
    The following minimum standards shall be observed in the light industrial (I-1) district subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet 
(3)  Maximum hard surface coverage: 80 percent 
(4)  Maximum structure height: 
a.  Principal structure: 35 feet 
b.  Accessory structure: 1 story 
(5)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
a.  Front: 30 feet 
b.  Corner: 30 feet 
c.  Side: 10 feet 
d.  Rear: 20 feet 
e.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when the site abuts a residential district without being separated by right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 223, § 1, 5-8-01) 
Secs. 62-397-62-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - PARK/OPEN SPACE (P-1) DISTRICT[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 11 as div. 13. 

Sec. 62-411. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the park/open space (P-1) district to preserve significant natural features and amenities such as lakes, rivers, marshes, steep hills, extensive woodlands and woodlands in their natural state in order to assure continuation of the existing natural drainage system, to prevent harmful soil erosion, to maintain ecological balance and to assure their permanent use for their main natural function as well as for enjoyment by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(10.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-412. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses in the park/open space (P-1) district are as follows: 
(1)  Public parks and recreational areas. 
(2)  Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing permitted uses. 
(3)  Luce Line Trial. 
(4)  Essential service structures and uses. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(10.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-413. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses for the park/open space (P-1) district are as follows: 
(1)  Recreational uses of a low intensity commercial nature. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(10.3), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-414-62-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - PUBLIC FACILITIES (P-2) DISTRICT[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 12 as div. 14. 

Sec. 62-431. - Intent. 
    The intent of the public facilities (P-2) district is to protect existing public facilities from conflicting use intrusion and to provide sites for future development of public facilities required by the residents and working population. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(11.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-432. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses for the public facilities (P-2) district are as follows: 
(1)  Public facilities such as schools, libraries, municipal administration and service buildings. 
(2)  Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses. 
(3)  Essential service structures and uses. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(11.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-433. - Conditional uses. 
    The conditional uses for the public facilities (P-2) district are as follows: 
(1)  None. 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(11.3), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-434-62-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 13 as div. 15. 

Sec. 62-451. - Floodplain. 
    In addition to the requirements of this chapter, use of land within the floodplain districts as designated by the federal flood insurance study for the city shall also be subject to the provisions of the city regarding floodplain management, Ordinance No. 188 (§§ 62-651-62-663). 
(Ord. No. 193, § D(12), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-452-62-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 14 as div. 16. 

Sec. 62-461. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the regulations, standards, and criteria contained in this division is to provide an alternate zoning district under which land can be developed or redeveloped with innovation, imagination, and creative architectural design when sufficiently justified under the provisions of this chapter. The objective of the planned unit development is to encourage a higher level of design and amenity than is possible to achieve under otherwise applicable zoning regulations. The end result can be a product which fulfills the objectives of the comprehensive plan and planning policies of the city while departing from the strict application of the use and bulk regulations of the zoning ordinance and the design standards of the subdivision control regulations. The planned unit development is intended to permit and encourage such flexibility and to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1)  To stimulate creative approaches to the residential, commercial and industrial development of land. 
(2)  To provide more efficient use of land. 
(3)  To preserve natural features and provide open space areas and recreation areas in excess of that required under existing zoning regulations. 
(4)  To develop new approaches to the living environment through variety in type, design and layout of residential structures, commercial and industrial buildings, transportation systems, and public facilities. 
(5)  To unify building and structures through design. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 4, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 62-462. - Permitted uses. 
    All uses to be permitted within the planned unit development district shall be identified within the development plan application. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 4, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 62-463. - Design standards and criteria. 
    The planned unit development shall be designed to comply with the following standards and criteria: 
(1)  Ownership and control. A proposed planned unit development shall be under single ownership or unified control at the time of filing an application for approval of the planned unit development, or the applicant shall provide written evidence of the applicant's ability to gain unified control of the property if the planned unit development is approved. 
(2)  Size. Property considered for planned unit development shall be a minimum of ten acres in size. 
(3)  Area, lot width, yard, and height/bulk requirements. For lot requirements and standards in the planned unit development district, refer to section 62-213, Table 1. 
These regulations may be waived or modified by the city council in cases where it is determined that the changes will not negatively affect the value or enjoyment of surrounding property, the provision of municipal services, or the flow of traffic on local streets and the changes are justified by the standards set forth in this section. 
(4)  Common open space requirements. 
a.  Percentage. The following amount of the total lot coverage of a planned unit development not included as public right of way shall be devoted to common open space: 
1.  Multi-family residential: 35 percent 
2.  Single-family attached residential: 30 percent 
3.  Single-family detached residential: 25 percent 
4.  Mixed use/nonresidential: 20 percent 
b.  Permitted uses. The following amenities may be included in the common open space requirement: 
1.  Recreation open space, including, but not limited to: 
i.  Swimming pools. 
ii.  Tennis courts. 
iii.  Recreation buildings. 
iv.  Jogging trails/fitness courses. 
v.  Tot lots. 
vi.  Ice rinks 
vii.  Other recreational uses requiring permanent structures on the land other than the buildings. 
2.  Interior walkways separate from public sidewalks that connect parking lots to buildings and connect one building to another. 
3.  Greenbelts linking open space areas with residential areas, nonresidential areas, or other open space areas. 
4.  Open landscaped areas not including land within 12 feet of any parking area. 
5.  Natural water features, wetlands, and conservation areas. 
6.  Boulevards and traffic circles. 
c.  Exclusions: Common open space shall not include the following: 
1.  Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual occupant. 
2.  Dedicated streets, alleys, or other public rights of way. 
3.  Vehicular drives, private streets, and parking, loading and storage areas. 
d.  Open space access: Convenient access through a permanent easement shall be provided and perpetually guaranteed to all residents not granted primary access. 
(5)  Park sites. A planned unit development shall provide for the dedication of land for public park and recreational purposes as set forth in chapter 63 of this Code (subdivision ordinance). 
(6)  Landscaping, screening, and tree preservation. A planned unit development shall comply with all applicable regulations for landscaping, screening, and tree preservation. 
(7)  Lighting. A planned unit development shall comply with regulations for exterior lighting as set forth in the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(8)  Trails. Trail systems shall be provided to facilitate movement within the planned unit development and to ensure access to and between commercial facilities and public uses, including schools, parks, and recreational facilities. The circulation systems shall be a direct and convenient link to existing or planned routes and trails beyond such development. 
(9)  Principal structures. The provisions of this Code which prohibit the utilization of any parcel of land or lot for the purpose of erecting more than one principal building or structure may be waived by the city for buildings and structures in a planned unit development. 
(10)  Relationship to adjoining land. A planned unit development shall be developed with connections to adjoining land. Designs should emphasize accessibility, open views, and connections with the larger community and discourage development that divides neighborhoods or restricts access to adjacent property. The design of lots, streets, sidewalks, and paths within a planned unit development shall make provisions for the continuation of such existing or proposed features to adjoining areas. 
(11)  Density bonuses. Unless waived by the city council or modified by ordinance, densities in a planned unit development shall be established by the comprehensive plan for residential developments and by bulk requirements of the underlying zoning district or the district where the use is first allowed. Increases in density may be granted where it is determined that such increases will not negatively affect the value or enjoyment of surrounding property, the provision of municipal services, or the flow of traffic on local streets. To be granted density increases, a planned unit development shall evidence a superior level of design and amenity enhancement. Features considered in this determination include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Tree preservation. 
b.  Superior architectural design. 
c.  Enclosed, underground or depressed parking areas, or parking areas that incorporate landscaping in excess of the minimum standards established by ordinance or policy. 
d.  Plazas, malls, formal gardens, or other pedestrian areas. 
e.  Community amenities. 
f.  Preservation and/or enhancement of natural features. 
g.  Preservation of historical character. 
h.  Amount, quality, and interconnectedness of common open space. 
i.  Inclusion of an affordable housing component. 
j.  Other features as determined by the planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 4, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 62-464. - Procedure. 
    If necessary to rezone the property, the applicant shall request approval of rezoning and development plan approval concurrently. Upon approval of a rezoning request, a property will be zoned planned unit development. As part of the rezoning application, the applicant shall submit a development plan indicating how the goals, standards, and intent of the district has been satisfied. The review of a development plan request shall be as outlined in the appropriate section of the Subdivision Ordinance of Watertown (chapter 63). 
(Ord. No. 235, § 4, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 62-465. - Content of planned unit development submittals. 
    For each stage in the planned unit development review process, information as requested on appropriate application forms shall be provided. Information shall include all information and data as the city may require for the full and complete consideration of the planned unit development. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 4, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 62-466. - Changes to planned unit development. 
    A planned unit development shall be constructed in accordance with the approved final plat of the planned unit development and all supporting data. The final plat shall control and limit the use of the parcel of land (including the general internal use of buildings and structures) and the location of buildings and structures in the planned unit development as indicated on the plat. Changes to the planned unit development shall be considered to be either a major change or a minor change. 
(1)  Major changes are modifications that alter the concept or intent of the planned unit development. Factors that shall be considered in determining whether a proposed change constitutes a major or a minor change include: 
(a)  Nonresidential components of a planned unit development: 
1.  The proposed change to the following components which constitute a greater than ten percent cumulative increase or decrease, based on the later of the first preliminary plat or the most recent preliminary plat that incorporates any major changes to the original planned unit development: 
i.  Gross floor area of a nonresidential building. 
ii.  Acres of area used for nonresidential purposes. 
iii.  Total gross floor area of all of the nonresidential buildings in the project. 
iv.  Total number of parking spaces for the project. 
b.  Change in location or type of land use. 
c.  Change in type, number or location of a building. 
d.  Greater than a ten percent increase in the height of a building. 
e.  Change in the functional classification of a roadway. 
f.  Reduction in the acreage of open space or common open space. 
g.  Residential components of a planned unit development: 
1.  The proposed change constitutes a greater than ten percent cumulative change in the number of dwelling units in the planned unit development, based on the first preliminary plat approved by the city for the project; or 
2.  The proposed change constitutes a greater than ten percent cumulative change in the height of any building or structure in the planned unit development other than single-family detached dwelling units, based on the first preliminary plat approved by the city for the project; or 
3.  Change in the location, size, or types of dwelling units or land uses; or 
4.  Change in the functional classification of a roadway; or 
5.  Reduction in the acreage of open space. 
(2)  A revised preliminary plat of planned unit development and supporting data shall be submitted with an application for a major change. If a final plat of planned unit development has also been approved, a revised final plat shall also be submitted with the revised preliminary plat of planned unit development, and the final plat of planned unit development shall also be subject to the procedure set forth in this subsection for the approval of a major change. 
(3)  Minor changes are modifications that are not defined as major changes and do not alter the concept or intent of a planned unit development. Minor changes not approved through the administrative adjustment process set forth in the following subsection may be approved by the city council without the review and recommendation of the planning commission unless the city council refers a request for a minor change to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
(4)  Minor changes which meet the criteria set forth in this subsection may be approved by the city planner through an administrative adjustment process without the approval of city council if the proposed minor change does not result in the following: 
a.  Any increase in density. 
b.  Any change in circulation patterns or access. 
c.  Any change in mixture of dwelling unit types. 
d.  Any change in grading or utility provisions. 
e.  Any change in the mixture of land uses. 
f.  Any reduction of an amount of common open space, landscaping, or buffering. 
g.  Any change to exterior elevations of buildings which alter rooflines, building materials, approved color schemes, or result in a change in architectural style. 
h.  Other changes of similar scale, proportion, or use. 
(5)  Upon application for a major change to a planned unit development or a minor change that has been referred to the planning commission, public notice shall be provided, in conformance with the notification requirements of preliminary plats. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 4, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 62-467. - Criteria for approval. 
    The planning commission shall not recommend approval of nor shall the city council approve a development plan for a planned unit development or a major or minor change to the planned unit development unless the proposed development or change complies with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The design of the planned unit development presents an innovative and creative approach to the development of land and living environments. 
(2)  The planned unit development meets the requirements and standards of the planned unit development regulations. 
(3)  The physical design of the planned unit development efficiently utilizes the land and adequately provides for transportation and public facilities while preserving the natural features of the site. 
(4)  Open space, common open space, and recreational facilities are provided. 
(5)  The modifications in design standards from the subdivision control regulations and the waivers in bulk regulations from the zoning regulations fulfill the intent of those regulations. 
(6)  The planned unit development is compatible with the adjacent properties and nearby land uses. 
(7)  The planned unit development fulfills the objectives of the comprehensive plan and planning policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 4, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 62-468. - Effective period. 
(a)  The planned unit development shall be constructed in a timely manner. The planned unit development shall be subject to revocation under the following conditions: 
(1)  Final platting does not occur within one year [from] the date of approval of the preliminary plat of a planned unit development. 
(2)  Construction does not commence and proceed within one year from the date of approval of the final plat of a planned unit development. 
(3)  For good cause shown, upon request of the developer, the city council may extend the time limits in up to one-year increments. 
(b)  The city council may initiate or the owner of the parcel of land on which the planned unit development is to be constructed may apply for the revocation of the planned unit development. The owner shall be notified, in writing, at least 30 days prior to the city council's consideration of the revocation if initiated by the city council. 
(c)  Upon revocation of a planned unit development, the parcel of land shall conform to the permitted uses and other regulations of the original zoning district. Where no original zoning district existed, the property shall be rezoned in accordance with annexation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 4, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 62-469. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - TUSCANY VILLAGE (PUD-TV)[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 15 as div. 17. 

Sec. 62-469.5. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the (PUD-TV) planned unit development - Tuscany Village is to permit the development of various residential and public uses of land in an orderly manner. 
    Residential buildings shall incorporate recognized pedestrian scale, personal character and quality, including low maintenance but architecturally significant building materials, porches and stoops, lighting, shutters, door and window locations and orientation 
    Buildings and structures are located to form and define public gathering spaces throughout the neighborhood. Buildings with porches, stoops, balconies and decks contribute a personal character to the street, contribute to a safe neighborhood, and serve as a buffer between the public street and the private house interior and recreational spaces beyond. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 1, 4-22-05; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 3-22-16) 
Sec. 62-469.6. - Definitions. 
    Build-to line means an alignment established a certain distance from the curb line along which a building shall be built. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 1, 4-22-05) 
Sec. 62-469.7. - General regulations. 
    Subdivision. The subdivision of any lots shall be expressly prohibited, following approval of a final platting. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 1, 4-22-05) 
Sec. 62-469.8. - District regulations. 
A.  Buildings shall be located as shown on an approved site plan. It is the goal of the zone to encourage a pedestrian oriented, walkable development. Therefore, it is necessary that pedestrian oriented amenities and features be incorporated into the house and site design. 
1.  Permitted uses. Single-family detached residential and four to six unit attached family residential. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
    The secondary façade, this "rear" portion of the building shall utilize consistent building materials and style as in other portions of the building. For the purpose of defining a site plan for approval, the following bulk regulations and design standards shall be adhered to: 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
Multi-family Buildings. 
(a)  Build-to line. From public street right-of-way line: 20 feet. 
(b)  Setback. Minimum distance between buildings shall be 30 feet. 
(c)  Height: Three stories or 36 feet. 
Single-family Buildings. 
(a)  Front Yard Setback: 20 feet. 
(b)  Side Yard Setback: 7.5 feet. 
(c)  Rear Yard Setback: 10 feet. 
(d)  Height: 35 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Each unit should extend a walk from a door to the sidewalk along the street or sidewalk trail system as shown on an approved site plan. The single-family homes shall be permitted to utilize the driveway for a portion of the connection between the door and street, sidewalk or trail system. 
(b)  Lights. Each multi-family dwelling unit shall provide a carriage light, style as provided for in the approved site plan, to be located at the intersection of the walk serving the dwelling unit leading from the front door and the sidewalk along the street or sidewalk trail system. 
(c)  Sheds. Accessory sheds shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Detached garages. Detached garages shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted. 
5.  Design standards. Buildings in the district shall be designed to promote a unique personal character, utilizing highest quality building materials. 
(a)  Building walls. The following materials shall be construed as permitted materials for exterior walls. 
Multi-family Buildings. 
All front facing walls on a single building shall be consistent in style, design, color, and material: 
Brick 
Wood Siding, including cement fiber products 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Single-family Buildings. 
Front façade: 
Stone - 20% of the front façade, not including the roof gables, shall have stone coverage 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Accent trim 
Shakes, including cedar or quality vinyl shakes. 
Side and rear façades: 
Stone 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Accent trim 
Shakes, including cedar or quality vinyl shakes 
Wood Siding, including cement fiber products and LP SmartSide 
(b)  Porches. Multi-family buildings shall utilize enclosed porches or patios. Buildings utilizing porches shall include materials such as: 
Foundation walls and piers: stucco, stone, split faced concrete block, or brick. Open foundations shall be enclosed by privacy lattice with one inch maximum openings. 
Posts and piers may include the following materials: wood, stone, stucco, brick. 
Railings may include the following materials: wood, aluminum, or approved paintable alternative. 
Porches shall have roofs, with supporting posts, piers, and/or columns. 
Single-family homes can have decks or patios. 
(c)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be symmetrically pitched. 
Eaves should overhang between 12 inches and 30 inches on the principal structure. 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches. 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(d)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using similar colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principal structure. 
6.  Entrance monumentation. Entrance monumentation shall be consistent in style and color throughout the zoning district. In all other respects, signage shall be consistent with the regulations provided in the Watertown Sign Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 1, 4-22-05; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 3-22-16) 
Sec. 62-469.9. - Site plan approval required. 
    Site Plan approval shall be required in accordance with sections 62-611 through 62-622 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 1, 4-22-05) 
Sec. 62-469.10. - Variances, appeals, and amendments. 
    Requests for variances, appeals, and amendments from and to the provisions of this division shall be administered as provided by divisions 2, 6, and 7 article II of this chapter. However, a request for a variance must be accompanied by a recommendation from the owners association or other operative neighborhood association, if any, pertaining to the property that is the subject to the variance request. An amendment to the district shall not require a recommendation from the owners association. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 1, 4-22-05) 
Sec. 62-470. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - RIVERPOINTE (PUD-RP)[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 16 as div. 18. 

Sec. 62-470.5. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the (PUD-RP) planned unit development - Riverpointe is to permit the development of various residential and public uses of land in an orderly manner. In order to accomplish the foregoing, a general plan consisting of various sub zones has been approved by the city council. 
    Residential buildings shall incorporate recognized pedestrian scale, personal character and quality, including low maintenance but architecturally significant building materials, porches and stoops, lighting, shutters, door and window locations and orientation 
    Buildings and structures are located to form and define the difference between the public space (streets) and the private areas (rear yards). Buildings with porches, stoops, and balconies contribute a personal character to the street, contribute to a safe neighborhood, and serve as a buffer between the public street and the private house interior. House designs that include front facing garages are discouraged, as their impact on the street negates from the personal character desired. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 62-470.6. - Subzones. 
    The following subzones shall make up the planned unit development - Riverpointe zoning district: 
Subzone A. Townhomes 
Subzone B. Twin homes 
Subzone C. High density attached residential 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 62-470.7. - General regulations. 
    No lot within a subzone shall be subdivided subsequent to approval of a final plat. 
    Lot layout and design shall be consistent with an approved site plan, developed under the following regulations: 
Buildings shall be located as depicted on the approved site plan. It is the goal of the zone to encourage a pedestrian oriented, walkable development, therefore, it is necessary that pedestrian oriented amenities and features shall be incorporated into the house and site design. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 62-470.8. - Subzone district regulations. 
A.  Subzone A. townhomes. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
Four units per building (structure) attached side by side. 
Single-family residential. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. All buildings shall be located as indicated on an approved site plan. 
(a)  Minimum setback. Setback shall be measured from the property line. 
Front ten feet 
Side five feet 
Rear five feet 
(b)  Minimum distance between buildings. 45 feet. 
(c)  Height. Three stories or 36 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. A sidewalk shall be extended from the front door to the sidewalk along the street as shown on the approved site plan. 
(b)  Lights. An approved carriage light shall be provided as shown on the approved site plan. 
(c)  Sheds. Accessory sheds shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted. 
5.  Design standards. Principal buildings in subzone A shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding, including cement fiber products 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
(b)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Roof colors shall be earth toned excluding green, silver, and light gray. 
(c)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using similar colors and patterns as employed in the principal structure. Steel raised panel doors shall incorporate windows or other similar treatment. 
B.  Subzone B. twin homes. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
Two units per building attached side by side. 
Single-family residential. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Minimum setback. 
Front ten feet 
Side five feet 
Rear five feet 
(b)  Minimum distance between buildings. 25 feet. 
(c)  Height. 
Three stories or 36 feet 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. A sidewalk shall be extended from the front door to the sidewalk along the street as shown on the approved site plan. 
(b)  Lights. An approved carriage light shall be provided as shown on the approved site plan. 
(c)  Sheds. Accessory sheds shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted. 
5.  Design standards. Principal buildings in subzone B shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding 
Cementious fiberboard 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
(b)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Roof colors shall be earth toned excluding green, silver, and light gray 
(c)  Garage Doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using similar colors and patterns as employed in the principal structure. Steel raised panel doors shall incorporate windows or other similar treatment. 
C.  Subzone C. High Density Attached Residential. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
Attached family residential. Six units per building, arranged back-to-back and side by side. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Minimum Setback. 
Front public street setback ten feet 
Private drive setback 14 feet 
(b)  Height. Three stories or 36 feet. 
(c)  Minimum distance between buildings. As shown on an approved site plan. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Lights. An approved carriage light shall be provided as shown on the approved site plan. 
(b)  Sheds. Accessory sheds shall not be permitted. 
(c)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted. 
5.  Design standards. Principal buildings in subzone C shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding 
Cementious fiberboard 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
(b)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted roofing materials: 
Asphalt shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Roof colors shall be earth toned excluding green, silver, and light gray. 
(c)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using similar colors and patterns as employed in the principal structure. Steel raised panel doors shall incorporate windows or other similar treatment. 
(d)  Group refuse storage. If used and approved as an accessory structure, group refuge storage shall be housed in a structure consistent with the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 62-470.9. - Site plan approval required. 
    Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with sections 62-611 through 62-622 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 62-470.10 - Variances, appeals, and amendments. 
    Requests for variances, appeals, and amendments from and to the provisions of this division shall be administered as provided by divisions 2, 6, and 7 of article II of this chapter. However, a request for a variance must be accompanied by a recommendation from the owners association or other operative neighborhood association, if any, pertaining to the property that is the subject to the variance request. An amendment to the district shall not require a recommendation from the owners association. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1, 4-26-05) 
Secs. 62-470.11-62-470.14. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - FOREST HILLS ZONING (PUD-FH)[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 17 as div. 19. 

Sec. 62-470.15. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the planned unit development - Forest Hills zoning (PUD-FH) is to permit the development of various residential, business/ commercial uses, and public uses of land in a planned and orderly manner. In order to accomplish the foregoing, a general plan consisting of various sub zones has been approved by the city council. 
    Residential buildings shall incorporate a pedestrian scale, personal character and quality, including low maintenance but architecturally significant building materials, porches and stoops, lighting, shutters, door and window locations and orientation 
    Commercial buildings should be designed to recognize a residential character. Buildings should incorporate the highest architectural quality using materials chosen for their durability and strength. 
    Buildings and structures are located to form and define public space (streets) and the private areas (rear yards). Buildings with porches, stoops, and balconies contribute a personal character to the street, contribute to a safe neighborhood, and serve as a buffer between the public street and the private house interior. House designs that include front facing garages are discouraged, as their impact on the street negates from the character desired. 
(Ord. No. 273, 9-23-05) 
Sec. 62-470.16. - Definitions. 
    Build-to line means an alignment established a certain distance from the property line along which a building shall be built. In the case of attached family homes, the build-to line shall be as established by the preliminary plat or the planning commission. For the purposes of this section, the building style will govern its placement on the lot. All principal buildings will be classified into three styles: porch, front building wall, and garage, to be classified by that portion (porch, wall, garage) of the structure the shortest distance from the street. 
    Shutter means a cover or screen for a window, usually fitted with louvers. Shutters must be sized appropriately to cover the adjacent opening. Shutter may be functional or have the appearance of functionality. 
    Porch means a roofed structure not more than 75 percent enclosed by walls and attached to the main building. 
    Front building plane means that portion of the principal structure closest to the street not a garage door or porch. 
    Other terms as defined in section 62-1 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 273, 9-23-05) 
Sec. 62-470.17. - General regulations. 
(a)  Subdivision. No lots within subzone A, B, and C shall be subdivided subsequent to approval of a final plat. This shall not be construed to prohibit replatting of an outlot. 
Setback, Front: The front building setback for subzones A, B, C, D, and F shall be 30 feet. 
Within A, B, C, D, or F subzones, a front building setback of 25 feet shall be permitted if the garage is set back five feet (so that the garage is located no closer than 30 feet) from the front building plane (for garages facing the street). 
Within A, B, C, D, or F subzones, a front building setback of 25 feet shall be permitted for the garage if the garage is side loaded (garage door(s) are perpendicular to the street). In this instance, the front building plane of the principal structure shall not encroach closer than 25 feet. 
Within A, B, C, D, or F subzones, a front building setback of 20 feet shall be permitted if a porch is used as a feature on the front of the principal structure and the garage door encroaches no closer than 25 feet. To meet this requirement, the porch must include: 
A minimum of six feet of depth, measured at the front door to the top of step(s), if any. Such porch shall provide a minimum of 18 feet of width. 
(b)  Detached garages. Detached garages shall be prohibited in all districts. 
(c)  Garage door setback. Garage doors, where facing the street within A, B, or C subzones, shall be located a minimum of 15 feet back from the porch or front building plane, which ever is used to classify building type. 
(d)  Porch design standards. To be classified as a porch style building, the porch shall provide a minimum of eight feet of depth, measured at the front door to the top of step(s), if any. Such porch shall provide a minimum of 25 feet of width, or 70 percent of the gross width of the house, which ever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 273, 9-23-05; Ord. No. 285, § 1, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 62-470.18. - Subzones. 
    The following subzones shall make up the planned unit development - Forest Hills zoning district: 
Subzone A. Low density single family detached residential 
Subzone B. Medium density single family detached residential 
Subzone C. High density single family detached residential 
Subzone D. Townhomes 
Subzone E. Row houses 
Subzone F. Twin homes 
Subzone G. High density attached residential 
Subzone H. Neighborhood commercial 
(Ord. No. 273, 9-23-05) 
Sec. 62-470.19. - Subzone district regulations. 
A.  Subzone A. Low density single-family detached residential. 
1.  Permitted uses. Single-family detached residence. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setback. 
Side ten feet 
Rear 35 feet 
Corner side yard 30 feet 
(b)  Height. 
Maximum height shall be 36 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Each dwelling unit shall extend a walkway from the front door to the sidewalk along the street. 
(b)  Lights. Each unit shall provide a carriage light, style as approved in writing by the city planner, to be located at the intersection of the sidewalk leading from the front door and the sidewalk along the street. 
(c)  Sheds. Accessory sheds may be permitted on the property, provided: 
Maximum size is 120 square feet. 
Maximum height is 12 feet or one story. 
Sheds shall be permanently mounted on concrete slab at least four inches thick. 
Sheds shall be finished of materials exactly like those of the principal structure, including, but not limited to shingle type and color, siding type and color. Sheds shall be located such that the structure is screened as much as possible from public streets and in no instance shall be located within a required yard. 
(d)  Fences. Fences may be permitted on the property, as provided for in section 62-477. The following additional regulations apply: 
All fences in the front or corner side yard shall provide, at minimum 50 percent openness, meaning the open space shall be at least as wide as the picket width. Wire fences shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Other accessory structures. Other accessory structures may be constructed as permitted in section 62-477 of this Code, provided such construction is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
5.  Design standards. Buildings in subzone A shall be designed for permanent, reduced or maintenance free materials, and may include, at minimum: 
(a)  Porches. Porches shall include materials such as: 
Foundation walls and piers: stucco, stone, rough faced concrete block, or brick. Open foundations shall be enclosed by privacy lattice; one inch maximum openings. 
Posts and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, stone, stucco, brick. 
Railings shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, aluminum, or approved paintable alternative. 
Porches shall have roofs, with supporting posts, piers, and/or columns. 
(b)  Exterior walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials: 
Brick 
Wood siding, including approved cement fiber products, eight inch max exposure. 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Steel 
Aluminum 
Vinyl .042 minimum thickness 
All lap siding material shall provide a maximum of eight inch maximum exposure. When using steel, vinyl or aluminum siding, a minimum of 25 percent of the non-glazed front facade shall be covered with brick or stone. 
(c)  Roofs. The following shall be permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better or an equal or superior product approved in writing by the city. 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be pitched between 6:12 and 12:12 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays, browns, black except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(d)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using complementary colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Garage doors must include one of the following architectural features such as windows, accent trim which varies in color, or a superior material that distinguishes itself from the surrounding home with written approval by the city. 
B.  Subzone B. Medium density single-family detached residential. 
1.  Permitted uses. Single-family detached residence. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setback. 
Side seven feet 
Rear 30 feet 
Corner side yard 25 feet 
(b)  Height. 
Maximum height shall be 36 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Each dwelling unit shall extend a concrete, brick, natural stone (an equal material approved by the city in writing may be used) walkway from the front door (or stoop) to the sidewalk along the street. This sidewalk need not be perfectly straight and can connect to the front stoop via a secondary sidewalk that connects to the driveway. 
(b)  Lights. Each unit shall provide a carriage light, style as approved in writing by the city planner, to be located at the intersection of the sidewalk leading from the front door and the sidewalk along the street. 62-470.19B.5.(b), (c), (d) 
(c)  Sheds. Accessory sheds may be permitted on the property, provided: 
Maximum size is 120 square feet. 
Maximum height is 12 feet or one story. 
Sheds shall be permanently mounted on concrete slab at least four inches thick. 
Sheds shall be finished of materials exactly like those of the principal structure, including, but not limited to shingle type and color, siding type and color. 
Sheds shall be located such that the structure is screened as much as possible from public streets. 
(d)  Fences. Fences may be permitted on the property, as provided for in section 62-477. The following additional regulations apply: 
All fences in the front or corner side yard shall provide at minimum 50 percent openness, meaning the open space shall be at least as wide as the picket width. Wire fences shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Other accessory structures. Other accessory structures may be constructed as permitted in section 62-477 of this Code, provided such construction is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
5.  Design standards. Principal buildings in subzone B shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Porches. Porches shall include materials: 
Foundation walls and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Stucco, stone, split faces concrete block, or brick. Open foundations shall be enclosed by privacy lattice. One inch maximum openings. 
Posts and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: 
Wood, stone, stucco, brick. 
Railings shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, aluminum, or approved paintable alternative. 
Porches shall have roofs, with supporting posts, piers, and/or columns. 
(b)  Exterior walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials: 
Brick 
Wood siding, including approved cement fiber products, eight inch max exposure. 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Steel 
Aluminum 
Vinyl .042 minimum thickness 
All lap siding material shall provide a maximum of 8 inch maximum exposure. When using steel, vinyl or aluminum siding, a minimum of 25 percent of the non-glazed front facade shall be covered with brick or stone. 
(c)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better or an equal or superior product approved in writing by the city. 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be pitched between 6:12 and 12:12 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between 8 inches and 24 inches 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays, browns, black except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(d)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using complementary colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Garage doors must include one of the following architectural features such as windows, accent trim which varies in color, or a superior material that distinguishes itself from the surrounding home with written approval by the city. 
C.  Subzone C. high density single-family detached residential. 
1.  Permitted uses. Single-family detached residence. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setback 
Side five feet 
Rear 20 feet 
Corner side yard 20 feet 
(b)  Height 
Maximum height shall be 36 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Each dwelling unit shall extend a concrete, brick, natural stone (an equal material approved by the city in writing may be used) walkway from the front door (or stoop) to the sidewalk along the street. This sidewalk need not be perfectly straight and can connect to the front stoop via a secondary sidewalk that connects to the driveway. 
(b)  Lights. Each unit shall provide a carriage light, style as approved in writing by the city planner, to be located at the intersection of the sidewalk leading from the front door and the sidewalk along the street. 
(c)  Sheds. Accessory sheds may be permitted on the property, provided: 
Maximum size is 120 square feet. 
Maximum height is 12 feet or one story. 
Sheds shall be permanently mounted on a concrete slab at least four inches thick. 
Sheds shall be finished of materials exactly like those of the principal structure, including, but not limited to shingles type and color, siding type and color. 
(d)  Fences. Fences may be permitted on the property, as provided for in section 62-477. The following additional regulations apply: 
All fences in the front or corner side yard shall provide at minimum 50 percent openness, meaning the open space shall be at least as wide as the picket width. Wire fences shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Other accessory structures. Other accessory structures may be constructed as permitted in section 62-477 of this Code, provided such construction is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
5.  Design standards. Principal buildings in subzone C shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Porches. Porches shall include materials such as: 
Foundation walls and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Stucco, Stone, split faces concrete block, or brick. Open foundations shall be enclosed by privacy lattice. One inch maximum openings. 
Posts and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, stone, stucco, brick. Railings shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, aluminum, or approved paintable alternative. 
Porches shall have roofs, with supporting posts, piers, and/or columns. 
(b)  Exterior walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding, including approved cement fiber products maximum eight inch exposure 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Steel 
Aluminum 
Vinyl .042 minimum thickness 
Siding shall provide maximum five-inch lap exposure. When using steel or aluminum siding, a minimum of two percent of the non-glazed front facade shall be covered with brick or stone. 
(c)  Roofs. The following shall be constructed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better or an equal or superior product approved in writing by the city. 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 6:12 and 12:12 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure. 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches. 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(d)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using complementary colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Garage doors must include one of the following architectural features such as windows, accent trim which varies in color, or a superior material that distinguishes itself from the surrounding home with written approval by the city. 
D.  Subzone D. townhomes. Buildings shall be as located a part of an approved site plan. It is the goal of the zone to encourage a pedestrian oriented, walkable development. Therefore, it is necessary that pedestrian oriented amenities and features be incorporated into the house and site design. 
1.  Permitted uses. Three to seven unit attached family residential. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setback 
Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet 
Rear, from public street: 40 feet 
Corner side yard: 20 feet 
(b)  Height 
Maximum Height shall be two stories or 30 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Each dwelling unit shall extend a concrete, brick, natural stone (an equal material approved by the city in writing may be used) walkway from the front door (or stoop) to the sidewalk along the street. This sidewalk need not be perfectly straight and can connect to the front stoop via a secondary sidewalk that connects to the driveway. 
(b)  Lights. Each unit shall provide a carriage light (type to be determined and approved by the city planner) located at the intersection of the private sidewalk and the public sidewalk. 
(c)  Fences. Fences may be permitted on the property, as provided for in section 62-477. The following additional regulations apply: 
All fences in the front or corner side yard shall provide at minimum 50 percent openness, meaning the open space shall be at least as wide as the picket width. Wire fences shall not be permitted 
(d)  Other accessory structures. Other accessory structures may be constructed as permitted in section 62-477 of this Code, provided such construction is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(5)  Design standards. Principal buildings in subzone D shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Porches. Porches shall include materials such as: 
Foundation walls and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Stucco, Stone, split faces concrete block, or brick. Open foundations shall be enclosed by privacy lattice. One inch maximum openings. 
Posts and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, stone, stucco, brick. 
Railings shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, aluminum, or approved paintable alternative. 
Porches shall have roofs, with supporting posts, piers, and/or columns. 
(b)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood Siding, including cement fiber products 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Steel 
Aluminum 
All lap siding material shall provide a maximum of five inches width. When using steel or aluminum siding, a minimum of 25 percent of the non-glazed front facade shall be covered with brick or stone. 
(c)  Roofs. The following shall be constructed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better or an equal or superior product approved in writing by the city. 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be pitched between 6:12 and 12:12 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure. 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches. 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(d)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using complementary colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Garage doors must include one of the following architectural features such as windows, accent trim which varies in color, or a superior material that distinguishes itself from the surrounding home with written approval by the city. 
E.  Subzone E. row houses. The ROW house subzone is unique from the townhome subzone in that it provides a more uniquely urban style of development. Excepting individual balconies and patios, there is no private exterior space. Recreational needs are supported by the closely adjacent public park system, including connecting sidewalks, trails, and ponds. Buildings in the ROW house subzone shall exhibit a superior architectural quality, captured with its use of brick and other high quality, low maintenance materials. 
1.  Permitted uses. Attached residential units five to eight units per building. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. Buildings in the subzone E shall be located as provided for in an approved site plan. Such locations shall correspond to the following: 
(a)  Setbacks. 
ROW houses fronting a public street shall be built to be located 30 feet from the adjacent public right-of-way. Unenclosed stoops, balconies, and other similar projections may encroach into the required building setback a distance not to exceed ten feet. 
ROW houses fronting a private parking or drive aisle shall be built to be located 25 feet from the adjacent private drive aisle edge of curb. Uncovered porches and decks may encroach into this area a distance not to exceed ten feet, provided such improvements are located on the second story or above. 
(b)  Distances between buildings. 
Courtyards 
ROW houses, where adjacent to another building via an adjoining landscaped courtyard, shall preserve a minimum of 45 feet. Unenclosed porches, stoops, balconies, and other similar projections may encroach into the required building setback a distance not to exceed six feet. 
Parking/drive aisles 
ROW houses, where adjacent to another building via a shared parking facility (aisle or parking), shall preserve a minimum of 75 feet. 
Lateral separation 
ROW houses shall preserve a minimum of 20 feet between units. 
(c)  Height 
Maximum height shall be three stories or 45 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Each dwelling unit shall extend a concrete, brick, natural stone (an equal material approved by the city in writing may be used) walkway from the front door (or stoop) to the sidewalk along the street. This sidewalk need not be perfectly straight and can connect to the front stoop via a secondary sidewalk that connects to the driveway. 
(b)  Lights. Each unit shall provide a carriage light (type to be determined and approved by the city planner) located at the intersection of the private sidewalk and the public sidewalk. 
(c)  Fences. Ornamental fences may be constructed, provided: 
Ornamental fences may be a maximum of 36 inches high, constructed of wrought iron, aluminum, or approved equal; 
Located adjacent to streets, and; 
Constructed in a "per block" basis. 
5.  Design standards. Row houses shall be designed for permanency and strength of character. While a row house building contains a number of separate units, exterior surfaces shall be consistent. 
(a)  Exterior walls. 
A minimum of 75 percent of the exterior (includes four sides of building), non-glazed surface of Row houses shall include brick. The subzone, consisting of several individual buildings shall include consistent building colors and materials. The remaining 25 percent of the exterior, non-glazed surface of Row houses may include: 
Wood siding, including cement fiber products; 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing; 
Stone; 
Steel 
Aluminum 
All lap siding material shall provide a maximum of eight inches exposure. 
(b)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better or an equal or superior product approved in writing by the city. 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be pitched between 6:12 and 12:12 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(c)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using complementary colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Garage doors must include one of the following architectural features such as windows, accent trim which varies in color, or a superior material that distinguishes itself from the surrounding home with written approval by the city. 
F.  Subzone F. twin homes. 
1.  Permitted uses. Two unit single-family attached structures. 
2.  Conditional uses. None. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setback 
Side five feet 
Rear 20 feet 
Corner side yard 20 feet 
(b)  Height 
Maximum height shall be 36 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Each dwelling unit shall extend a concrete, brick, natural stone (an equal material approved by the city in writing may be used) walkway from the front door (or stoop) to the sidewalk along the street. This sidewalk need not be perfectly straight and can connect to the front stoop via a secondary sidewalk that connects to the driveway. 
(b)  Lights. Each unit shall provide a carriage light (type to be determined and approved by the city planner) located at the intersection of the private sidewalk and the public sidewalk. 
(c)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted in subzone F. 
5.  Design standards. Principal buildings in subzone F shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Porches. Porches shall include materials such as: 
Foundation walls and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Stucco, stone, split faces concrete block, or brick. Open foundations shall be enclosed by privacy lattice. One inch maximum openings. 
Posts and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, stone, stucco, brick. 
Railings shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, aluminum, or approved paintable alternative. 
Porches shall have roofs, with supporting posts, piers, and/or columns. 
(b)  Exterior walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding, including cement fiber products 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Steel 
Aluminum 
All lap siding shall have a maximum eight-inch exposure. When using steel or aluminum siding, a minimum of 25 percent of the non-glazed front facade shall be covered with brick or stone. 
(c)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be pitched between 6:12 and 12:12 
Eaves should overhang between 18 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(d)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using complementary colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Garage doors must include one of the following architectural features such as windows, accent trim which varies in color, or a superior material that distinguishes itself from the surrounding home with written approval by the city. 
G.  Subzone G. high density attached residential. 
1.  Permitted uses. Eight units per building, arranged in a back-to-back fashion, or in a one-two level fashion. 
2.  Conditional uses. None 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setback 
Public street setback: 30 feet 
Private street front setback: 20 feet 
Private street side setback: Ten feet 
(b)  Height 
Three stories or 36 feet 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Each dwelling unit shall extend a concrete, brick, natural stone (an equal material approved by the city in writing may be used) walkway from the front door (or stoop) to the sidewalk along the street. This sidewalk need not be perfectly straight and can connect to the front stoop via a secondary sidewalk that connects to the driveway. 
(b)  Lights. Each unit shall provide a carriage light (type to be determined and approved by the city planner) located at the intersection of the private sidewalk and the public sidewalk. 
(c)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted in subzone G. 
5.  Design standards. Principal buildings in subzone G shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Vinyl (.42 minimum thickness) 
Brick 
Wood siding, including James Hardi products 
Stone 
All lap siding shall have a maximum five inches width. 
(b)  Roofs. The roof structure of buildings arranged with units back to back have traditionally been visually imposing, due to their size and building materials. Every attempt must be made to minimum this effect of the roofs in the subzone through the development of roof features, including dormer windows, cupolas, roof articulation. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better or an equal or superior product approved in writing by the city. 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(c)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using complementary colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Garage doors must include one of the following architectural features such as windows, accent trim which varies in color, or a superior material that distinguishes itself from the surrounding home with written approval by the city. 
(d)  Group refuse storage shall be housed in a structure consistent with the principal structure. 
H.  Subzone H. neighborhood commercial. The neighborhood commercial subzone is intended to provide areas for a limited range of business establishments that will offer convenience goods and services to residents located in the general vicinity of the zone. The district shall be designed to accommodate pedestrian and short term traffic. 
    Architecture shall incorporate the residential character of the district, and include materials chosen for their strength and permanency of character. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Bakeries, where all goods are sold on the premises at retail. 
b.  Barber shops and beauty parlors. 
c.  Drug stores/ pharmacies not larger than 8,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Electrical appliance shops and repair. 
e.  Financial institutions. 
f.  Florist shops and greenhouses for retail trade only. 
g.  Grocery, fruit or vegetable stores. 
h.  Hardware store. 
i.  Launderettes, Laundromats and dry cleaners employing facilities for not more than 1,000 pounds of dry goods per day and using carbon tetrachloride or other non-inflammable cleaning agents. 
j.  Medical and dental laboratories and clinics. 
k.  Pet shop. 
l.  Professional or service offices. 
m.  Public libraries. 
n.  Retail stores, and services, not larger than 8,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
o.  Shoe repair shops. 
p.  Tailor and dressmaking shops. 
q.  Residential, provided located on second floor or above. 
2.  Conditional uses. Any use not expressly permitted but consistent with the intent of the district. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Build-to lines. 
Front (public street): Five feet 
(b)  Setback. 
Side 20 feet 
Distance from residential subzones: 50 feet 
(c)  Height 
A maximum of 36 feet 
(d)  Parking 
Parking regulation shall be as prescribed in the parking requirements outlined in the city Code. 
4.  Design standards. 
(a)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding, including James Hardi products 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Steel 
Aluminum 
When using steel or aluminum siding, a minimum of 65 percent of the non-glazed front facade shall be covered with brick or stone. 
(b)  Windows and doors. Windows and doors (fenestration) identify a personal character to the subzone, while providing light, motion, and visibility to the surrounding areas. This adds to the positive, comfortable image of the area. Fenestration ratio (the ratio of glazed surface areas to non glazed surface areas) shall be at minimum of 65 percent. The use of canopies and awnings is encouraged throughout the subzone to provide comfort to the consumer and window shopper. 
(c)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Roof lines shall incorporate residential character, and include hips or gables, dormers, etc. Flat roofs or single sloped roofs shall not be permitted. 
Mechanical units (condensers, vents, satellites, etc.) shall be completely screened from public view. 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(d)  Accessory structures. Trash, grease, recycling receptacles shall be located within a permanent structure that completely screens the contents from public view. Such structure shall be consistent in design with the principal structure. 
(e)  Parking. The visual image of the commercial subzone shall be dominated by the architecture and pedestrian amenity (street furniture, lighting, landscaping). Therefore, parking shall be limited in number of spaces provided and location of these spaces. The use of shared parking facilities is important to the success of a neighborhood shopping center to avoid creating a "sea of concrete" unattractive and unappealing to shoppers and consumers. Parking shall be located interior to the space defined by the placement of buildings at the perimeter, thereby screening the spaces from adjacent public streets and affording the ability for users to share parking, all within a parking surface defined by clearly delineated pedestrian routes. 
(f)  Signage. Signage shall be consistent in style and color throughout the subzone. A master sign plan shall be developed for the subzone. In all other respects, signage shall be consistent with the regulations provided in chapter 48 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 273, 9-23-05; Ord. No. 285, § 1, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 62-470.20. - Site plan approval required. 
    Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with sections 62-611 through 62-622 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 273, 9-23-05) 
Sec. 62-470.21. - Variances, appeals and amendments. 
    Requests for variances from the provisions of this division shall be administered as provided by divisions 2, 6 and 7 or article II of this chapter. However, a request for a variance must be accompanied by a recommendation from the owners association or other operative neighborhood association, if any, pertaining to the property that is the subject to the variance request. 
(Ord. No. 273, 9-23-05) 
Secs. 62-470.22-62-470.24. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 20. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - GENERAL RESIDENTIAL (PUD-GR)[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 18 as div. 20. 

Sec. 62-470.25. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the planned unit development general residential (PUD-GR) is to permit the development of various residential and public uses of land in an orderly manner. In order to accomplish the foregoing, a general plan consisting of various sub zones has been approved by the city council. 
Residential buildings shall incorporate recognized pedestrian scale, personal character and quality, including low maintenance but architecturally significant building materials, porches and stoops, lighting, shutters, door and window locations and orientation. 
Buildings and structures are located to form and define a separation between the public space (streets) and the private areas (interior spaces and rear yards). Buildings with porches, stoops, and balconies contribute a personal character to the street, contribute to a safe neighborhood, and serve as a buffer between the public street and the private house interior. House designs that include front facing garages are discouraged, as their impact on the street negates from the personal character desired. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 62-470.26. - Subzones 
    The following subzones shall make up the Planned Unit Development - GR zoning district: 
Subzone A. Townhomes 
Subzone B. Twin Homes 
(Ord. No. 281, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 62-470.27. - General regulations 
No lot within a subzone shall be subdivided subsequent to approval of a final plat. 
Lot layout and design shall be consistent with an approved site plan, developed under the following regulations: 
Buildings shall be located as depicted on the approved site plan. It is the goal of the zone to encourage a pedestrian oriented, walkable development, therefore, it is necessary that pedestrian oriented amenities and features shall be incorporated into the house and site design. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 62-470.28. - Subzone district regulations. 
A.  Subzone A. townhomes 
1.  Permitted uses. 
Three to six units per building (structure) attached side by side. 
Single family detached residential. 
2.  Conditional uses. 
None 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
All buildings shall be located as indicated on an approved site plan. 
(a)  Minimum setback. Setback shall be measured from the property line. 
Front 20 feet 
Side five feet 
Rear five feet 
(b)  Height. 
Two stories or 30 feet 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sheds. Accessory sheds shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted. 
5.  Design standards. 
Principle buildings in subzone A shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding, including cement fiber products 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Steel, aluminum 
Vinyl 
Stone 
(b)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Roof colors shall be earth toned excluding green, silver, and light gray. 
(c)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using similar colors and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Steel raised panel doors shall incorporate windows or other similar treatment. 
B.  Subzone B. Twin Homes. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
Two units per building on separate lots. Attached side by side. 
Single family residential. 
2.  Conditional uses. 
None 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Minimum setback. 
Front 20 feet 
Side five feet 
Rear five feet 
(b)  Height. 
Two stories or 30 feet 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sheds. Accessory sheds shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted. 
5.  Design standards 
Principle buildings in subzone B shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding 
Cementious fiberboard 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Steel 
Aluminum 
Vinyl 
(b)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Roof colors shall be earth toned excluding green, silver, and light gray. 
(c)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using similar colors and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Steel raised panel doors shall incorporate windows or other similar treatment. 
B.  Subzone B. Twin homes. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
Two units per building on separate lots. Attached side by side. 
Single family residential. 
2.  Conditional uses. 
None 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Minimum setback. 
Front 20 feet 
Side five feet 
Rear five feet 
(b)  Height. 
Two stories or 30 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sheds. Accessory sheds shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Fences. Fences shall not be permitted. 
5.  Design standards. 
Principle buildings in subzone B shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Building walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood siding 
Cementious fiberboard 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Steel 
Aluminum 
Vinyl 
Stone 
(b)  Roofs. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt shingles 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Roof colors shall be earth toned excluding green, silver, and light gray. 
(c)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using similar colors and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Steel raised panel doors shall incorporate windows or other similar treatment. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 62-470.29. - Site plan approval required. 
    Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with sections 62-611 through 62-622 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 62-470.30. - Appeals, variances, and amendments. 
    Appeals and requests for variances and amendments from and to the provisions of this division shall be administered as provided by divisions 2, 6, and 7 of article II of this chapter. However, a request for a variance must be accompanied by a recommendation from the owners association or other operative neighborhood association, if any, pertaining to the property that is the subject to the variance request. An amendment to the district shall not require a recommendation from the owners association. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Secs. 62-470.31-62-470.34. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 21. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT-BUSINESS PARK (BP)[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 19 as div. 21. 

Sec. 62-470.35. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the planned unit development-business park (BP) zoning is to permit the development of various business/commercial uses, in a planned and orderly manner. In order to accomplish the foregoing, a general plan consisting of various sub zones has been approved by the city council. 
    It is the intent of this district to promote high quality development while providing a location and environment suitable for a multitude of businesses. Buildings should incorporate the highest architectural quality using materials chosen for their durability and strength. 
    Sub zones have been developed to maximize the potential development while minimizing the potential conflict between incompatible uses. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.36. - Definitions 
Material good(s) means the substance or substances out of which finished products are constructed. 
Screening (for outdoor storage) means providing a fence or landscaping to create 100 percent opacity, as viewed from the public right of way or adjacent property, to a height of eight feet for all areas proposed for outdoor storage. 
Significant tree means any deciduous or coniferous tree measuring four caliper inches in diameter or greater which is not dead or actively infected with any disease. 
Stem diameter (caliper inches, trunk diameter) means the diameter of a tree measured usually at 4.5 feet above the ground. The diameter of trees that have multiple stems will equal the sum of the diameters of each stem. 
Tree preservation area means an area that is intended to be preserved so that no more than 50 percent of the total significant caliper inches are removed. 
Other terms as defined in section 62-1 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.37. - General regulations 
Subdivision. No lots within sub zones A, B, and C shall be subdivided so that a greater number of total lots would exist following subdivision. Lots will be permitted to be combined following the necessary subdivisions procedures as provided by section 52-46 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.38. - Subzones. 
The following sub zones shall make up the planned unit development-business park (BP) zoning district: 
Subzone A. Commercial retail/highway commercial, office 
Subzone B. Commercial/light industrial 
Subzone C. Industrial 
(Ord. No. 293, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.39. - Subzone district regulations. 
A.  Subzone A. Commercial retail/highway commercial office. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in subzone A under the conditions specified. No building or lot shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted hereunder, with the exception of the following: 
i.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Code; 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the subzone A district: 
i.  Any use not expressly permitted but consistent with the intent of the district which, by approval of the city council, shall be permitted 
ii.  Offices such as: 
(1)  Business offices of a public utility, transportation, advertising, real estate, insurance, commercial or industrial establishment 
(2)  Finance agency offices 
(3)  Medical, optical and dental offices, legal, engineering, architectural and similar professional offices, accounting and bookkeeping service offices 
(4)  Offices of miscellaneous business services such as stenographic services and business and management consulting services 
(5)  Offices of non-profit organizations, such as professional organizations, civic, social and fraternal associations, political organizations and religious institutions 
iii.  Governmental centers and offices and other public uses and structures appropriate to the character of the district, necessary to its servicing, or requiring location within the district. 
iv.  Municipal buildings and uses 
v.  Businesses that offer a convenience goods and services to residents of the community such as: 
(1)  Bank machine/ATM 
(2)  Barber/beauty shop 
(3)  Child day-care center 
(4)  Club or lodge 
(5)  Coffee shop 
(6)  Copy center/print shop 
(7)  Dance/aerobic gymnastic studio 
(8)  Drug stores 
(9)  Dry cleaning service 
(10)  Electric appliance shops and repair 
(11)  Fingernail salon 
(12)  Fitness center/gym 
(13)  Health spa 
(14)  Ice-cream shop 
(15)  Karate/marshal arts studio 
(16)  Photographic studio 
(17)  Plant nursery-(Retail) 
(18)  Tailor 
(19)  Tanning salon 
(20)  Trade, business or commercial school 
(21)  Video/dvd store 
vi.  Service-oriented adult use establishments, principal, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
vii.  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, principal, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
viii.  Service-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
ix.  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
2.  Conditional uses. 
(a)  Conditional uses, as hereinafter enumerated, may be allowed in subzone A district, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit (cup) in accordance with the provisions of division 5 of this chapter. 
(b)  The following conditional uses may be allowed in the subzone A district: 
i.  Automobile fueling and or service stations. 
ii.  Outdoor storage of material goods if screened. 
iii.  Public utility. 
iv.  Restaurant (sit down and fast food). 
v.  Commercial businesses such as on-sale or off-sale liquor establishments (taverns, pubs) and restaurants intending to sell or serve liquor as part of regular business. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setbacks. 
Front: 20 feet Side: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 45 feet from residential property Ten feet for all other properties Rear: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 45 feet from residential property 25 feet for all other properties Corner Side yard: 20 feet  
(b)  Parking setbacks. 
Front: Ten feet Side: Five feet (Zero feet if two parcels gain site plan approval to utilize a shared parking lot) Rear: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 15 feet for all other properties Corner Side yard: Ten feet  
(c)  Height. 
Maximum height shall be ten stories or 36 feet. 
(d)  Impervious surface area. 
Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 75 percent. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Fences. Fences may be permitted on the property, as provided for in section 62-477 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. The following additional regulations apply: 
All fences in the front or corner side yard shall provide, at minimum 85 percent opacity and shall be ornamental metal or approved equal. Chain link and wire fences shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Other accessory structures. Other accessory structures may be constructed as permitted in section 62-477 of the Municipal Code of Watertown, provided such construction is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
5.  Design standards. 
All new buildings, structures, expansions, remodeling, and site plans shall conform to these design standards. Buildings in subzone A shall be designed for permanent, reduced or maintenance free materials, and may include, at minimum: 
(a)  Exterior walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials: 
Natural brick 
Masonry block (if approved by city council) 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Fiber cement siding such as James Hardie products or approved equal. 
Glass 
Pre-cast concrete panels as approved by the city. 
Treated/anodized metal for trim and accent 
(b)  Roofs. Roofs can be pitched or flat and shall be constructed using the following standards: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be pitched between 6:12 and 12:12. 
Flat roof: Shall have decorative/accent trim 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays, browns, black except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. Other colors may be permitted as approved by the city. 
(c)  Screening. 
i.  Roof-mounted mechanical units, satellite dishes, or other similar equipment shall be screened from the public view by the extension of a parapet wall or other roof structure. 
ii.  In the case where the parapet wall cannot feasibly screen the roof-mounted equipment, point-in-place or other appropriate screening shall be required. Such screening shall have similar design features as the building including materials, shape, and color considerations. 
Understanding the operational requirements of satellite dishes and antennas, such units shall be screened to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties. 
(d)  Landscaping. A minimum of ten percent of site shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of the following elements: 
i.  One major shade trees, for every 40 linear feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances. Each tree, at the time of installation, shall have a clear trunk height of at least six feet and a minimum caliper of two inches. 
ii.  For the purpose of these regulations, a major shade tree shall be a tree normally growing to a mature height of 25 feet and a mature spread of at least 15 feet. 
iii.  Five shrubs for every 100 linear feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances. 
iv.  All areas not devoted to structures or parking and the impervious surface area required for each lot shall be covered or planted with grass, ground covers or other live landscape treatment, excluding paving or gravel. 
v.  Screening-Landscaping may be used to satisfy screening requirements for outdoor storage of goods and equipment if approved by the city council. 
(e)  Tree preservation . This entire development is considered to be a tree preservation area. All significant trees shall be preserved in accordance with the following procedures: 
i.  For any construction or development that proposes to disturb any significant tree, a tree survey, prepared by a certified arborist, shall be completed by the applicant of the site plan approval indicating the location, size species and condition of all significant trees. 
ii.  The survey prepared shall indicate all trees that will be removed due to the proposed construction. 
iii.  All significant trees removed shall be replaced in accordance with section 52-142 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
iv.  The tree survey shall indicate the limits of removal. The survey shall include provisions for and identify the location of protective fencing to protect the trees to be preserved. 
(f)  Parking. Parking lots shall conform to the following: 
i.  All parking areas shall be paved with bituminous paving to a nine ton standard and surrounded by six inches high non-surmountable curb and gutter in compliance with the City of Watertown Engineering Standards and Specifications. 
ii.  Parking requirements for each use shall be determined by the city using accepted standards. 
iii.  Parking areas shall conform to the setbacks established herein. 
iv.  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for the uses prescribed herein shall be determined by section 62-516 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(g)  Signage. Signage shall be consistent in style and color throughout the subzone. In all other respects, signage shall be consistent with the regulations provided in chapter 48 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
B.  Subzone B. Commercial, light industrial. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in subzone B under the conditions specified. No building or lot shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted hereunder, with the exception of the following: 
i.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Code; 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the subzone B District: 
i.  Any use not expressly permitted but consistent with the intent of the district which, by approval of the city council, shall be permitted. 
ii.  Any of the permitted uses in the subzone A District. 
iii.  Manufacturing and commercial uses such as: 
(1)  Automobile repair or restoration 
(2)  Wholesale florist or greenhouse 
(3)  Contractor and construction supply shops conducted wholly within an enclosed building, including but not limited to plumbing, HVAC, roofing and electrical. 
(4)  Light manufacturing, production, processing, assembly, fabricating, cleaning, servicing and repairing of materials, goods or products with no outdoor storage. 
(5)  Light manufacturing including outdoor storage of material goods and equipment if fully screened 
(6)  Kennel 
iv.  Service-oriented adult use establishments, principal, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
v.  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, principal, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
vi.  Service-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
vii.  Retail-oriented adult use establishments, accessory, as defined in section 47-4 and prescribed in section 47-23 of this Code. 
2.  Conditional uses. 
(a)  Conditional uses, as hereinafter enumerated, may be allowed in subzone B district, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of division 5 of this chapter. 
(b)  The following conditional uses may be allowed in the subzone B district: 
i.  Automobile fueling and or service stations 
ii.  Antennas and communications towers 
iii.  Outdoor storage of material goods with required screening 
iv.  Public utility 
v.  Restaurant (sit down and fast food) 
vi.  Commercial businesses such as on-sale or off-sale liquor establishments (taverns, pubs) and restaurants intending to sell or serve liquor as part of regular business. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setbacks. 
Front: 20 feet Side: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 45 feet from residential property Ten feet for all other properties Rear: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 45 feet from residential property 25 feet for all other properties Corner Side yard: 20 feet  
(b)  Parking setbacks. 
Front: Ten feet Side: Five feet (Zero feet if two parcels gain site plan approval to utilize a shared parking lot) Rear: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 15 feet for all other properties Corner Side yard: Ten feet  
(c)  Height. 
Maximum height shall be two stories or 36 feet. 
(d)  Impervious surface area. 
Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 75 percent. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Fences. Fences may be permitted on the property, as provided for in section 62-477 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. The following additional regulations apply: 
All fences in the front or corner side yard shall provide, at minimum 85 percent opacity and shall be ornamental metal or approved equal. Chain link and wire fences shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Other accessory structures. Other accessory structures may be constructed as permitted in section 62-477 of the Municipal Code of Watertown, provided such construction is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
5.  Design standards. 
All new buildings, structures, expansions, remodeling, and site plans shall conform to these design standards. Buildings in subzone B shall be designed for permanent, reduced or maintenance free materials, and may include, at minimum: 
(a)  Exterior walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials: 
Natural brick 
Masonry block (if approved by city council) 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Fiber cement siding such as James Hardie products or approved equal. 
Glass 
Pre-cast concrete panels as approved by the city. 
Treated/anodized metal for trim and accent 
(b)  Roofs. Roofs can be pitched or flat and shall be constructed using the following standards: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be pitched between 6:12 and 12:12. 
Flat roof: Shall have decorative/accent trim 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays, browns, black except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. Other colors may be permitted as approved by the city. 
(c)  Screening. 
i.  Roof-mounted mechanical units, satellite dishes, or other similar equipment shall be screened from the public view by the extension of a parapet wall or other roof structure. 
ii.  In the case where the parapet wall cannot feasibly screen the roof-mounted equipment, point-in-place or other appropriate screening shall be required. Such screening shall have similar design features as the building including materials, shape, and color considerations. 
Understanding the operational requirements of satellite dishes and antennas, such units shall be screened to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties. 
(d)  Landscaping. A minimum of ten percent of site shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of the following elements: 
i.  One major shade trees, for every 40 linear feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances. Each tree, at the time of installation, shall have a clear trunk height of at least six feet and a minimum caliper of two inches. 
ii.  For the purpose of these regulations, a major shade tree shall be a tree normally growing to a mature height of 25 feet and a mature spread of at least 15 feet. 
iii.  Five shrubs for every 100 linear feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances. 
iv.  All areas not devoted to structures or parking and the impervious surface area required for each lot shall be covered or planted with grass, ground covers or other live landscape treatment, excluding paving or gravel. 
v.  Screening. Landscaping may be used to satisfy screening requirements for outdoor storage of goods and equipment if approved by the city council. 
(e)  Tree preservation. This entire development is considered to be a tree preservation area. All significant trees shall be preserved in accordance with the following procedures: 
i.  For any construction or development that proposes to disturb any significant tree, a tree survey, prepared by a certified arborist, shall be completed by the applicant of the site plan approval indicating the location, size species and condition of all significant trees. 
ii.  The survey prepared shall indicate all trees that will be removed due to the proposed construction. 
iii.  All significant trees removed shall be replaced in accordance with section 52-142 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
iv.  The tree survey shall indicate the limits of removal. The survey shall include provisions for and identify the location of protective fencing to protect the trees to be preserved. 
(f)  Parking. Parking lots shall conform to the following: 
i.  All parking areas shall be paved with bituminous paving to a 9 ton standard and surrounded by 6" high non-surmountable curb and gutter in compliance with the City of Watertown Engineering Standards and Specifications. 
ii.  Parking requirements for each use shall be determined by the city using accepted standards. 
iii.  Parking areas shall conform to the setbacks established herein. 
iv.  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for the uses prescribed herein shall be determined by section 62-516 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(g)  Signage. Signage shall be consistent in style and color throughout the subzone. In all other respects, signage shall be consistent with the regulations provided in chapter 48 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
C.  Subzone C. Light industrial. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in subzone C under the conditions specified. No building or lot shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted hereunder, with the exception of the following: 
i.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Code; 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the subzone C district: 
i.  Any use not expressly permitted but consistent with the intent of the district which, by approval of the city council, shall be permitted. 
ii.  Light industrial uses such as: 
(1)  Contractors yard with a principle building or office 
(2)  Scientific research facilities 
(3)  Outdoor storage of material goods with required screening 
(4)  Warehouse and wholesaling all commodities except live animals 
(5)  Fabricating and manufacturing, production, processing and storage of material goods and products 
2.  Conditional uses. 
(a)  Conditional uses, as hereinafter enumerated, may be allowed in subzone C district, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 62-124 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(b)  The following conditional uses may be allowed in the subzone C district: 
i.  Automobile fueling and or service stations 
ii.  Antennas and communications towers 
iii.  Public utility 
iv.  Restaurant (sit down and fast food) 
v.  Commercial businesses such as on-sale or off-sale liquor establishments (taverns, pubs) and restaurants intending to sell or serve liquor as part of regular business. 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setbacks. 
Front: 20 feet Side: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 45 feet from residential property Ten feet for all other properties Rear: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 45 feet from residential property 25 feet for all other properties Corner Side Yard: 20 feet  
(b)  Parking setbacks 
Front: Ten feet Side: Five feet (Zero feet if two parcels gain site plan approval to utilize a shared parking lot) Rear: 35 feet if adjacent to State Highway 25 75 feet if adjacent to CSAH 122 15 feet for all other properties Corner Side Yard: Ten feet  
(c)  Height. 
Maximum height shall be two stories or 36 feet. 
(d)  Impervious surface area. 
Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 75 percent. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Fences. Fences may be permitted on the property, as provided for in section 62-477 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. The following additional regulations apply: 
All fences in the front or corner side yard shall provide, at minimum 85 percent opacity and shall be ornamental metal or approved equal. Chain link and wire fences shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Other accessory structures. Other accessory structures may be constructed as permitted in section 62-477 of the Municipal Code of Watertown, provided such construction is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
5.  Design standards. All new buildings, structures, expansions, remodeling, and site plans shall conform to these design standards. Buildings in subzone C shall be designed for permanent, reduced or maintenance free materials, and may include, at minimum: 
(a)  Exterior walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials: 
Natural brick 
Masonry block (if approved by city council) 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Fiber cement siding such as James Hardie products or approved equal. 
Glass 
Pre-cast concrete panels as approved by the city. 
Treated/anodized metal for trim and accent 
(b)  Roofs. Roofs can be pitched or flat and shall be constructed using the following standards: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better 
Metal, standing seam 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and Gabled roofs shall be pitched between 6:12 and 12:12. 
Flat roof: Shall have decorative/accent trim 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays, browns, black except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. Other colors may be permitted as approved by the city. 
(c)  Screening. 
i.  Roof-mounted mechanical units, satellite dishes, or other similar equipment shall be screened from the public view by the extension of a parapet wall or other roof structure. 
ii.  In the case where the parapet wall cannot feasibly screen the roof-mounted equipment, point-in-place or other appropriate screening shall be required. Such screening shall have similar design features as the building including materials, shape, and color considerations. 
Understanding the operational requirements of satellite dishes and antennas, such units shall be screened to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties. 
(d)  Landscaping. A minimum of ten percent of site shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of the following elements: 
i.  One major shade trees, for every 40 linear feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances. Each tree, at the time of installation, shall have a clear trunk height of at least six feet and a minimum caliper of two inches. 
ii.  For the purpose of these regulations, a major shade tree shall be a tree normally growing to a mature height of 25 feet and a mature spread of at least 15 feet. 
iii.  Five shrubs for every 100 linear feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances. 
iv.  All areas not devoted to structures or parking and the impervious surface area required for each lot shall be covered or planted with grass, ground covers or other live landscape treatment, excluding paving or gravel. 
v.  Screening. Landscaping may be used to satisfy screening requirements for outdoor storage of goods and equipment if approved by the city council. 
(e)  Tree preservation. This entire development is considered to be a tree preservation area. All significant trees shall be preserved in accordance with the following procedures: 
i.  For any construction or development that proposes to disturb any significant tree, a tree survey, prepared by a certified arborist, shall be completed by the applicant of the site plan approval indicating the location, size species and condition of all significant trees. 
ii.  The survey prepared shall indicate all trees that will be removed due to the proposed construction. 
iii.  All significant trees removed shall be replaced in accordance with section 52-142 of the Watertown Municipal Code. 
iv.  The tree survey shall indicate the limits of removal. The survey shall include provisions for and identify the location of protective fencing to protect the trees to be preserved. 
(f)  Parking. Parking lots shall conform to the following: 
i.  All parking areas shall be paved with bituminous paving to a nine ton standard and surrounded by six inches high non-surmountable curb and gutter in compliance with the City of Watertown Engineering Standards and Specifications. 
ii.  Parking requirements for each use shall be determined by the city using accepted standards. 
iii.  Parking areas shall conform to the setbacks established herein. 
iv.  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for the uses prescribed herein shall be determined by section 62-516 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(g)  Signage. Signage shall be consistent in style and color throughout the subzone. In all other respects, signage shall be consistent with the regulations provided in chapter 48 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 328, §§ 5, 6, 9-18-08) 
Sec. 62-470.40. - Site plan approval required. 
    Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with section 62-611 through 62-622 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.41. - Variances, appeals and amendments. 
    Requests for variances from the provisions of this division shall be administered as provided by section 62-141-62-144 Municipal Code of Watertown. However, a request for a variance must be accompanied by a recommendation from the operative business park association, if any, pertaining to the property that is the subject to the variance request. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 62-470.42-62-470.49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 22. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT-WOODFIELD RESIDENTIAL (PUD-W)[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 401, § 4, adopted June 27, 2017, renumbered div. 20 as div. 22. 

Sec. 62-470.50. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the planned unit development Woodfield residential (PUD-W) zoning is to permit the development of residential uses of land while incorporating recognized pedestrian scale, personal character and quality, including low maintenance but architecturally significant building materials, porches and stoops, door and window locations and orientation in an affordable manner. 
Buildings and structures are located to form and define a separation between the public space (streets) and the private areas (interior spaces and rear yards). Buildings with porches, stoops, and balconies contribute a personal character to the street, contribute to a safe neighborhood, and serve as a buffer between the public street and the private house interior and therefore are encouraged. House designs that include front facing garages are discouraged, as their impact on the street negates from the personal character desired. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.51. - General regulations. 
No lot shall be subdivided subsequent to approval of a final plat. 
Lot layout and design shall be consistent with an approved site plan, developed under the following regulations: 
Buildings shall be located as depicted on the approved site plan. It is the goal of the zone to encourage a pedestrian oriented, walkable development, therefore, it is necessary that pedestrian oriented amenities and features shall be incorporated into the house and site design. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.52. - District regulations. 
A.  Single family detached residential. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
Single family detached residence 
2.  Conditional uses. 
None 
3.  Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Build-to line. 
Setback, front: The front building setback shall be 30 feet. 
The front building setback of 25 feet shall be permitted if the garage is set back five feet (so that the garage is located no closer than 30 feet) from the front building plane (for garages facing the street). 
The front building setback of 25 feet shall be permitted for the garage if the garage is side loaded (garage door(s) are perpendicular to the street). In this instance, the front building plane of the principal structure shall not encroach closer than 25 feet. 
The front building setback of 20 feet shall be permitted if a porch is used as a feature on the front of the principal structure and the garage door encroaches no closer than 25 feet. To meet this requirement, the porch must include: 
A minimum of six feet of depth, measured at the front door to the top of step(s), if any. Such porch shall provide a minimum of 16 feet of width or 80 percent of the front face of the house not including the garage. 
(b)  Setback. 
Side: Five feet Rear: 20 feet Corner side yard: 20 feet  
(c)  Height. 
Maximum height shall be 36 feet. 
4.  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Sheds. Accessory sheds may be permitted on the property, provided: 
Maximum size is 120 square feet. 
Max Height is 12 feet or one story. 
Sheds shall be permanently mounted on a concrete slab at least four inches thick. 
Sheds shall be finished of materials exactly like those of the principle structure, including, but not limited to shingles type and color, siding type and color. 
(b)  Fences. Fences may be permitted on the property, as provided for in section 62-477 of the city Code. The following additional regulations apply: 
All fences in the front or corner side yard shall provide at minimum 50 percent openness, meaning the open space shall be at least as wide as the picket width. Only black or brown vinyl coated chain link fence is permitted. All other fencing such as wood, iron, metal, aluminum or steel is allowed per section 62-477 of the city Code. 
(c)  Other accessory structures. Other accessory structures may be constructed as permitted in section 62-477 of the Municipal Code of Watertown, provided such construction is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
5.  Design standards. Principle buildings shall include, at minimum: 
(a)  Porches. Although front porches are not required, if constructed, porches shall include materials such as: 
Foundation walls and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: stucco, stone, split faces concrete block, or brick. Open foundations shall be enclosed by privacy lattice, one-inch max. openings. 
Posts and piers shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials; 
Wood, stone, stucco, brick. 
Railings shall be constructed with one or more of the following materials: Wood, aluminum, or approved paintable alternative. 
Porches shall have roofs, with supporting posts, piers, and/or columns. 
(b)  Exterior walls. The following shall be construed as permitted materials and styles: 
Brick 
Wood Siding, including approved cement fiber products max 8" exposure 
Stucco, smooth texture only, no cake icing 
Stone 
Steel 
Aluminum 
Vinyl .042 minimum thickness 
Siding shall provide maximum five-inch lap exposure. When using steel or aluminum siding, a minimum of 25 percent of the non-glazed front facade shall be covered with brick or stone. 
(c)  Roofs. The following shall be constructed as permitted materials and styles: 
Asphalt dimensional shingles 30 y[ea]r grade or better or an equal or superior product approved in writing by the city. 
Metal, standing seam 
Wood shingles 
Slate or rubber "slate" tile 
Hipped and gabled roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 6:12 and 12:12 
Eaves should overhang between 16 inches and 30 inches on the principle structure. 
Rakes (gable end) must overhang between eight inches and 24 inches. 
Roof colors shall be light to dark grays except wood shingles and slate tiles may be their natural material color. 
(d)  Garage doors. Garage doors when visible to public areas, including parks, trails, open space, and streets, must be designed and located to minimize the visual impact on the adjacent public areas, and blend into the design of the structure, using complementary colors, materials, and patterns as employed in the principle structure. Garage doors must include one of the following architectural features such as windows, accent trim which varies in color from the primary color of the garage door, painting the garage door using the same color as the principal structure, or a superior material that distinguishes itself from the surrounding home with written approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.53. - Site plan approval required. 
    Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with sections 62-611 through 62-622 of the Municipal Code of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 62-470.54. - Appeals, variances, and amendments. 
    Appeals and requests for variances and amendments from and to the provisions of this division shall be administered as provided by divisions 2, 6, and 7 of article ii of this chapter. However, a request for a variance must be accompanied by a recommendation from the owners association or other operative neighborhood association, if any, pertaining to the property that is the subject to the variance request. An amendment to the district shall not require a recommendation from the owners association. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 2-13-07) 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-471. - Performance standards. 
    Every use permitted by this chapter shall be so established and maintained as to comply with the provisions of the following performance standards: 
(1)  Residual features. No activity or operation shall be established or maintained which by reason of its nature or manner of operation will cause the emission of noise, odor, toxic or noxious fumes, gases, smoke, dust and particulate matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, welfare, comfort and safety or cause injury to property or business. 
(2)  Glare. Direct or reflected glare, such as from floodlights, spotlights or high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination, shall not be visible beyond the site of origin at any property line. Any lighting used for exterior illumination (including off-street parking areas) shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
(3)  Vibration. No activity shall at any time cause earth vibrations perceptible beyond the limits of the site on which the use is located. Vibrations created during the process of construction are exempt from this standard. 
(4)  Explosives. Any use requiring the storage, utilization or manufacturing of products which should decompose by detonation shall be located not less than 400 feet from any residential or planned residential district. This standard shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or commercial purposes. 
(5)  Waste material. In commercial or industrial districts, without first having received a permit to do so from the city, liquid wastes containing any organic or toxic matter shall not be washed into the public sanitary sewer system or storm sewer system. If such a permit is not granted, a method of disposal shall be devised which will not require continuous land acquisition for permanent operation and will not cause a detrimental effect to adjacent land. Should the waste be of solid form rather than fluid, it shall be stored within a completely enclosed structure or contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. Such a waste storage structure or container shall be so located and fenced as to be removed from public view. In all districts, all wastes material, debris, refuse, garbage, materials not currently in use for construction or otherwise regulated herein shall be kept in an enclosed building or property and contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such vacant land free of waste material and noxious weeds. Existing uses shall comply with this provision within six months following enactment of this chapter. 
(6)  Radiation and electrical emissions. No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment, including but not limited to radio and television reception other than that of the creator of the disturbance. 
(7)  Traffic control. The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on public streets, safety hazards and excessive traffic through residential areas. Traffic into and out of all commercial and industrial uses and areas shall in all cases be forward moving with no backing onto streets or pedestrian ways. No access drive to any lot shall be located within 30 feet of any two intersecting street right-of-way lines. 
(8)  Land slope. No building or structure shall be constructed on slopes of 18 percent or more in grade. 
(9)  Outdoor display of product. The city council recognizes the display of product outside of the confines of a building beneficial to the business and community at large, provided displays continue to promote the health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetic quality of the community. To further those goals, outdoor display of product shall be permitted, provided the following standards are met: 
a.  Outdoor display area shall not utilize any required parking spaces. 
b.  Outdoor display on sidewalks shall preserve a minimum five-foot sidewalk width. 
c.  Where the outdoor display involves the stacking of material, the height of the material shall not exceed five feet. 
d.  Outdoor display shall not encroach onto adjacent right-of-way or city property. 
e.  The footprint of the outdoor display area shall not exceed one square foot per one lineal foot of principal building frontage. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(1.1-1.9), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 244, § 2, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 62-472. - Outside storage. 
(a)  All material and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened (see section 62-473) so as to not be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following: 
(1)  Construction and landscaping materials and equipment temporarily being used on the premises. 
(2)  Agricultural equipment and materials if these are being used or intended for use on the premises. 
(3)  Public and private recreational vehicles, boats, equipment, etc., or public facilities. 
(4)  Off-street parking facilities, except as otherwise regulated in this chapter and except in residential districts where any off-street parking area containing over six spaces may be required to be screened. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(1.10), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 226, § 1, 8-14-01) 
Sec. 62-473. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 244, § 3, adopted Mar. 11, 2003, repealed § 62-473, which pertained to screening and derived from Ord. No. 193, § E(1.11), adopted Dec. 28, 1993. 
Sec. 62-474. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 232, adopted June 11, 2002, repealed the former § 62-474 and enacted a new chapter 28, landscaping, as set out in this Code. The former § 62-474 pertained to landscaping and derived from Ord. No. 193, § E(1.10), adopted Dec. 28, 1993 and Ord. No. 226, § 2, adopted Aug. 14, 2001. 
Sec. 62-475. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 244, § 4, adopted Mar. 11, 2003, repealed § 62-475, which pertained to fences and derived from Ord. No. 193, § E(1.13), adopted Dec. 28, 1993. 
Sec. 62-476. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All principal structures permitted in all zoning districts except A-1 and P-1 shall be constructed in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. All structures in the zoning districts set forth shall possess wall and ceiling joist construction consisting of framing materials of at least 11/2 inch by 31/2 inch dimensions. All principal and accessory buildings shall employ the standards as outlined in the Watertown Subdivision Ordinance, Article VI, Building Design Guidelines. The exterior of accessory buildings in all districts except the A-1 and P-1 zoning districts shall be compatible with other buildings on the lot in keeping with the character of the neighborhood. The use of metal for greater than 50 percent of the exposed building surface area shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section, the calculation shall not include glazed (glass) or roof surfaces. 
(b)  Structures to be utilized for single- family inhabitation in allowable districts, as set forth by the Watertown Zoning Ordinance, shall have a minimum overall building width of 24 feet and shall have a roof slope ratio of 4:12 (four-inch rise to 12-inch run). 
(c)  All other structures to be built in zoning districts not set forth in this section shall comply with all requirements as described in the Watertown Zoning Ordinance, Watertown Subdivision Ordinance and the Minnesota State Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(1.14), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 244, 5, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 62-477. - Accessory structures. 
    The intent of this section is to establish the minimum regulations for accessory structures in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare; to protect use areas; to promote orderly development; to provide adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property; to provide for compatibility of different uses; to prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(1.15), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 244, § 6, 3-11-03; Ord. No. 248, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 283, § 1, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 336, § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 355, § 2, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 383, § 1, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 387, § 1, adopted July 14, 2015, changed the title of § 62-477 from "Accessory buildings and structures" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 62-478. - Timing. 
    No detached accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot prior the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. A building or zoning permit is required for all accessory structures as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 387, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Sec. 62-479. - Setback and other requirements for all zoning districts. 
    Accessory buildings and structures in residential districts shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Accessory structure standards and requirements: 
(1)  Setbacks shall be in accordance with Table 1. 
Table 1 
Type Setback Distance from principal structure Height Maximum Size Maximum number per lot Design 1 Attached accessory buildings Same as principal structure 6 feet 12 feet maximum and no more than 1 story no min. 1,000 SF combined type 1, 2, 5 & 7 or 5% 1 1 Constructed of materials similar to the principal structure, and in character with the surrounding built environment, as determined by the city planner. 2 Detached accessory buildings (not including storage sheds) Front: 15 feet from principal building front line. 
Side: 10 feet (R-1), 5 feet (R 2-3), 
Rear: 5 feet 6 feet 12 feet maximum and no more than 1 story no min. 1,000 SF combined type 1, 2, 5 & 7 or 5% 1 1 Constructed of materials similar to the principal structure, and in character with the surrounding built environment, as determined by the city planner. 3 Landscape Feature and Play Equipment no max. no max. 4 Decks See paragraph (4) no max. no max. 5 Storage shed Front: 15 feet from principal building front line. 
Side: 10 feet (R-1), 5 feet (R 2-3), 
Rear: 5 feet 6 feet 12 feet maximum and no more than 1 story 150 SF 1 Constructed of materials similar to the principal structure, and in character with the surrounding built environment, as determined by the city planner. 6 Pool/Spa Front: 15 feet from principal building front line. 
Side: 10 feet (R-1), 5 feet (R 2-3), 
Rear: 10 feet 6 feet no max. 2 7 Temporary structure Front: 15 feet from principal building front line. 
Side: 10 feet (R-1), 5 feet (R 2-3), 
Rear: 10 feet 6 feet 12 feet maximum and no more than 1 story 250 SF and included in total SF with types 1, 2, 5 & 7 1 Maintained so that there are no tears, rips and in good repair, as determined by the city planner.  
1 Five percent of buildable lot area 
(2)  Accessory structures shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Two detached accessory structures may be permitted on a property if there is not an attached accessory structure. 
b.  The maximum number of accessory structures on any property shall be in accordance with Table 1. 
c.  The maximum combined square footage allowed for types 1, 2, 5 and 7 shall be 1,000 SF or 5% of the buildable lot area (lot area total shall exclude wetlands, lakes or other similar natural features), whichever is greater. 
d.  In the case of a corner or double frontage lot, accessory structures shall be restricted to the building setback lines for the principal structure. 
e.  Accessory buildings shall not be permitted within any easement unless expressly permitted. No accessory structure shall be constructed in such a way to impede drainage ways or interfere with overland flow easements. 
f.  If a garage is attached to the principal structure, finished living space above or adjacent to the garage including but not limited to bonus rooms, workshops and other similar living spaces shall not be counted towards the total square footage or height of the accessory building. 
g.  The height of the accessory structure shall be measured as prescribed in section 62-1, Building height. 
h.  Maximum permitted height of a garage door shall be eight feet. 
i.  The requirements of this section do not apply to domesticated animal enclosures (doghouses), provided such structure is less than 15 square feet in area and five feet in height. 
(3)  Driveways. Driveways shall be permitted in all yards. Driveways of houses with three or more garage [stalls] shall have a maximum width of 30 feet at the property line and curb. Driveways of houses with two or fewer garage stalls shall have a maximum width of 24 feet at the property line and curb. Homes in a cul-de-sac, regardless of garage size, shall have a maximum driveway width of 24 feet at the property line and curb, unless otherwise specified as part of the subdivision approval. Each unit or home shall have one driveway in accordance with the maximum width stated above, and shall not be shared with other adjacent units or lots. The driveways shall be separated by landscaping, grass, or other similar applications. An individual lot may be permitted a second driveway access provided: 
a.  The minimum distance between the drives, as measured at the property line, shall not be less than 75 feet. 
b.  Maximum amount of hard, semi-permeable or permeable surface shall not exceed 45 percent of the required front yard. 
Table 2. 
Width of driveway at curb and property line Setback from side property line Minimum distance between driveways Maximum amount of hard, semi-permeable or permeable surface in front yard 1 or 2-stall garage 24 feet 5 ;b0;  
75 feet ;b0;  
45% 3-stall garage 30 feet 5 Lots on cul-de-sac 24 feet 5 Special provisions In Kings Highlands subdivision, a maximum driveway width of sixteen (16) feet is required for Lots 9-17, Block 2, Kings Highlands except within an area of thirty-five (35) feet out from the garage. Refer to Exhibit H in the Kings Highlands Development Agreement. 5  
(4)  Decks. 
a.  Decks are not permitted in required side or corner side yards. 
b.  Decks shall be subject to the setback requirements of the principal structure, and shall meet the rear yard setback requirements of the principal structure or be permitted to extend up to ten feet from the principal structure, whichever allows the greater deck. In no case shall the deck be closer than five feet from the side or rear property lines. 
c.  Decks and patios at or below grade are permitted in all yards. 
(5)  Fences. 
a.  Permit required. No fence, except temporary fencing, shall be constructed without a permit. The application shall be accompanied by a plot plan clearly describing the type, location and method of anchoring the fence. Boundary line fences shall be located entirely upon the private property of the party constructing the fence unless the owner of the property of the adjoining property agrees, in writing, that such fence may be erected on the division line of the respective properties. The persons, firms, or corporations constructing or causing the construction of such fence shall be responsible for maintaining that part of their property between fence and property line. City staff will require any application for a fence permit to establish boundary lines of the property by a survey thereof to be made by any registered land surveyor. At the discretion of the city, the property owner may establish boundary lines by showing the stake markers of the surveyed lot. Applicant shall be required to physically identify the property corners for city inspection. 
b.  Location. Fences not exceeding three feet in height are permitted within the limits of any yard in all districts. However, no fence or wall may be constructed which interferes with the sight triangle. A fence may be located along the rear lot line and side lot lines to a maximum height of six feet up to the point where it is parallel with the front edge of the house except in corner and double frontage lots, as permitted below. From the front edge of the house to the right-of-way the height of the fence shall not exceed three feet in height. 
i.  Double frontage lots: In the case of double frontage lots with an arterial street forming the rear property line, fences may be permitted up to the property line in the secondary front yard, provided no landscaping buffer exists as part of the plat improvements. Such fences may be up to six feet in height. For double frontage lots backing to a street other than an arterial street, fences up to six feet in height may be permitted, provided a 20-foot setback is preserved in the secondary front yard, and no landscape buffer exists as part of the plat improvement. For the purposes of this subdivision, arterial streets within the city shall be defined in the city's Comprehensive Plan as shown on the "Future Functional Class" map. 
ii.  Corner lots: In the case of fences on corner lots, fences exceeding three feet in height to a maximum of six feet in height are permitted in the secondary front yard provided a minimum setback equal to the principal structure or 30 feet is maintained, whichever is closer to the corner side property line. 

1.  No fence or wall shall be permitted on public rights-of-way or boulevard area. 
2.  No fence or wall shall obstruct natural drainage or extend within a wetland, drainage ditch, or river. 
3.  No fence shall be erected on a corner lot that will obstruct or impede the clear view of an intersection by approaching traffic. 
4.  Fences may be constructed within public and private utility and drainage easements provided that: 
a.  No fence or wall shall be located within a drainage or utility easement if there is a utility, either public or private, located within the easement. 
b.  Removal of a fence or wall or a portion thereof for the purpose of utilizing the easement shall be at the property owner's expense. 
5.  Fences in excess of four feet in height shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the right-of-way of any alley. 
c.  Fencing conformity. Fencing in all districts shall conform to the following: 
1.  Design. The side of the fence considered to be the face (finished side as opposed to structural supports) shall face abutting property. Every fence shall be constructed in a professional and substantial manner and of substantial material reasonably suitable for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. The materials and design shall also be compatible with other structures in the area in which the fence is located and shall not cause blight or a negative impact. Fences shall be at least five percent open to provide space for the passage of air. All fencing shall be constructing straight, true, and plum. 
2.  Materials. 
a.  Any fence which is dangerous to the public safety or general welfare and health is a public nuisance and the city may commence proceedings for the abatement thereof. Electric fences may not be used. Materials such as standing seem metal, hog wire, chicken wire, or sheep wire fencing, barbed wire fencing, snow fencing and other similar types of non-standard fencing, as determined by the zoning administrator, shall not be allowed as permanent fencing. This requirement shall not be construed to prohibit the use of underground electric pet fencing or similar use. 
b.  The use of slats of any kind is prohibited in or upon chain link fences. 
c.  Wire fence other than chain link shall not be permitted as boundary line fences within ten feet of the property line in residential zoning districts. 
3.  Maintenance. Fences in all districts shall be maintained so that the exposed outer surface shall be uniformly painted or stained in a neat and aesthetically acceptable condition. 
4.  Temporary fencing. All snow-stop fencing may be used from November 1 to April 1 on private property. Temporary fencing shall not be installed in the right-of-way. Temporary fences such as garden fences not exceeding four feet in height which are not up for more than seven months may be permitted within the interior yard. No permit shall be required for temporary fencing. 
5.  No existing fence in violation of this subdivision will be allowed to be replaced or rebuilt. Should an existing fence be replaced or rebuilt, it must come under the regulation of this subdivision. 
d.  Residential and agricultural districts. 
1.  Setback and design. A fence may be located within the rear yard and side yard to a maximum height of six feet up to the point where it is parallel with the front edge of the building. Fences located within the front yard or side-street yard to the right-of-way shall be ornamental in design and the height of the fence shall not exceed three and one-half feet as measured from grade. 
2.  Fences around dog kennels not exceeding 50 square feet in size, fences around garbage cans, and garden fences located in the interior of the lot will not require fence permits but shall adhere to the other regulations of this subdivision. 
3.  All garbage can areas in multi-family developments shall be protected by privacy fence not less than six feet in height. The privacy fence shall be constructed of wood, vinyl or similar, but shall not include chain link with slats. All gates shall have a self-closing and self-latching latch installed on the outside of the fence. 
4.  Residential fences height exceptions. 
a.  Fences for sport courts may be up to eight feet in height with ten-foot setback. 
e.  Commercial, business, and industrial districts. Fences not exceeding eight feet in height are permitted within the limits of any side or rear yard. Fences over six feet in height shall require a building permit. 
f.  Required fences for swimming pools. Regulations for fences surrounding swimming pools shall be in accordance with chapter 62, article V, division 2 of the City Code. 
(6)  Temporary structures. 
a.  Pursuant to authority granted by Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, Subd. 9, the City of Watertown opts out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family health care dwellings. 
b.  Temporary structures shall be required to obtain an annual building permit and have a maximum use of 180 days from the date of permit. 
c.  Event tents shall be limited to a maximum of three consecutive days. 
d.  The temporary structure shall be removed following the expiration of the building permit or use of the structure. 
e.  Attached and detached accessible ramps shall be subject to a building and zoning permit. Permanent ramps shall be subject to all applicable accessory structure requirements and setbacks. Temporary ramps shall be permitted in all residential districts for a period of two years. Accessible ramps shall not be located within any applicable easements or right-of-way. Temporary ramps shall meet all applicable building codes, shall be located no closer than five feet to any property line, and shall be removed following use or at the end of the two year permit issuance. 
(7)  Swimming pools/spas. No swimming pools or spa shall be constructed within any required front or corner side yard, buffer area, or easement. Hot tubs shall incorporate a hard carver when not in use. Swimming pools shall be surrounded on all sides by a six-foot high, non-climbable fence. Height shall be measured from grade on the side of the fence which faces away from the pool. However, the fencing requirement may be waived, in lieu of a mechanical cover so as to prohibit access to the pool water when the cover is deployed. Such fence shall be setback from the edge of the water a minimum of six feet. All gates into the area shall include a self-closing, self-latching mechanism installed as meeting the requirements set forth in the state building code. For the purposes of this section, chain link style fencing shall be considered a climbable fence. This regulation shall not apply to swimming pools owned by the public for public use. 
(8)  Animal runs. In residential districts, animal runs are permitted within the limits of interior side and rear yards. A five-foot setback is required from all lot lines and screening (landscaping and/or opaque fencing) shall be provided to reduce visibility to the adjoining properties. 
(9)  Refuse or waste containers. See Chapter 28 Landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 387, § 1, 7-14-15; Ord. No. 398, § 1, 8-23-16) 
Sec. 62-480. - Accessory structure standards for business, commercial and industrial uses. 
    Accessory buildings and structures in business, commercial and industrial districts shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Accessory structure standards and requirements: 
(1)  Setbacks shall be in accordance with Table 3. 
Table 3 
Setbacks Distance from
principal structure Maximum lot area As defined for principal structures 6 feet 30%  
(b)  All accessory structures larger than 150 square feet for business, commercial and industrial uses shall require site plan approval. 
(1)  Commercial fuel island canopies. Where permitted, commercial fuel island canopies shall maintain a minimum front yard setback of fifteen feet and minimum rear yard and interior side yard setback of 20 feet. 
(2)  Cart corrals. Shall be significantly landscaped and/or screened to minimize the visual impact on the area. Cart corrals require site plan approval. A low screening wall, constructed of materials of a like or similar nature to the principal structure to completely screen carts is encouraged, provided such wall does not disrupt pedestrian and motor vehicle movements. 
(Ord. No. 387, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Sec. 62-481. - Home occupations. 
(a)  All home occupations permitted by this chapter, except those located within the rural conservation or agricultural/open space districts shall be so established and maintained as to comply with the provisions of the following standards: 
(1)  Conduct of the home occupation does not result in any alterations to the exterior of the residence. 
(2)  Signage consists of no more than one single or double faced unlighted sign with a maximum area of two square feet not located on a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Conduct of the home occupation does not generate more noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference than normally associated with residential occupancy in the neighborhood. 
(4)  The home occupation is not of a scale requiring the use of a commercial vehicle for the delivery of materials to or from the premises. 
(5)  The use shall not generate sewage of a nature or rate greater than that normally associated with residential occupancy, nor shall it generate hazardous waste or solid waste as a rate greater than that normally associated with residential occupancy. 
(6)  Except for articles produced on the premises, no stock-in-trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises. 
(7)  The home occupation shall not increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by more than one additional vehicle at a time and any need for parking generated by the conduct of a home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard, or in a driveway in such a manner that access to the garage is not eliminated. 
(8)  No more than one person other than those living in the residence may be employed in the home occupation. 
(9)  No outdoor display of goods or outside storage of equipment or materials is permitted. 
(10)  No accessory building may be used for operations, display of goods or the storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation. 
(11)  No home occupation will be allowed that jeopardizes the health and safety of residents of the city. 
(12)  There shall be no renting of space in a residence for nonresidential purposes. 
(b)  Home occupations located within the rural conservation or agricultural/open space district shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Conduct of the home occupation does not result in any alternations to the exterior of the residence. 
(2)  Signage consists of no more than one single or double faced unlighted sign with a maximum area of 12 square feet not located on a public right-of-way. Such signage shall be located no closer than five feet from all property lines. 
Temporary promotional signs for agricultural sales may be permitted for 90 days per calendar year, provided such signage shall not exceed 16 square feet in area. 
(3)  The use shall not generate sewage of a nature, rate, or type that cannot be treated by a permitted on-site sewage system. 
(4)  Except for articles produced on the premises, no stock-in-trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises. 
(5)  If the home occupation is a professional service, including hair salon and dog grooming, then customers or clients shall not exceed three at any one time and related incidental supplies (e.g. hair care products) shall not be considered stock-in-trade. 
(6)  Any additional need for parking generated by the home occupation shall be met by off-street parking. Such parking shall be limited to three spaces and shall be located no closer than 30 feet from the front or corner side yard property lines and five feet from the side and rear property lines. 
(7)  No more than one person other than those living in the residence may be employed in the home occupation. Employees shall not report to the premises in order to travel to work off site. 
(8)  No outdoor display of goods or outside storage of equipment or materials is permitted. 
(9)  If the home occupation is a repair business the items to be repaired shall be of a size or nature that the repair can occur within the home. 
(10)  No home occupation will be allowed that jeopardizes the health and safety of residence of the city. 
(11)  There shall be no renting of space in a residence for nonresidential purposes. 
(12)  No more than one vehicle used in the home occupation shall be stored on site. The vehicle may be stored outside provided an adequate off-street location is available on site. 
(13)  Notwithstanding the requirements above, a seasonal roadside stand less than 120 square feet for the sale of horticultural products may be permitted, provided sufficient off-street parking is available. Maximum sale duration shall not exceed 90 days. 
(14)  Home occupations not meeting the requirements enumerated above may be permitted pursuant to the conditional use permit procedures of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(2.1), 12-28-93; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 12-10-02) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 387, § 1, adopted July 14, 2015, supplied provisions for new §§ 62-478 and 62-479. At the instruction of the city, current §§ 62-478 and 62-479 have therefor been redesignated as §§ 62-481 and 62-482 to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 62-482. - Sexually oriented uses. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish provisions for the opportunity as well as controls of sexually oriented uses within the city. 
(b)  Generally. Sexually oriented uses, as defined in this chapter, shall be subject to the following general provisions: 
(1)  Activities classified as obscene under state law are not permitted and are strictly prohibited. 
(2)  Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes. 
(3)  Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place which is also used to dispense or consume alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Sexually oriented uses, principal, as defined in this chapter, which deal solely in the retail sales of sexually oriented materials only for off-premises consumption shall be exempt from the requirements of section 62-479(c). 
(5)  A sexually oriented use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as an sexually oriented use, principal. 
(c)  Principal. 
(1)  Sexually oriented uses, principal, shall be located at least 150 feet from the property line of any zoning district in which residential uses are allowed, either as permitted or conditional uses, and at least 150 feet as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the building upon which the sexually oriented use, principal, is located from any sensitive use provided below: 
a.  Public or private school facility; 
b.  Public park or recreational trail; 
c.  Licensed day care facility; 
d.  On-sale or off-sale liquor facilities; 
e.  Another existing sexually oriented use, principal. 
(2)  Sexually oriented use, principal, activities, as defined by this chapter, shall be classified as one use. No two sexually oriented uses, principal, shall be located in the same building or upon the same property and each use shall be subject to section 62-479(c)(1). 
(d)  Accessory 
(1)  Sexually oriented uses, accessory, shall: 
a.  Comprise no more than ten percent of the floor area of the establishment in which they are located; and 
b.  Comprise no more than 2,000 square feet of floor area in total; and 
c.  Comprise no more than 20 percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation; and 
d.  Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise. 
(2)  Sexually oriented business, accessory, shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general public access: 
a.  Movie rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation or shall be in catalogs under the direct control and distribution of the operator. 
b.  Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as sexually oriented shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the publication title. 
(3)  Sexually oriented business, accessory, activities shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are admitted. 
(e)  Violation. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 206, § 2, 4-22-97) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 62-481. 
Secs. 62-483-62-482. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL POOLS AND SPAS 

Sec. 62-483. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permanent swimming pool. Any body of water contained by steel, concrete, fiberglass vessel or similar permanent material, whether in ground or above ground. 
    Residential swimming pool. Any constructed pool, permanent or portable, which is intended for non-commercial use as a swimming pool by the owner's family and their guests. 
    Spa. A unit primarily designed for therapeutic use which is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each individual. It may be included but not limited to hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water mineral baths, air induction bubbles or any combination thereof. Industry terminology for a space includes, but is not limited to, therapeutic pool, hydrotherapy pool, whirlpool, hot spa, hot tub, etc. 
    Temporary swimming pool. Any body of water contained in a rubber, plastic, or inflatable vessel which can be erected without permanent support that is put up and taken down on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 62-484. - Permit required. 
(a)  Temporary swimming pool. All temporary swimming pools, whether submerged or elevated are deemed to be a structure under the Zoning Ordinance. Temporary swimming pools greater than 24 inches in depth and more than 5,000 gallons shall require a one time lifetime permit. The temporary swimming pool, if dismantled or removed, shall be put up in the same location annually. A new permit shall be required if the location of the temporary swimming pool changes or the size or dimensions of the pool changes. The applicant shall pay the respective fees established by council resolution for such permit. Temporary swimming pools less than 24 inches in depth and less than 5,000 gallons are exempt from a permit. 
(b)  Permanent swimming pool and spas. Permanent swimming pools and spas over 24 inches in depth at any point and 5,000 gallons or larger require a building permit. The construction, plumbing and electrical work connected with any pool or spa to be constructed shall be subject to inspection and shall conform to all applicable building codes of the city and state. Permanent swimming pools that do not exceed 24 inches in depth at any point and less than 5,000 gallons require a zoning permit. 
    The permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  Two sets of plans drawn to scale that show in sufficient detail the following: 
a.  The proposed location and its relationship to the other principal buildings on the lot and on adjacent properties. 
b.  The size of the pool or spa. 
c.  Fencing and other fixtures existing on the lot, such as utility location and trees. 
d.  The location, size, and statement as to the types of equipment to be used in connection with the pool or spa including but not limited to the filter unit, pump, wiring, heating unit, fencing and the pool or spa itself. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 62-485. - Compliance. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own or maintain a swimming pool or spa that does not comply with this division. Failure to prevent access into an above ground pool when unoccupied or the removal of the required fencing either attached or detached is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 62-486. - Construction to be in accordance with approved plan. 
    All swimming pools, spas, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems and other features shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans. If any deviations from such plans are desired, a supplementary plan covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval and shall conform to the provision of this division. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 62-487. - General standards. 
(a)  Fences. Requirements for permanent swimming pools. Permanent swimming pools shall be surrounded on all sides by a four-foot high, nonclimbable fence, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger than four inches in either vertical or horizontal direction. 
(b)  In general. 
(1)  Fences shall be at least four [feet] but not more than six feet high and located at least four feet from the edge of the pool. The bottom of the fence shall not be more than four inches from the ground. Height shall be measured from grade on the side of the fence which faces away from the pool. 
(2)  Fences shall be of non-corrosive material. 
(3)  The fence shall be completely installed and inspected before filling the pool. 
(4)  All such fences shall be constructed so as not to be easily climbable, and generally to prevent children from gaining uncontrolled access. All fence openings points of entry onto the pool are shall be equipped with gates or doors. All gates or doors shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at a sufficient height so as to be non-accessible to small children. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Those property owners with temporary swimming pools shall have the discretion to construct a fence. The city does not require a fence. 
(2)  Spas which incorporate a hard cover when not in use. 
(3)  The fencing requirement may be waived, in lieu of a mechanical cover so as to prohibit access to the pool water when the cover is deployed. 
(4)  The fencing requirement does not apply to above ground outdoor swimming pools having at least four-foot high vertical or outward inclined sidewalls, provided that the pool has all of the following: 
a.  The ladder ramp, stairs or similar access to pool is removable and removed when the pool is not in use and the wall cannot be readily climbed by children. Above ground permanent swimming pools shall be protected in such a way that access ways, other than those afforded by the dwelling house or accessory buildings, shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors so these gates or doors are kept securely closed at all times when not in actual use. 
b.  If the wall of the pool is less than four feet high, a railing/fence may be installed on the top of the pool wall to create a height of four feet or greater. If the wall of the pool is less than four feet in height and no railing or fence has been installed to increase the height to four feet or greater, a separate four-foot high fence shall be required to surround the pool in accordance with section 62-484. 
(d)  Drainage. To the extent feasible, back flush water or water from the pool or spa drainage shall be directed onto the owner's property or onto approved public drainage ways. In no case may the water be drained into the sanitary sewer. 
(e)  Lighting. Any pool or spa lighting above the ground shall be directed toward the pool and not the adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 62-488. - Setback requirements; location generally. 
(a)  All swimming pools and spas shall be at least ten feet from underground or overhead utility lines, walkway, or other easements, both public and private. 
(b)  The filter unit, pump, heat unit, any other noise making mechanical equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any residential structure on adjacent property. 
(c)  All swimming pools and spas shall be at least six feet from any side or rear lot line, and five feet from any principal building. 
(d)  No swimming pool or spa shall be constructed within any required front or corner side yard setback, buffer area, or easement. 
(e)  Private swimming pools located on the site of multiple-family dwellings shall have no part of the water surface, any pumps, filters, or other apparatus located less than 50 feet from any lot line or easement. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 62-489. - Operation and maintenance. 
    No swimming pool, whether temporary or permanent, or spa shall be used, kept, maintained or operated if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 62-490. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city's building official and/or zoning administrator or his or her designee shall have authority to inspect any residential swimming pool or spa whether considered permanent or temporary, at any reasonable time during the construction and thereafter to determine whether or not the provisions of this division regarding health, sanitation, operation, and safety applicable thereto are complied with. 
(b)  The building official shall have the authority to enter upon any premises as may be deemed necessary to inspect work done and installations made under permits issued by the city. 
(c)  No swimming pool or spa shall be occupied or used at any time prior to complying with the provisions of this division and the final inspection and approval of the pool or spa and permanent fence by the building official even though containing water for construction purpose. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 12-14-10) 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-491-62-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING 

Sec. 62-511. - Applicability. 
(a)  In all districts, in connection with every industrial, commercial, business, recreational, or dwelling use, and all other uses, space for off-street parking and storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with all of the following regulations except as elsewhere provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-512. - General provisions. 
(a)  Access. Access and parking areas shall be designated or designed so as to provide an adequate means of access to a public alley or street. All public parking areas shall have access off driveways and not directly off a public street. Driveways shall be limited so as to cause minimal interference with traffic movement. All parking spaces shall be clearly marked. All parking facilities shall be designed, constructed, and maintained with security as a priority to protect the safety of the users. 
(b)  Use of parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for the parking of passenger automobiles. No motor vehicle over 1-1/2 ton capacity bearing a commercial license and no commercially licensed trailer shall be parked or stored in a residential district except when loading, unloading, or rendering a service. Under no circumstances shall parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for open area storage of commercial vehicles or for open air parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owner, tenant, or customers of business or manufacturing establishments. 
(c)  Use change or expansion. No replacement or expansion of a use shall be allowed until such required additional parking is approved and furnished. Review may be required under the site plan review procedures of this Code. 
(d)  On-street parking. Except for uses within the central business district and approved by the city council, on-street parking shall not be used to satisfy minimum parking requirements. 
(e)  Goods, vehicle and snow storage. Required parking areas and the driveways providing access shall not be used for the storage, display, sales, rental, or repair of motor vehicles or other goods or for the storage of snow. Adequate space for snow storage shall be provided on the site. 
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-513. - Setback requirements. 
    The setback requirements for parking spaces are as follows: 
(1)  Yards. In no case shall required off-street parking be permitted in the required front yard, side yard or rear yard. 
(2)  Residential districts. Notwithstanding those provisions outlined in (1) above, open parking spaces accessory to one- and two-family structures may be located within any yard. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial districts. Off-street parking spaces shall not be less than 50 feet from the property line when such areas abut a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a right-of-way width greater than 80 feet. 
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-514. - Design and maintenance. 
(a)  Design of parking spaces and drive aisles. Parking spaces and drive aisles shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Space Angle (degrees) Width at Curb (feet) Space Length (feet) Aisle (feet) 45 12 20 13.5* 60 10 20 18.5* 90 9 18 24 Handicapped Accessible 16 18 Parallel 20 9 24  
*One-way aisles. 
(1)  For parking spaces where an unobstructed overhang of two feet is provided, such parking space may be reduced in depth by two feet. 
(2)  Parking spaces immediately adjacent to a wall or vertical surface with a height greater than two feet shall require two additional feet of stall width. 
(b)  Calculating space. When determining the number of required off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of 1/2 or more shall constitute another space. 
(c)  Signs. Signs located in any parking area necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement shall be in addition to accessory signs permitted in other sections of this Code. 
(d)  Surfacing. All of the area intended to be utilized for parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with a bituminous surface (asphalt) or Portland Cement Concrete. This requirement also applies to open sales lots. The minimum thickness of pavement of the parking areas shall be as required by the city engineer. 
(1)  All parking spaces, except parking spaces for single-family attached and detached residences, shall be striped in accordance with the approved site plan. This striping shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner. 
(2)  All off-street parking areas and associated driveways, access roadways and frontage roads, except driveways for single family attached and detached residences, shall be constructed with permanent, Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) curb and gutter of at least six inches high and 24 inches wide or of an alternate height and width approved by the city. Prefabricated portable curb or wheel stops shall not be considered an acceptable alternative. 
(e)  Lighting. With respect to lighting, all of the following shall apply: 
(1)  Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading area shall be designed for uniformity and be so arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining residential uses or premises and away from public streets. 
(2)  Lighting fixtures shall possess hard cut-off qualities at property lines. 
(3)  Lighting fixtures shall not be forward throwing. Lighting fixtures shall be metal halide (MH) or High Pressure Sodium (HPS) shoebox style with a flat lens. Such lights may be decorative or ornamental subject to site plan approval. 
(4)  Any project adjacent to residential, or environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to parks or trails shall be required to submit an isometric contour lighting plan for review and approval by the city. The city planner may also require an isometric plan at his discretion for any other site plan. 
(5)  The illumination of the parking area shall be as follows: 
a.  Adjacent to areas other than residential or sensitive areas, as defined herein, 
1.  A maximum of 400-watt light fixtures shall be permitted. 
2.  The overall height of the fixture shall not be greater than 30 feet from grade, including base. 
b.  Adjacent to residential or sensitive areas, as defined herein: 
1.  A maximum of 250-watt light fixtures shall be permitted. 
2.  The overall height of the light fixture shall not be greater than 25 feet from grade, including base. 
3.  Under convenience store canopies, lighting shall provide 70 foot candle (fc) maximum with an average of 50 fc or less. Light fixtures shall be recessed into the canopy in such a way that the lens is not visible. 
(6)  The city council may approve the use of decorative type fixtures in all districts. 
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-515. - Landscaping. 
    Off-street parking areas shall be screened from rights-of-way and adjacent properties in accordance with the provisions outlined in the landscaping provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
State Law reference- Landscaping, ch. 28. 
Sec. 62-516. - Minimum required number of off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  Benches in places of public assembly. In stadiums, churches, and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 22 inches of such seating facility shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining required parking. 
(b)  Handicapped parking. At least one handicapped parking space shall be provided for each development, excluding single family attached and detached residential developments. An additional space shall be provided for each increment of 50 spaces in excess of the initial 50 spaces. Handicapped parking shall be in compliance with the Uniform Building Code and applicable state law. 
(c)  Parking in the central business district (CBD). It is acknowledged that a walkable environment is vital to the success of businesses within the CBD, the CDB district, and the community as a whole. Vast, unused parking areas degrade the desired walkability of a cohesive commercial center. It is the policy of the city council to promote the success of the community. In furthering the city council's policies, uses in the CBD district shall, in addition to regulations outlined in this chapter, conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Pedestrian connections with adjacent uses, parks, streets, and trails shall be promoted and encouraged; such connections may include, but are not limited to sidewalks, lighting, signage, and street furniture. 
(2)  No parking shall be permitted in the front yard of a building in the central business district. Street parking shall be permitted where provided. 
(3)  The city council may reduce the minimum number of required parking spaces in the central business district. 
(d)  Required parking by use. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for the following uses shall be as prescribed. 
Function Minimum Parking Space Assisted living centers, sanitarium, convalescent home, rest home or similar one space per two dwelling units plus one space per staff Automotive repair stations three spaces per service bay 
one space per service vehicle 
2.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f of non service area Automotive sales 1/1000 s.f. GFA plus 1/5,000 s.f. of developed display or storage area Animal boarding/kennels 3.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. Banks 2.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. GFA 
three queuing spaces per drive thru station Barber/beauty shops two spaces per chair or beautician station Bowling alley five parking spaces for each alley plus additional parking spaces as may be required herein for related uses Car wash, drive thru oil change three spaces per 1,000 s.f. GFA 
Queuing capacity equal to two per service capacity Car wash, self service One-half space per wash bay plus two queuing spaces per service capacity Child Care Center one space per five students, five spaces minimum. one space per van or bus, plus one queue space per six students Religious organizations, auditoriums, and other similar places of assembly one parking space for each 3-1/2 seats based upon design capacity of seating area Commercial entertainment five spaces per 1,000 s.f. of outdoor area and building combined. Convenience stores five spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Community center, post office, YMCA, YWCA, physical culture studio, library, private club, lodge, museum, art gallery, and other similar establishments 12 parking spaces plus one for each 250 square feet in excess of 2,000 square feet of floor area based upon design capacity Delicatessen/donut shop/coffee bar ten spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Drinking establishments/lounge 15 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Driving ranges 1 per tee area 
Additional spaces as required for accessory uses. Furniture store, appliance store, grain sales, studios, commercial green houses 2.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 s f of GFA. Open sales or rental lots shall provide one parking space for each 3,500 square feet of land that is to be used for sales and display area Funeral homes/mortuary one space per four fixed seats 
In case of no fixed seats, ten spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Fitness centers/health clubs 2.25 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Golf club, country club six spaces per hole 
Additional spaces as required for accessory uses. Grocery stores five spaces per 1,000 s.f. pf GFA Hospital one parking space for each two hospital beds based upon design capacity Libraries three spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Medical office or clinic three spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Motel, motor hotel, motor court, or hotel one parking space for each guest room plus one for each employee Motor service stations four parking spaces plus two additional parking spaces for each service stall Multiple family dwellings two spaces per dwelling unit 
one visitor space per five dwelling units One- and two-family dwellings two spaces per dwelling unit Professional and business offices 2.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Restaurants, fast food 15 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA 
five queuing spaces per drive thru lane Restaurant, sit down, not fast food 15 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA Retail sales, service establishments, and shopping centers five spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA School-elementary, middle one space per employee. 
Additional spaces as required for assembly areas 
bus staging area and parent queuing shall be separated and have capacity as determined by the city council School-secondary, senior high and private schools one parking space for each classroom plus 1 additional parking space for each six students based upon design capacity Self-storage and mini-warehousing one space per 20,000 s.f. of GFA 
1 space per 50,000 s.f. vehicle or boat storage spaces 
office space equal to office space requirement Theater or athletic field one parking space for each six seats based upon design capacity Wholesaling, manufacturing, and similar industrial uses one parking space for each two employees on maximum shift or 1 parking space for each 2,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is the larger Other uses As required by city council  
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 62-517-62-530. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET LOADING 

Sec. 62-531. - Loading facilities. 
(a)  Adequate off-street loading spaces shall be provided in connection with any structure that requires receipt or distribution of materials by vehicles. Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width and 35 feet in depth. Such space shall be designed in a manner acceptable to the city provided adequate space for loading access. 
(b)  Loading berths, docks, and yards shall be screened from general public view and from all adjoining properties of contrasting and conflicting uses. Such facilities shall not occupy any yard requirement bordering a street and shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the property line abutting a residential district and shall provide a substantial buffer in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Loading areas shall be permitted only in the rear and side yard areas unless otherwise approved by the city council during a review of the development request. 
(d)  No area shall be counted as both a required parking space and loading space. 
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-532. - Access. 
(a)  Each loading space shall be located with appropriate means of access to a public street or alley in a manner that will least interfere with traffic. All loading space access shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the intersection of two public rights-of-way. The city council may require additional separation to further the intent of this article. 
(b)  Loading areas shall be designed and located so that the truck shall not back into or onto a public street. 
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-533. - Surfacing. 
    All loading yards shall be paved in accordance with the paving requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 233, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 62-534-62-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-551. - Agricultural operations. 
    Agricultural operations including ag-related structures in existence at the time of passage of this chapter shall be allowed to continue if in an agriculture district. Feedlots as defined in this chapter shall not be permitted within city boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(7.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-552. - Dwelling below ground level. 
    Earth-sheltered dwellings, meaning residential structures so constructed that 50 percent or more of the exterior surface area of the building, excluding garages and accessory buildings, is covered with earth and all applicable codes and ordinances including the state building code are satisfied, are permitted pursuant to applicable regulations of this chapter. Partially completed buildings shall not be considered earth-sheltered. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(8.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-553. - Space between buildings. 
    In cases where several buildings might be constructed on one lot of record excluding residential lots, the minimum space between such buildings shall be no less than a distance equal to one-half the building heights of the two buildings involved. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(9.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-554. - Design by registered architect, engineer or land surveyor. 
    The design of buildings and the drawing of site plans, etc., shall be by such persons as required pursuant to M.S.A. § 326.03, or amendments thereof. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(10.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-555. - House, building or structure moved onto lot. 
    The moving of a house, building or structure onto a lot shall be governed by the provisions of Ordinance Number 111 and all provisions contained in such ordinance are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(11.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-556. - Solar energy systems. 
    Solar energy systems, including solar collectors, storage facilities and distribution components for space heating and cooling and domestic water heating, are permitted within all districts of this chapter pursuant to the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(12.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-557. - Wind energy systems. 
    Windmills for purpose of electrical generation shall be allowed under a conditional use permit. Issuance of the permit must include findings that the structure and its operation will not be dangerous and will not adversely affect neighboring property. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(13.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-558. - Antennas, satellite dishes and towers. 
    Antennas, satellite dishes and towers for the purposes of sending and/or receiving electromagnetic waves shall extend no higher than 12 feet above the height of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(14.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-559. - Land development and improvements. 
    Outdoor wood-burning boilers. No person shall install or operate an outdoor wood-burning boiler as defined in this zoning chapter within the limits of the City of Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 2, 2-24-09) 
Secs. 62-560-62-570. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAND EXCAVATION AND RECLAMATION 

Sec. 62-571. - Conditional use permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit upon or excavate from the land any material in the amount of 150 cubic yards or more or to a depth of three feet or more without first securing a conditional use permit from the city. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to activities commonly associated with land development and building construction. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(5.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-572. - Land excavation. 
    The city council shall hold a public hearing regarding any application for a land excavation conditional use permit. If issued, such conditional use permit shall be made subject to the following minimum requirements, and such other requirements as the planning commission or city council may specify to protect the public interest. 
(1)  All operations shall be conducted no closer than 100 feet to an adjacent property, unless under common lease or ownership, and no closer than 100 feet to any right-of-way line. 
(2)  All operations shall be conducted no closer than 300 feet to an existing dwelling, school, hospital or similar residential or public use. It shall be unlawful for any person to dig and leave open, unfenced, unbarricaded or uncovered any pit, quarry, hole or excavation, including basements, wells, septic tanks or cesspools. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(5.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-573. - Land reclamation. 
    A land reclamation conditional use permit, if issued, shall be made subject to the following minimum requirements and such other requirements as the planning commission or city council may specify to protect the public interest: 
(1)  The material deposited shall be leveled and covered with sufficient black loam or organic material to sustain vegetation and allow maintenance. 
(2)  Finished grades shall not adversely affect adjacent properties. 
(3)  Drainage facilities shall be provided to effectively divert or convey stormwater runoff. 
(4)  Provisions for effectively controlling fire, rodents and dispersal of material by wind or by hauling to and from the site and for general maintenance of the site shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(5.3), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-574. - Exceptions. 
    No permit for land excavation or reclamation shall be required for any person making any excavation or material deposit relative to the following: 
(1)  Construction of buildings for which a building permit was previously applied for and was granted, provided the contemplated excavation or filling operation was sufficiently described at the time of building permit application. 
(2)  Installation of utilities for which appropriate permits have been secured or under any contract directly or indirectly with the city. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(5.4), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-575. - Applications for permits. 
    Applications for land excavation or reclamation conditional use permits shall be filed jointly by the land owner and the earth moving contractor with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A legal description of the lands upon which grading operations shall be performed. 
(2)  Copies of any agreements contemplated or entered into between the owner of such property and any other person charged with performance of such grading. 
(3)  All required fees shall be paid. 
(4)  A map showing existing conditions on the site and within 300 feet of the site including land ownership, structures, utilities, roadways, vegetation, drainage courses and other pertinent natural features, such as contour lines, if requested by the city engineer or city council. 
(5)  A plan for removal from or deposits upon subject property in accordance with provisions of this chapter and showing final topography indicated by contour lines at no greater interval than five feet; steps to be taken to conserve topsoil; anticipated future use of the property including location of future roads, drainage courses and other improvements. 
(6)  A bond and/or other security as specified by the city council, sufficient in value to cover the expense of the completion of the development plan or to bring such portion of the completed project to a safe grade and elevation so as to be healthful and safe to the general public and to provide safe and adequate drainage of the site. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(5.5), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-576. - Review and inspection. 
    In all cases, each application for a permit for land excavation and reclamation must be reviewed by the city engineer before the permit is granted. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(5.6), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-577. - Existing operations. 
    Existing land excavation or reclamation operations may be continued for a period of not to exceed 90 days if prompt steps are taken to make application for a permit hereunder. However, no existing use may be expanded or enlarged prior to obtaining such permit-except operations existing under previously issued permits-which may continue if in accordance with objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(5.7), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-578-62-590. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 

Sec. 62-591. - Requirements generally. 
    All utility lines hereafter installed, constructed or otherwise placed within the city for electric, telephone, TV cable or other like or similar services to serve residential, commercial and industrial customers in newly platted areas, and which utilize metallic conductors to carry electric current, whether owned, installed or constructed by the supplier, consumer or any party shall be installed and placed underground in an approved, safe manner, subject only to the exceptions stated in this division. Plans shall be subject to review by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(6.1), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-592. - Utility companies. 
    All companies installing and operating lines such as those described herein shall be referred to as utility companies for the purpose of this division. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(6.2), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-593. - Exceptions to application. 
    The following exceptions to the strict application of this section shall be allowed upon the conditions stated: 
(1)  Above-ground placement, construction, modification or replacement of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting and service connection pedestals shall be allowed. 
(2)  Above-ground placement, construction, modification or replacement of those lines commonly referred to as high voltage transmission lines shall be allowed; or, where it is determined by the city that there is not an adequate backup system or alternate system to serve customers in the event of disruption of the proposed underground line to be installed; provided, however, that 60 days prior to commencement of construction of such a project, the city engineer shall be furnished notice of the proposed project and, upon request, the utility company involved shall furnish any relevant information regarding such project to the city engineer. 
(3)  Above-ground placement, construction, modification or replacement of lines shall be allowed in residential, commercial and industrial areas where the city council, following consideration and recommendation by the planning commission, finds that underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible due to topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions which adversely affect underground utility placement. 
(4)  Above-ground placement of temporary service line shall only be allowed: 
a.  During the new construction of any project for a period of not to exceed 24 months. 
b.  During an emergency to safeguard lives or property within the city. 
c.  For a period of not more than seven months when soil makes excavation impractical. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(6.3), 12-28-93) 
Sec. 62-594. - Repair and maintenance of existing installations. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent repair, maintenance, replacement or modification of existing overhead utility lines. 
(Ord. No. 193, § E(6.4), 12-28-93) 
Secs. 62-595-62-610. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SITE PLAN REVIEW[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 231 adopted June 11, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as chapter 64. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as chapter 62, article VIII. 
State Law reference- Administration, ch. 2; subdivisions, ch. 52. 

Sec. 62-611. - Title. 
    This article of the City of Watertown Code of Ordinances, providing for the administration and enforcement of site plans, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Site Plan Ordinance of the City of Watertown, MN. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-612. - Intent and scope. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the development of multi-family, commercial, public, and industrial projects to be subject to the control of the city pursuant to the comprehensive plan of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city. 
    Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. 
    Public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the comprehensive plan, official map, and the capital budget and program of the city, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the building code, zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, official map, and capital budget of the city. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-613. - Approval required. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any building or intensification of any building or use within the jurisdictional limits of the city with the following exceptions: 
Construction or alteration of a principal or accessory building on a lot zoned for residential use. 
(b)  Site plan approval shall be required for all conditional uses. 
(c)  A site plan, consistent with the requirements as outlined in this article, shall be required for all commercial, industrial, and non-single and two family dwellings in residential zoning districts when new construction, expansion of existing structures, or modification of existing structures or improvements is proposed. 
(d)  No building permit for any structure or development within any district within which a site plan is required shall be issued until said site plan has been approved by the city council. 
(e)  The lawful use of property in which a site plan has been approved at the time of enactment of this article may be continued although such site may not conform to the regulations herein. For those properties approved before the adoption of these regulations, such property shall be classified as "permitted non-conforming". No permit shall be issued for any site development after the effective date of and not in substantial conformity with the provisions of these regulations. Nor shall any development requiring an approved site plan, except as herein specified, be substantially improved, converted, enlarged, or otherwise altered without conforming to the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
State Law reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 62-614. - Termination. 
(a)  All site plan approvals shall expire and terminate 90 days after the date of such approval unless a building permit has been issued for the construction provided for in the site plan. 
(b)  Except as provided below, if the owner or developer of property for which a site plan has been approved determines that an extension of time is necessary in the development schedule, or that a significant modification of the site plan would provide for a more appropriate or more practical development of the site, the owner or developer may apply for an amendment of the site plan. Any such modifications or development schedule extensions shall be reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-615. - Minor modifications. 
(a)  In the case of minor modifications of the site plan or development schedule, the city planner may give approval if the decision does not modify the overall theme of the development, affect public safety, or result in the reduction of any minimum standard as provided in this zoning chapter. Minor modifications may include the following: 
(1)  Lighting location and fixture type; 
(2)  Location, height, and style of fences and walls; 
(3)  Location of trash enclosures; 
(4)  Location and size of building signs and monument signs; 
(5)  Location and construction of on-site sidewalks, except on city right-of-way; 
(6)  Location, type, and size of plantings, provided the modification would have the same effective cover and screening; 
(7)  Location and construction of accessory buildings of less than 400 square feet in area; 
(8)  Location and construction of accessory structures; 
(9)  Reconfiguration of architectural features, including colors, and/or modification of finished materials that do not alter or compromise the previously approved theme; and 
(10)  Minor relocation or addition of driveways or parking spaces. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to allow the city planner to vary the provisions of any statute, ordinance, city policy, or previous directives of the city council. The planner shall have the discretion to refer any minor modification requests to the planning commission for its review. 
(c)  Any modification that is deemed by the city planner not to be a minor modification shall be required to present plans for review in accordance with the regulations prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-616. - Compliance with approved plans. 
    If the city planner finds that any construction, proposed construction or occupancy of a development on a property for which a site plan has been approved does not substantially comply with the site plan as approved, or that the construction and development of the property is not being carried out in accordance with the development schedule filed with the site plan, the city planner may suspend all building permits for the development and order all construction stopped until such time as the owner or developer of the project, or the successors in interest, shall provide satisfactory proof that the site plan and schedule of development will be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-617. - Occupancy. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy will be granted upon completion of new construction or completion of alterations or additions to existing structures. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such time as all site improvements and building construction is completed in compliance with all provisions identified on the approved development plan and within all applicable building codes. 
(b)  Temporary certificates of occupancy. 
(1)  Temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to completion of the project if, in the opinion of the city planner or building official, the remaining items could not be completed due to circumstances beyond the applicants control and the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy will not inhibit the completion of the total project, nor have an adverse effect on persons in the immediate area or nearby properties, or affect the safety of the occupants. 
(2)  The applicant will be required to sign an agreement to complete and post sufficient security to complete the remaining items. The security will be returned to the applicant with the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. The agreement to complete shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-618. - Generally. 
(a)  Applicants shall prepare for review with the planning commission, city engineer, city planner and others a site plan. 
(b)  The site shall be developed to maximum existing conditions, (including but not limited to vegetation, topography, etc.), minimize adverse impacts to adjacent properties, while enhancing pedestrian and vehicular access and creating an aesthetically pleasing and attractive environment. 
Prior to the submission of a site plan application, a pre-application review meeting shall be scheduled with the city planner. The purpose of the pre-application review meeting is to begin identifying issues, communicate development requirements, and point out possible future difficulties. This evaluation is preliminary in nature and shall not be considered an intention to approve or deny any particular project and is not intended to be inclusive of the comments but only to identify major areas of concern or issues to be considered. The city reserves the right to supplement additional comments that may be generated during the formal review of the application. 
(1)  Application submittal. Application for site plan review shall be made to the city planner on forms provided by the city. The application shall include: 
a.  Evidence of ownership or interest in the property; 
b.  Application fee as determined from time to time by the city council; 
c.  Completed application forms. Such forms shall require sufficient information necessary to fully review a development application; 
d.  Eight folded copies of each plan set, signed by a registered architect, civil engineer, landscape architect or other licensed design professional as approved by the city. 
(2)  Incomplete submittals. If all required submittal items are not provided, the application will be deemed invalid and such submittal will be returned to the applicant as incomplete. The city will retain no record of the submittal if returned to the applicant as incomplete. 
(3)  Waiver of requirements. The city planner may find that unusual characteristics of an application make it unnecessary for the applicant to submit all of the information for an application required by this article. In such cases, the city planner may waive or reduce the requirements if it is also found that the absence of such information will not inhibit the city's ability to evaluate the compliance of the proposed site development with the standards of this article and any other requirements of this Code. 
(4)  City review. The city planner shall immediately refer a copy of the site plan to the city engineer, public works director, water plant operator and fire chief. Each department shall review the plan and may confer with the planner on changes deemed advisable as to its compliance with the ordinances of the city, its effect upon public utilities, streets, property, safety, and general welfare and submit findings as soon as possible. The city planner shall forward comments to the applicant for inclusion in revised plan sets. The city planner shall forward the site plan and city staff report to the planning commission. 
(5)  Consultant review. The city may retain outside consultants in the review of development proposals. 
(6)  Planning commission review. The planning commission shall make a recommendation on the site plan to the city council. The planning commission may recommend approval, approval subject to conditions or that the site plan be denied. If denial is recommended, the reasons for that recommendation shall be stated in the record. 
(7)  City council review. 
a.  The city council shall, upon receipt of the recommendations of the planning commission, either approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the site plan of the proposed development 
b.  Upon final action by the city council on any site plan, five copies consistent with the city council's approval shall be provided and stamped approved by the city planner and kept on file. One copy of the approved site plan shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-619. - Performance security. 
    The developer shall furnish the city with a letter of credit from a bank or cash escrow equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost to complete the landscaping improvements. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-620. - Duration. 
    Approval of a site plan submitted under this article shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 62-621. - Fees. 
    Each development application shall include the appropriate fees. Fees shall be in an amount determined by the city council from time to time. 
    In addition to the application fee, the applicant for development plan review must also pay all costs incurred by the city including city staff time, legal, engineering, administrative, building inspection services, and services of other persons or entities employed or contracted by the city for, or in any way involved in, the review and inspection of the development plan and public utility extensions contemplated thereby, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, trails, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, street lights, electric and gas lines, water retention areas and all other improvements intended for public use or benefit 
constructed or caused to be constructed by the owner and under no condition shall the fee be refunded for the failure of the city to approve the development plan. All charges incurred for this review shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 333, § 1, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 62-622. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Failure to maintain a site in accordance with an approved site plan shall constitute a violation of this article and a failure to correct such a violation within 30 days following written notice of said violation shall render the site plan and any certificates of zoning compliance and occupancy subject to cancellation. 
(b)  Failure to acquire site plan or site plan amendment approval where required, prior to construction, alteration, or otherwise modification of a building, sign, or structure, shall constitute a violation of this article and a failure to correct such a violation within 30 days following written notice of said violation shall render the site plan and any certificates of occupancy subject to cancellation. In addition, the building official shall post a stop work order relating to work in the process of completion outside the requirements of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 231, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 62-623-62-650. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 345, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 2009, amended Art. IX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IX, §§ 62-651-62-663, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 188, §§ 1.0, 5.0-13.0, adopted Aug. 11, 1992; and Ord. No. 246, § 1, adopted July 8, 2003. 

Sec. 62-651. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S.A. chs. 103F and 462, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council of City of Watertown, Minnesota, does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Watertown, Minnesota, are subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This article is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 
(3)  National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This article is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in subsection 62-651(b)(1) by provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 62-652. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which article applies. This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Watertown shown on the official zoning map and/or the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of the floodway, flood fringe, or general floodplain districts. 
(b)  Establishment of official zoning map. The following maps together with all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the official zoning map and this article. The attached material includes the flood insurance study for Carver County, Minnesota, and incorporated areas, dated December 21, 2018, and the flood insurance rate map panels enumerated below, dated December 21, 2018, all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The official zoning map shall be on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer and the zoning officer. 
27019C0051D 
27019C0052D 
27019C0053D 
27019C0054D 
(c)  Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than two feet above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. 
(d)  Interpretation. 
(1)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(2)  The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the zoning administrator, the board of adjustment shall make the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area within the 100-year floodplain if earlier, and other available technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the board of adjustment and to submit technical evidence. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. All other articles inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(f)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. This article does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Watertown or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(g)  Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby. 
(h)  Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Accessory use or structure. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
    Basement. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. 
    Conditional use. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that: 
(1)  Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist. 
(2)  The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood. 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Equal degree of encroachment. A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. 
    Flood. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas. 
    Flood frequency. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded. 
    Flood fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the flood insurance study for Watertown, Minnesota. 
    Flood insurance rate map. An official map on which the federal insurance administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
    Floodplain. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. 
    Flood prone area. Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodproofing. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
    Floodway. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR, part 60.3. 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle." 
    Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water. 
    Principal use or structure. All uses or structures that are not accessory uses or structures. 
    Reach. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this article, the term recreational vehicle shall be synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle. 
    Regional flood. A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in a flood insurance study. 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than two feet above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. 
    Repetitive loss. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Start of construction. Includes substantial improvement, and means the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement that occurred before the permit's expiration date. The actual start is either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in subsection 62-659(c)(1) of this article and other similar items. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure." For the purpose of this article, "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1. 
    Variance. A modification of a specific permitted development standard required in an official control including this article to allow an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a community's respective planning and zoning enabling legislation. 
(i)  Annexations. The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference into subsection 62-652(b) above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the City of Watertown at the time of adoption of this article. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of Watertown after the date of adoption of this article, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this article immediately upon the date of annexation into the Watertown. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 62-653. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
(a)  Districts. 
(1)  Floodway district. The floodway district includes those areas within zones AE delineated within floodway areas as shown on the flood insurance rate maps adopted in subsection 62-652(b). For lakes, wetlands and other basins, the floodway district also includes those areas that are at or below the ordinary high water level as defined in M.S.A. § 103G.005, Subd. 14. 
(2)  Flood fringe district. The flood fringe district includes areas within zones AE on the flood insurance rate map adopted in subsection 62-652(b), but located outside of the floodway. For lakes, wetlands and other basins, the flood fringe district also includes areas mapped in zones A, which are below the one percent annual chance (100-year) flood elevation but above the ordinary high water level as defined in M.S.A. § 103G.005, Subd. 14. 
(b)  Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this article. Within the floodway, flood fringe and general floodplain districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in sections 62-654, 62-655, and 62-656 that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that: 
(1)  New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this article and specifically section 62-659. 
(2)  Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this article and specifically section 62-661. 
(3)  As-built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be certified by ground surveys and floodproofing techniques must be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of this article and specifically as stated in section 62-660 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 62-654. - Floodway district (FW). 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails. 
(4)  Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas. 
(b)  Standards for floodway permitted uses. 
(1)  The use shall have low flood damage potential. 
(2)  The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists. 
(3)  The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or equipment. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Structures accessory to the uses listed in subsection (a) above and the uses listed in subsections (2)-(8) below. 
(2)  Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials. 
(3)  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures. 
(4)  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines. 
(5)  Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials. 
(6)  Placement of fill or construction offences. 
(7)  Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of subsection 62-659(1) of this article. 
(8)  Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency flood event. 
(d)  Standards for floodway conditional uses. 
(1)  All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected. 
(2)  All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and standards contained in subsection 62-660(d) of this article. 
(3)  The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists. 
(4)  Fill: 
a.  Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. 
b.  Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan. 
c.  As an alternative, and consistent with subsection (b) immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the governing body has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the office of the county recorder. 
(5)  Accessory structures: 
a.  Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation. 
b.  Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters: 
1.  Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and 
2.  So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures. 
c.  Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All floodproofed accessory structures must meet the following additional standards: 
1.  The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; 
2.  Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly floodproofed; and 
3.  To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings. 
(6)  Storage of materials and equipment: 
a.  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
b.  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body. 
(7)  Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of M.S.A., ch. 103G. Community-wide structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in the floodway. 
(8)  A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 62-655 - Flood fringe district (FF). 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s). If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted use in the flood fringe district provided such use does not constitute a public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for flood fringe district "permitted uses" listed in subsection 62-655(b) and the "standards for all flood fringe uses" listed in subsection 62-655(e). 
(b)  Standards for flood fringe permitted uses. 
(1)  All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon. 
(2)  As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its largest projection may be internally floodproofed in accordance with subsection 62-654(d)(5)c. 
(3)  The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of 500 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with subsection 62-655(e) of this article. 
(4)  The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(5)  The provisions of subsection 62-655(e) of this article shall apply. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or floodproofed in accordance with subsection 62-655(b)(1), (2) and or any use of land that does not comply with the standards in subsection 62-655(b)(3), (4) shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in subsections 62-655(d), (e) and 62-660(d) of this article. 
(d)  Standards for flood fringe conditional uses. 
(1)  Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: 1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 2) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. 
The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional standards: 
a.  Design and certification. The structure's design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding. 
b.  Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed areas. Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate: 
1.  A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. There shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention; and 
2.  That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage. 
(2)  Basements, as defined by subsection 62-652(h) of this article, shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
b.  Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with subsection 62-655(d)(3) of this article. 
(3)  All areas of nonresidential structures including basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted. 
(4)  When at any one time more than 500 cubic yards of fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the governing body. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists. 
(5)  Storage of materials and equipment: 
a.  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
b.  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body. 
(6)  The provisions of subsection 62-655(e) of this article shall also apply. 
(e)  Standards for all flood fringe uses. 
(1)  All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the board of adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist. 
(2)  Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four upon occurrence of the regional flood. 
(3)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in subsection 62-655(e)(2) above. In considering permit applications, due consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be located in floodplain areas. 
(4)  Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. 
(5)  Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been specified on the official zoning map. 
(6)  Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in subsection 62-659(c). 
(7)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 62-656. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 409, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2018, repealed § 62-656 which pertained to the general floodplain district and derived from Ord. No. 345, § 1, adopted Oct. 27, 2009. 
Sec. 62-657. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Review criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the floodway district at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this article and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents. 
(b)  Floodway/flood fringe determinations in the general floodplain district. In the general floodplain district, applicants shall provide the information required in subsection 62-656(b) of this article to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site. 
(c)  Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. 
(d)  [Delineated floodplain.] No subdivision of land shall occur which creates a lot extending into a delineated floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 62-658. - Public utilities, railroads, roads, and bridges. 
(a)  Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall be floodproofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(b)  Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain shall comply with sections 62-654 and 62-655 of this article. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety. 
(c)  On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public utilities are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 62-659. - Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and placement of recreational vehicles. 
(a)  New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by section 62-657 of this article. 
(b)  The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance with section 62-655 of this article. If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with subsection 62-655(e)(1), then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the governing body. 
(1)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in subsection (c)(l) below shall be subject to the provisions of this article and as specifically spelled out in subsection (c)(3), (4) below. 
(1)  Exemption: Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this article if they are placed in any of the areas listed in subsection 62-659(c)(2) below and further they meet the following criteria: 
a.  Have current licenses required for highway use. 
b.  Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it. 
c.  The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district. 
(2)  Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles: 
a.  Individual lots or parcels of record. 
b.  Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds. 
c.  Existing condominium type associations. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles exempted in subsection (c)(1) lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500.00 for a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500.00 for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/floodproofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in sections 62-654 and 62-655 of this article. There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur. 
(4)  New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the floodway or flood fringe districts provided said recreational vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with subsection 62-655(e)(1) of this article. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood. 
b.  All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria of subsection (a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of subsection [62-660(d)] of the article. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of subsection 62-659(c)(1)a. and b. of this article will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with subsection 62-658(c) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 62-660. - Administration. 
(a)  Zoning officer. A zoning officer or other official designated by the governing body shall administer and enforce this article. If the zoning officer finds a violation of the provisions of this article the zoning officer shall notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures stated in section 62-662 of the article. 
(b)  Permit requirements. A permit must be obtained from the zoning administrator to verify if a development meets all applicable standards outlined in this article prior to conducting the following activities: 
(1)  The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in this article. 
(2)  The construction of a dam, on-site septic system, or any fence not meeting the definition of farm fence. 
(3)  The change or extension of a nonconforming use. 
(4)  The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source. 
(5)  The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain. 
(6)  Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including new or replacement culverts and bridges), unless a public waters work permit has been applied for. 
(7)  Any other type of "development" as defined in this article. 
(c)  Minimum development standards. All new construction and substantial improvements must be: 
(1)  Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  Flood capacity. Floodplain developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system. 
(6)  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
(7)  Critical facilities are to be located, so that the lowest floor is not less than two feet above the regional flood elevation, or the 500 year flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(8)  Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made in duplicate to the zoning officer on forms furnished by the zoning officer and shall include the following where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel. 
(9)  State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the zoning officer shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits. 
(10)  Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the zoning officer stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(11)  Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans, permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this article, and punishable as provided by section 62-662 of this article. 
(12)  Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this article. Floodproofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect. 
(13)  Record of first floor elevation. The zoning officer shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The zoning officer shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are floodproofed. 
(14)  Notifications for watercourse alterations. The zoning officer shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the commissioner of the department of natural resources prior to the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to M.S.A. ch. 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the commissioner of natural resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(15)  Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease the 100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the zoning officer shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data. 
(d)  Board of adjustment. 
(1)  Rules. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such boards by state law. 
(2)  Administrative review. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Variances. The board of adjustment may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of such variance, the board of adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this article, any other zoning regulations in the community, and in the respective enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied: 
a.  Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(4)  Hearings. Upon filing with the board of adjustment of an appeal from a decision of the zoning officer, or an application for a variance, the board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The board of adjustment shall submit by mail to the commissioner of natural resources a copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of the hearing. 
(5)  Decisions. The board of adjustment shall arrive at a decision on such appeal or variance within the timeline as stated in M.S.A. § 15.19. In passing upon an appeal, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning officer or other public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those specified in subsection 62-660(e)(6), which are in conformity with the purposes of this article. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article punishable under section 62-662. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the commissioner of natural resources within 15 days of such action. 
(6)  Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the board of adjustment may be made, and as specified in this community's official controls and also by Minnesota Statutes. 
(7)  Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The zoning officer shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and 2) such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the officer of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(e)  Conditional uses. The city council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses permissible under this article. Applications shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who shall forward the application to planning commission for consideration. 
(1)  Hearings. Upon filing with the City of Watertown a complete application for a conditional use permit, the zoning administrator shall submit by mail to the commissioner of natural resources a copy of the application for proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of the hearing. 
In all cases where a public hearing is required, a notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing. When an amendment involves changes in district boundaries affecting an area of five acres or less, a similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the amendment relates. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the person responsible for mailing the notice may use any appropriate records to determine the names and addresses of owners. A copy of the notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to by the responsible person and shall be made a part of the records of the proceedings. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a good faith attempt was made to give property notice. 
Within a reasonable period of time, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing and hear the application for the conditional use permit. The planning commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the city council. The recommendation of the planning commission shall be presented by the zoning administrator at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
(2)  Decisions. The city council shall arrive at a decision on a conditional use within the timeline as stated in M.S.A. § 15.19. In granting a conditional use permit the city council shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those specified in subsection (e)(6), which are in conformity with the purposes of this article. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article punishable under section 62-662. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the commissioner of natural resources within 15 days of such action. 
(3)  Procedures to be followed by the planning commission in passing on conditional use permit applications within all floodplain districts. 
a.  Require the applicant to furnish such of the following information and additional information as deemed necessary by the zoning officer and planning commission for determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use: 
1.  Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel; and 
2.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
b.  Transmit one copy of the information described in subsection (a) to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters. 
c.  Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or expert, the planning commission shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard. 
(4)  Factors upon which the decision of the city council shall be based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the city council shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this article, and: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 
b.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other hydraulic structures. 
c.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
d.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
e.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
f.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
g.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
h.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
i.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
j.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
k.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
l.  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this article. 
(5)  Time for acting on application. The city council shall act on an application in the manner as described in M.S.A. § 15.19. 
(6)  Conditions attached to conditional use permits. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this article, the city council shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this article. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities. 
b.  Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation. 
c.  Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions. 
d.  Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures. 
e.  Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and this article. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 62-661. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this article but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in subsection 62-652(h) of this article, shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 62-661(a)(1), (5) of this article. 
(1)  No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in subsections (3) and (5) below. 
(3)  The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor as estimated by the building inspector and approved by the city council. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of subsection 62-654 or 62-655 of this article for new structures depending upon whether the structure is in the floodway or flood fringe district, respectively. 
(4)  A nonconforming use or structure that has been discontinued or abandoned for a period of one year shall not be re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(5)  If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in subsection 62-652(h) of this article, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in sections 62-654, 62-655 or 62-656 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the floodway, flood fringe or general floodplain district, respectively. 
(6)  If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in subsection 62-652(h) of this article, from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building, then the building addition and the existing nonconforming building must meet the requirements of section 62-654 or 62-655 of this article for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the floodway or flood fringe district, respectively. 
(7)  If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive loss, as defined in 62-652(h) of this article, it must not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 62-662. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Watertown from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions may include but are not limited to: 
(1)  In responding to a suspected violation of this article, the zoning administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(2)  When an article violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the zoning officer, the zoning officer shall immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate department of natural resources' and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with the community's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible. 
(3)  The zoning officer shall notify the suspected party of the requirements of this article and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or development, the zoning officer may order the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the community. If the construction or development is already completed, then the zoning officer may either: (1) issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official controls; or (2) notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
(4)  If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the zoning officer within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this article and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The zoning officer shall also upon the lapse of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 62-663. - Amendments. 
    The floodplain designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the commissioner of natural resources if he determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use. 
    All amendments to this article, including amendments to the official zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the commissioner of natural resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The commissioner of natural resources must be given ten days' written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this article and said notice shall include a draft of the article amendment or technical study under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 10-27-09) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 49  2- 7-67 6 54-1 7 54-31 10 54-2 13 54-56 16 54-3 17, 18 54-5, 54-6 21 54-146, 54-147 55 11- 6-68 1-4 2-61-2-64 61 10- 7-69 1 1-13 64  4- 7-70 1, 2 34-2 65  4- 9-70 1 30-26 2 30-41 3, 4 30-43, 30-44 5 30-30 6 30-45 8, 9 30-46, 30-47 10 30-28 11 30-42 12 30-27 13 30-29 73  9-18-73 1-3 38-1 81 10- 2-74 1 6-3 2 6-3 
6-5 3 6-6 84  3-18-75 1, 2 10-66, 10-67 3 10-68, 10-69 4 10-54 5-7 10-51-10-53 8, 9 10-26, 10-27 11 10-81 12, 13 10-83, 10-84 14 10-28 85  4-15-75 1 18-26 2(1), 2(2) 18-41, 18-42 3, 4 18-43, 18-44 5(1)-5(3) 18-61-18-63 6(1), 6(2) 18-45, 18-46 7 18-47 8(1) 18-28 9 18-48 10 18-27 87 12-16-75 1-4 58-1-58-4 5-8 58-151-58-154 9 58-157 11 58-156 12, 13 58-186, 58-187 14(1), 14(2) 58-188, 58-189 15-17 58-158-58-160 18 58-155 19-21 58-5-58-7 88  4-20-76 2 54-32 93  2-15-77 1 10-28 94  3-15-77 1 2-86 108  2- 6-79 1 26-67 2 26-66 3 26-69 4, 5 26-71, 26-72 6-9 26-74-26-77 10 26-73 11 26-70 12 26-68 111  5- 1-79 1 14-66 6, 7 14-69 10-16 14-70-14-76 17, 18 14-67, 14-68  6-19-79(Res.) 54-92 112  6-28-79 1 54-91 119  4- 1-80 2 2-62 120  6-17-80 1 54-91 121  9- 2-80 1, 2 2-26, 2-27 124  2- 3-81 1 6-7 125  5- 5-81 1 10-67 2 10-28 131  2- 2-82 1, 2 54-116, 54-117 3-9 54-119-54-125 10 54-118 132  3- 2-82 1 10-69 1(1), 1(2) 10-67, 10-68 2 10-70 134  6-15-82 2 22-27 3 22-26 4.01 22-28 4.02 22-32 4.03 22-30 4.04-4.06 22-33-22-35 5 22-36 6.01 22-31 6.02, 6.03 22-37, 22-38 7 22-29 139  2-15-83 1 26-30 2, 3 26-35 144 10- 9-84 1, 2 2-26, 2-27 147 12-18-84 1, 2 54-57 3, 4 54-58, 54-59 151  7- 2-85 1-4 26-101-26-104 154  1- 6-87 1 6-1 2 6-66 2(4) 6-81 2(6) 6-53 6-156 3 6-43-6-46 4 6-47 5 6-48, 6-49 6 6-42 6-50 7 6-42 
6-50 8 6-51 8(5), 8(6) 6-67 9(1) 6-2 9(2) 6-4 10 6-81 11 6-52 12 6-50 13 6-101 14(1), 14(2) 6-102, 6-103 14(3) 6-103 15 6-105 15(1), 15(2) 6-104 17 6-42 18 6-42 
6-50 6-106 19(1), 19(2) 6-106 19(3) 6-131 19(4), 19(5) 6-107 20 6-110 21 6-109 22 6-3 6-108 23 6-132, 6-133 24-27 6-157-6-160 28 6-9 29 6-8 158  3- 3-87 1 10-52, 10-53 2 10-81 3 10-83 4 10-66 5 10-67 
10-69 6 10-68 7 10-54 8 10-82 9 10-28 164 12- 1-87 1, 2 2-26, 2-27 171  4-11-89 1-3 54-4 180 10- 9-90 1, 2 50-26, 50-27 3, 4 50-41, 50-42 5, 6 50-56, 50-57 181 11-13-90 1-3 34-1 182 12-11-90 1 14-26 14-28 2, 3 14-41, 14-42 4 14-29 185  7-23-91 1 58-60 186  9-10-91 1 26-26 2-9 26-28-26-35 10 26-27 188  8-11-92 62-651-62-663 189  8-11-92 1 42-26 2 42-31 3 42-27 4-6 42-32-42-34 7, 8 42-37, 42-38 9, 10 42-35, 42-36 11 42-39 12 42-28 13 42-40 14 42-29 15, 16 42-41, 42-42 17 42-30 190  2-23-93 art. I, §§ 1-26 58-26 art. II, 58-27, 58-28 art. III art. IV, § 1- 58-91-58-96 art. IV, § 6 art. V, § 1- 58-41-58-46 art. V, § 6 art. V, §§ 7-10 58-47 art. VI, § 1- 58-61-58-71 art. VI, § 11 art. VII, 58-29, 58-30 art. VIII art. IX, 58-106, 58-107 art. X art. XI, § 1- 58-121-58-124 art. XI, § 4 art. XII 58-125 art. XIII, §§ 1, 2 58-31 art. XIII, § 3 58-108 art. XIII, § 4 58-32 191  3-23-93 1-11 158-216-58-226 193 12-28-93 A(2)-A(4) 62-2-62-4 B 62-1 C(1) 62-5 C(2B) 62-6 C(3) 62-7 C(4)-C(7) 62-191-62-194 C(8), C(9) 62-211, 62-212 D(1.1)-D(1.4) 62-231-62-234 D(2.1)-D(2.4) 62-251-62-254 D(3.1)-D(3.4) 62-271-62-274 D(4.1)-D(4.4) 62-291-62-294 D(5.1) 62-311 D(6.1)-D(6.4) 62-331-62-334 D(7.1)-D(7.4) 62-351-62-354 D(8.1)-D(8.4) 62-371-62-374 D(9.1)-D(9.5) 62-391-62-395 D(10.1)-D(10.3) 62-411-62-413 D(11.1)-D(11.3) 62-431-62-433 D(12) 62-451 D(table 1) 62-213 E(1.1-1.9) 62-471 E(1.10)-E(1.15) 62-472-62-477 E(2.1) 62-478 E(3.1)-E(3.8) 62-511-62-518 E(4.1)-E(4.6) 62-531-62-536 E(5.1)-E(5.7) 62-571-62-577 E(6.1)-E(6.4) 62-591-62-594 E(7.1) 62-551 E(8.1) 62-552 E(9.1) 62-553 E(10.1) 62-554 E(11.1) 62-555 E(12.1) 62-556 E(13.1) 62-557 E(14.1) 62-558 F(1) 62-31 F(2) 62-51 F(2A) 62-52 F(2B) 62-53 F(2C) 62-54 F(3) 62-55 F(4) 62-76 F(5.1)-F(5.3) 62-101-62-103 F(5.4) 62-104, 62-105 F(5.6) 62-106 F(6.1)-F(6.4) 62-141-62-144 F(7.1)-F(7.6) 62-121-62-126 F(8) 62-166 F(8.1)-F(8.5) 62-161-62-165 F(10), F(11) 62-167, 62-168 195  3-22-94 1, 2       Added 48-1, 48-2 3(A)-3(D)       Added 48-31 4-12       Added 48-32-48-40 14       Added 48-41 196  5-24-94 1-3       Added 34-3 197  6-14-94 1-8       Added Adopt. ord., p. ix 199  8-23-94 34-4(note) 200  9-29-94 1       Added 26-121 3       Added 26-122 4-6       Added 26-123 7, 8       Added 26-124 9-13       Added 26-125-26-129 201A  4-11-95 5       Rpld 14-26-14-29       Rpld 14-41, 14-42 1       Added 14-26 1A, 1B       Added 14-27, 14-28 4       Added 14-29 2, 3       Added 14-41, 14-42 202  4-25-95 1-7       Added 34-4 8 34-4(note) 203  8- 8-95 1       Rpld 54-92(a)(5)       Rnbd 54-92(a)(6)-(8) as (5)-(7) 204  1-23-96 15       Rpld 26-66-26-77 1-14       Added 26-66-26-79 205  1-28-97       Added 39-1-39-8       Added 39-31-39-40 206  4-22-97 1 62-1 2       Added 62-479 3       Added 62-332(5) 4       Added 62-352(5) 5       Added 62-372(6) 6       Added 62-392(5) 207  4-22-97 1       Added 47-1-47-5       Added 47-21-47-29       Added 47-51-47-55 208  9-23-97 1       Added 58-8 2       Rpld 58-157 211  4-28-98 1-7 34-5 212  4-28-98 1 34-2 213  6- 9-98 1-14 34-4 215  5- 8-01 1 62-373 216  3- 9-99 5       Rpld 14-26-14-29 14-41, 14-42 1-4       Added 14-26-14-29 221  7-25-00 1-12 60-1-60-30 223  5- 8-01 1 62-391-62-396 225  8-14-01 1       Added 62-169-62-173 226  8-14-01 1 61-472 2 62-474 228 12-11-01       Rpld 39-1-39-40       Added 39-1-39-40 230  6-11-02 52-1-52-239 231  6-11-02 62-611-62-622       Rpld 62-169-62-173 232  6-11-02 28-1-28-27       Rpld 62-474 233  6-11-02       Rpld 62-511-62-536       Added 62-511-62-533 234  6-11-02 1 62-213 235  7- 9-02 1 62-1 2 62-21 3 62-213 4       Added 62-461-62-468 236 10- 8-02 1 26-151 237 10- 8-02 1 6-46.5 2 6-47 239 12-10-02 1 62-231-62-235 240 12-10-02 1 62-478 241 12-10-02 1 10-101 242 12-10-02 1 62-1 243  2-11-03       Added 46.5-1-46.5-163 244  3-11-03 1 62-1 2       Added 62-471(9) 3       Rpld 62-473 4       Rpld 62-475 5 62-476 6 62-477 245  4-22-03 6-1-6-160 246  7- 8-03 1 62-652(b) 62-653(a)(1) 62-653(a)(2) 62-654 62-660 247  8-26-03 1-4 14-26-14-29 248  8-26-03 1 62-477(a)(2) 249  8-26-03 1 52-30 2       Added 52-46(b)(5) 3       Rpld 52-61-52-63 3       Added 52-61 4       Rpld 52-81-52-84 4       Added 52-81 6       Added 52-82-52-84 7 52-127(b)(1) 52-127(c) 52-127(h) 8       Added 52-127(i) 9 52-134 10 52-142(a), (b), (c)(1) 11       Added 52-144 12 52-166(b)(1)a. 52-166(b)(2) 52-166(b)(3) 52-166(b)(4) 52-166(b)(7) 52-166(c) 13       Added 52-236(d) 251  1-17-04 1 58-107(c)(1) 252  2-24-04 1-12 27-26-27-31 253  2-24-04 1-3 14-30 255  6-29-04 48-1-48-28 256  8-10-04 1 34-1(a) 2       Added 34-1(c)(6), (7), (8) 257  9-13-04 14-77-14-89 14-101-14-114 260 11-23-04 1 10-28 2 10-67 261  9-28-04 1-13 27-26-27-30 262 12-14-04 1.01-1.23 51-26-51-47 263 12-14-04 1 6-11 2       Added 6-11.5 3       Rpld 6-27-6-30 264  3- 8-05 1-14 16-26-16-40 265  4-22-05 1       Added 62-469.5-62-469.10 267  2-22-05 1 62-213 268  4-26-05 1       Added 62-470.5-62-470.10 270  6-28-05 1-8 26-176-26-183 272  9-13-05 1-6 58-159 273  9-23-05 1       Added 62-470.15-62-470.21 275 11-22-05 50-26-50-59 278  1-24-06 1 2-62(a) 2 2-79(a) 279  2-28-06 1 48-13 2       Rpld 48-21(a)(2)       Added 48-21(a)(2) 3 48-22(a)(1)a.6. 4       Rpld 48-14(5) 280  3-14-06 1 54-32 281  3-28-06 1       Added 62-470.25-62-470.30 283  3-28-06 1 62-477(c)(7) 285  7-11-06 1 62-470.17(a) 62-470.9A.3.(a), (b) A.4.(b) A.5.(b)-(d) B.3.(a), (b) B.4.(a), (b) B.5.(b)-(d) C.3.(a), (b) C.4.(a), (b) C.5.(c), (d) D.3.(a), (b) D.4.(b) D.5.(c), (d) E.3.(a)-(c) E.4. (a), (b) E.5.(a)-(c) F.3.(a), (b) F.4.(a), (b) F.5.(c), (d) G.3.(a), (b) G.4.(a), (b) G.5.(a)-(c) H.3.(c)       Added H.3.(d) 286  8- 8-06 1       Added 62-375 290 11-28-06 1 62-1 2       Added 62-175-62-181 292  2-13-07 1       Added 14-31 293  2-13-07 1       Added 62-470.35-62.470.41 294  2-13-07 1 62-273(3)i 295  2-13-07 1       Added 62-470.50-62-470.54 300  6-26-07 1       Rpld 51-26-51-48 301  6-26-07 1       Added 51-26-51-58 305  5-22-07 1       Rpld 52-142 1       Added 52-142-52-148 1       Rnb 52-144       as 52-150 306  7-24-07 1 58-107(Table 1.) 307  7-24-07 1       Added 58-250-58-253 58-260-58-262 58-270, 58-271 58-280-58-284 308  8-28-07       Added 62-255 309  8-28-07 1       Added 14-26 310  8-28-07 1-6       Rpld 14-26-14-29       Added 14-25-14-30 312 10- 9-07 1-6       Added 10-111-10-116 313 10-23-07 1, 2 14-103(f) 3 14-109(b) 4 14-110(f) 314  1- 8-08 1 14-109(b) 315  1- 8-08 1       Added 58-115.1-58-155.3 2       Added 58-260.1 316  1- 8-08 1 14-109(f) 326  9-10-08 1       Rpld 47-1-47-5, 47-21-47-29, 47-51-47-55 327  9-10-08 1-3       Added 47-1-47-23 328  9-18-08 1 62-332(5) 2 62-352(5) 3 62-372(6) 4       Added 62-392(4)-(7) 5 62-470.39.A.1(b) 6 62-470.39.B.1(b) 330 11-10-08 1 52-81(7) 332  2-24-09 1 52-238 333  2-24-09 1 62-621 334  2-24-09 1 62-1 2       Added 62-559 336  6-23-09 1 62-447(c)(2) 337  6-23-09 1       Added 10-102 338  6-23-09 1       Rpld 34-3 339  7-28-09 1       Added 2-55, 2-56 2 2-61-2-65 3       Added 2-82-2-85 340  7-28-09 1       Added 51-1 344  9-22-09 1 52-213 345 10-27-09 1 62-651-62-663 349  6- 8-10 1 48-1-48-36 351  8- 9-10 1       Added 61-1-61-16 352  9-28-10 1-7       Added 15-31-15-37 354 12-14-10 1       Added 62-483-62-490 355 12-14-10 1 62-1 2 62-477(c)(4) 357  4-12-11 1 58-60 2 58-26 3       Added 58-72 359  6-14-11 1       Added 26-30(20) 2 26-31       Rpld 26-32-26-35       Added 26-32-26-36 360  8- 9-11 1-4       Added 27-26-27-29 6-12 27-30 13       Rpld 27-26-27-30 361  8-23-11 1       Rpld 27-26-27-30 362 10-25-11 1 48-12 2 48-28(4) 364 12-13-11 1       Rpld 14-26 365  1-10-12 1 34-1 366  1-10-12 1-3 34-1 367  1-24-12 1 34-4 368  1-24-12 1-4 62-141-62-144 5-7       Added 62-145-62-147 369  1-24-12 1, 2 62-191, 62-192       Dltd 62-193 3       Rnmb 62-194       as 62-193 376  1-22-13 1       Added 46-81, 46-82 2       Added 3-1, 3-2 380 10-28-14 1 Art. V, tit. 54-116-54-126 382 12- 9-14 1 48-12 48-13(2)d.2 48-14 48-17-48-19 48-20(d)       Dltd 48-22 48-24 383 12- 9-14 1 62-477(c)(4)c.2.a 385  3-24-15 1 14-25 14-27 14-29 386  5-26-15 1 54-57(c)(1) 54-57(d) 387  7-14-15 1 62-1 62-477       Added 62-478-62-480 389 12- 8-15 15-37 22-36 391  3-22-16 1 62-469.5 62-496.8 390  2- 9-16 1 10-28 Art. III(title) 10-51-10-53       Rpld 10-54       Rpld 10-66-10-69       Rnbd 10-70       as 10-55 10-81-10-84 10-102 392  4-12-16 1 62-1 2       Added 62-253(1)       Added 62-273(4)       Added 62-293(5) 393  5-10-16 1       Added 2-28 394  5-10-16 1 62-1 62-352(2) 62-372(4)       Added 62-393(4) 395  5-10-16 1 6-1, 6-2 6-4 6-10       Rnbd 6-11       as 6-10(2)       Rnbd 6-11.5       as 6-11       Rpld 6-13       Rnbd 6-14-6-26       as 6-13-6-25 6-31 397  6-28-16 1       Added Art. VIII, 26-184-26-188 398  8-23-16 1       Added 62-479(a)(6)a.       Rnbd 62-479(a)(6)a.-d.       as 62-479(a)(6)b.-e. 399  9-13-16 1 61-3 61-13, 61-14 61-16 401  6-27-17 1(Att.) 62-213 (Table 1) 2       Added 62-236-62-245 3       Added 62-246-62-250.5 4       Rnbd Divs. 3-20       as Divs. 5-22 406  4-24-18 10-102       Added 10-103 407  5- 8-18 1 62-1 62-241 62-250.1 62-253 62-273 62-293 408  5- 8-18 1 51-28 51-34 51-36, 51-37 51-42       Added 51-59 409 11-13-18 1 62-651-62-653       Rpld 62-656 62-660, 62-661 411  1- 8-19       Rpld 16-1-16-39       Added 16-1-16-41  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Minnesota Statutes Annotated (Minn. Stat). 
M.S.A. 
Section Section 

this Code 12.01-12.57 18-26 - 18-41 ch. 13 3-2 - 46-82 14.57-14.69 6-18 15.19 62-660 18.46 52-146 35.67-35.69 10-55 35.71 Ch. 10, Art. III - 10-84 84.81-84.928 54-116 84.81 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. V - 54-123 84.87 Ch. 54, Art. V 84.872 54-121 103B.231 58-223 103B.255 58-223 ch. 103F 62-651 ch. 103G 62-654 - 62-660 103G.005, subd. 14 62-653 103G.005, subd. 15 58-219 ch. 115 Ch. 58, Art. II 115.01, subd. 8 58-26 115.01, subd. 14 58-62 115.07 58-26 115A.882 50-43 ch. 116 Ch. 58, Art. II 144.391 34-4 145A.01 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II ch. 146B 15-31 - 15-34 146B.02 15-32 146B.03 15-32 161.45 51-28 - 51-49 168.11 26-67 168.27 39-38 ch. 168A 39-35 168B.01 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. III, 
Div. 2 ch. 169 Ch. 54 (note) - 54-1 - 54-116 - 54-146 169.01 26-67 169.04 Ch. 54 169.06 Ch. 54, Art. II 169.20 Ch. 54, Art. II 169.222 54-4 169.23 54-1 169.24 54-1 169.32 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. III 169.35 54-57 169.68 26-177 169.693 26-177 169.99 54-1 - 54-59 ch. 176 50-28 204B.l1, Subd. 2(d) 2-28 205.13, Subd. 3b 2-28 211B.045 48-14 216B.02 51-28 216B.02, Subd. 4 51-28 216B.02, Subd. 6 51-28 216B.164 61-16 216B.1641 61-3 216B.36 51-49 216C.06, Subd. 14 62-144 ch. 216D 51-31 216D.01-216D.09 51-41 - 51-51 216D.04, Subd. 3 51-28 222.37 51-49 237.16 51-26 237.162 51-26 - 51-28 - 51-43 - 51-49 237.163 51-26 - 51-27 - 51-28 - 51-43 - 51-49 237.163, Subd. 4(c) 51-44 237.163, Subd. 6 51-55 237.163, Subd. 6(b)(4) 51-34 237.79 51-26 237.81 51-26 ch. 238 16-29 - 51-28 238.02, Subd. 3 51-28 238.08, Subd. 1(b) 16-41 238.081 16-29 - 16-41 238.083 16-38 238.084 16-29 - 51-49 238.086 51-26 243.166 26-188 243.167 26-188 244.052 26-185 299F.011, Subd. 5 27-30 300.03 51-49 303.06 39-27 ch. 308A 51-28 325J.04, Subd. 2 39-34 326.03 62-554 326.2421 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II ch. 326B et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II ch. 326B 14-25 326B.121 Ch. 14, Art. II 326B.148 14-27 329.06 Ch. 42, Art. II 333.01 39-27 ch. 336 39-35 ch. 340A 6-1 - 6-13 340A.22 6-10 340A.22, Subd. 2 6-2 - 62-1 340A.24 6-2 - 6-10 - 62-1 340A.26 6-2 - 6-10 - 62-1 340A.28 6-10 340A.101 6-2 340A.101 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 340A.285 6-2 - 6-10 340A.403 6-10 340A.403, Subd. 2 6-10 340A.404 6-10 340A.404, Subd. 5 6-10 340A.404, Subd. 5(c) 6-10 340A.404, Subd. 10 6-10 340A.405 6-10 340A.406 6-11 340A.408, Subd. 5 6-13 340A.409 6-23 340A.412, Subd. 14 6-2 - 6-10 340A.413 6-10 340A.414 6-4 - 6-10 - 6-25 340A.414, Subd. 9 6-10 340A.504 6-16 340A.508, Subd. 3 6-18 340A.509 6-1 340A.801 6-23 340A.802 6-22 343.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 346.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 347.01 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) - Ch. 10, Art. III 347.09 Ch. 10, Art. III 347.14 Ch. 10, Art. III ch. 349 39-34 349.11-349.22 34-5 349.12, Subd. 25 34-5 ch. 349A 39-34 364.03, Subd. 3 39-33 - 47-11 364.06 3-2 - 46-82 364.09 3-2 - 46-82 410.015 Ch. 2 (note) 410.04 Ch. 2 412.02, subd. 3 2-86 412.111 Ch. 2, Art. IV 412.191, Subd. 4 6-31 412.211 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 412.221, Subd. 32 26-184 412.591, subd. 2 2-86 ch. 414 52-83 415.021 1-1 415.11 2-27 ch. 429 48-26 437.02 Ch. 42, Art. II ch. 453 51-28 ch. 453A 51-28 461.12 34-4 ch. 462 62-651 462.351 2-61 - 58-216 462.351 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 - 2-65 462.354 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 - 62-51 462.357 62-4 462.357, subd. 3 62-143 462.358 52-4 462.359 52-4 462.3593, Subd. 9 62-479 462.364 2-61 ch. 463 26-30 463.15 Sub. 3 14-106 ch. 466 16-37 ch. 469 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 - 2-71 469.001-469.047 2-75 469.029-469.108 2-72 469.091 2-71 469.093 2-71 469.094 2-75 469.124-469.134 2-75 469.174, subd. 8 2-75 471.705 Ch. 2, Art. III 471.924 39-27 473.864 52-4 ch. 505 52-4 561.01 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II ch. 609 34-4 609.02, subd. 3 1-13 609.034 1-13 609.321 47-7 609.324 47-7 609.3242 47-7 609.341, subd. 11(b) 47-12 609.342-609.3451 47-7 609.352 47-7 609.60 34-1 611A.51 et seq. 39-34 617.23 47-7 617.241 47-3 - 47-4 - 47-7 - 62-1 617.241-617.299 47-12 617.242, subd. 2 47-7 617.246 47-7 617.247 47-7 617.251 47-6 617.293 47-6 617.295 47-6  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Minnesota Statutes. 
Minn. Stat. 
Section Section  
this Code 12.01-12.57 18-26 18-41 ch. 13 3-2 46-82 14.57-14.69 6-18 15.19 62-660 18-46 52-142.5 35.67-35.69 10-70 35.71 10-84 84.81 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. V 54-123 84.81-84.928 54-116 84.87 Ch. 54, Art. V 84.872 54-121 103B.231 58-223 103B.255 58-223 ch. 103F 62-651 ch. 103G 62-654 62-660 103G.005, subd. 14 62-653 103G.005, subd. 15 58-219 115A.882 50-43 115.01, subd. 8 58-26 115.01, subd. 14 58-62 115.07 58-26 ch. 116 Ch. 58, Art. II 144.391 34-4 145A.01 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II ch. 146B 15-31 15-34 146B.02 15-32 146B.03 15-32 161.45 51-42 51.28 168.11 26-67 168.27 39-7 ch. 168A 39-12 168B.01 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. III, Div. 2 ch. 169 Ch. 54 54-116 169.01 26-67 54-1 54-116 54-146 169.01 26-66 169.04 Ch. 54 169.06 Ch. 54, Art. II 169.20 Ch. 54, Art. II 169.23, 169.24 54-1 169.32 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. III 169.35 54-57 169.68 27-177 169.99 54-1 54-59 169.222 54-4 169.693 26-177 ch. 176 50-28 204B.l1, subd. 2(d) 2-28 205.13, subd. 3b 2-28 211B.045 48-14 216B.36 51-42 216B.164 61-16 216B.1641 61-3 216D.01-09 51-51 216D 51-31 222.37 51-42 237.16 51-26 237.78 51-28 237.81 51-26 237.162 51-35 51-42 237.163 51-42 51-26 51-27 51-34 51-35 237.163, subd. 4(c) 51-44 237.163, subd. 6 51-55 ch. 238 16-29 51-28 238.08 16-41 238.08, subd. 1(b) 16-41 238.081 16-29 16-41 238.083 10-37 16-38 238.084 16-29 51-42 238.086 51-26 243.166 26-188 243.167 26-188 244.052 26-185 299F.011 27-26 300.03 51-42 300.06 51-29 303.06 39-4 308A 51-28 325J.04, subd. 4 39-11 326.03 62-554 326.2421 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 326B 14-25 326B et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 326B.121 Ch. 14, Art. II 326B.148 14-27 329.06 Ch. 42, Art. II 333.01 39-4 39-32 ch. 336 39-12 ch. 340A 6-1 6-13 340A.101 6-2 340A.101 et seq. Ch. 6 340A.22 6-2 6-10 340A.22, subd. 2 62-1 340A.24 6-2 6-10 62-1 340A.26 6-2 6-10 62-1 340A.28 6-10 340A.285 6-2 6-10 340A.403 6-10 340A.404 6-10 340A.405 6-10 340A.406 6-11 340A.408, subd. 5 6-13 340A.409 6-23 304A.412, 
subd. 14 6-2 6-10 340A.413 6-10 340A.414 6-2 6-10 6-25 340A.504 6-16 340A.508, subd. 3 6-18 340A.509 6-1 340A.801 6-23 340A.802 6-22 343.01 et seq. Ch. 10 346.01 et seq. Ch. 10 347.01 et seq. Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. III 347.09 Ch. 10, Art. III 347.14 Ch. 10, Art. III 349A 39-11 349.11-349.22 34-5 349.12, subd. 25 34-5 364.03, subd. 2 39-10(a)(2) 39-10(b)(2) 39-10(c)(2) 47-11 364.03, subd. 3 39-10(a)(2) 39-10(b)(2) 39-10(c)(2) 47-11 364.06 3-2 364.09 3-2 46-82 410.04 Ch. 2 410.015 Ch. 2 412.02, subd. 3 2-86 412.111 Ch. 2, Art. IV 412.191, 
subd. 4 6-31 51-58 412.211 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 412.221, subd. 32 26-184 412.591, subd. 2 2-86 415.02 Adopt. ord., § 7, p. ix 415.021 Adopt. ord., § 7, p. ix 1-1 415.11 2-27 ch. 429 48-26 437.02 Ch. 42, Art. II 453 51-28 453A 51-28 461.12 34-4 ch. 462 62-651 462.351 2-61 58-216 462.351 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2 2-65 462.354 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2 
62-51 462.357 62-4 462.364 62-1 462.3593 62-479 462.3593, subd. 9 62-479 ch. 463 26-30 463.15 18-82 463.17 26-32 ch. 466 16-37 ch. 469 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 
2-71 469.001-469.047 2-75 469.029-469.108 2-72 469.091 2-71 469.093 2-71 469.094 2-75 469.124-469.134 2-75 469.174, subd. 8 2-75 471.62 Ch. 6, Art. I 471.705 Ch. 2, Art. III 471.924 39-27 561.01 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II ch. 609 34-4 609.02, subd. 3 Adopt. ord., § 4, p. ix 1-13 609.60 34-1 609.034 1-13 609.321 47-7 609.324 47-7 609.341, subd. 11(b) 47-12 609.342-609.3451 47-7 609.352 47-7 609.3242 47-7 617.23 47-7 617.241 47-3 47-7 62-1 617.241-617.299 47-12 617.242, subd. 2 47-7 617.246 47-7 617.247 47-7 617.251 47-6 617.293 47-6 617.295 47-6  
