
Waseca, MN Code of Ordinances


TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



   10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



   11.   CITY STANDARDS



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference



   10.98   Administrative offenses



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   (1)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of
the city, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into
component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated
as the Code of Waseca, Minnesota, for which designation “city code,”
“code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or “code” may be
substituted.



      (2)   Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.



   (B)   (1)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and
sections are to the components of the code unless otherwise specified.



      (2)   Any component code may be referred to and cited by its
name, such as the “Traffic Code.”  Sections may be referred to and cited
by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§ 10.01.” 
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provision or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of Waseca,
Minnesota, as presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or
other legal actions at a future time.  The term CITY, when used in this code
may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The city code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Waseca County, Minnesota.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
AFFIRMATION may be substituted for an OATH, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.  Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents
thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the
Records Administrative Secretary for public inspection.  The Records
Administrative Secretary shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable
charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.



   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to
the contrary.



§ 10.98  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES.



   (A)   Purpose. Administrative offense procedures established
pursuant to this chapter are intended to provide the public and the city with
an informal, cost effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional
criminal charges for violations of certain ordinance provisions. The
procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have been
charged with administrative offenses. At any time prior to the payment of the
administrative penalty as is provided for hereafter, the individual may
withdraw from participation in the procedures in which event the city may
bring criminal charges in accordance with the law. Likewise, the city in its
discretion may choose not to initiate an administrative offense and may bring
criminal charges in the first instance. In the event a party participates in
the administrative offense procedures but does not pay the monetary penalty
which may be imposed, the city will seek to collect costs of the
administrative offense procedures as part of a subsequent criminal sentence
in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty of the criminal
violation.



   (B)   Administrative offense defined. An administrative offense is a
violation of a provision of this code and is subject to the administrative
penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties referred to in
Resolution 05-61, adopted August 16, 2005, hereafter.



   (C)   Notice. Any officer of the Waseca Police Department, or any
other person employed by the city, authorized in writing by the City Manager,
and having authority to enforce this code, shall, upon determining that there
has been a violation, notify the violator, or in the case of a vehicular
violation, attach to the vehicle a notice of the violation. Said notice shall
set forth the nature, date and time of the violation, the name of the
official issuing the notice, and the amount of the scheduled penalty.



   (D)   Payment. Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may,
within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set
forth on the schedule of penalties for the violation. The penalty may be paid
in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the
violation.



   (E)   Courtappearancerequest. Any person contesting an
administrative offense pursuant to this section may, within seven days of the
time of the issuance of the notice, request a court appearance. A person
requesting a court appearance will be issued a citation/summons for the
violation and a court date will be set. The administrative offense procedure
will then terminate.



   (F)   Failuretopay. In the event a party is charged with an
administrative offense fails to pay the penalty within seven days, or request
a court appearance within seven days, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor
charge will be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with
applicable city ordinances or state statutes. Upon issuance of the
misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge, the administrative offense procedure
shall terminate. If the penalty is paid in full within seven days, no similar
charge may be brought by the City of Waseca for the same incident.



   (G)   Disposition of penalties. All penalties collected by the
Waseca Police Department pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the city's
Finance Director and may be deposited in the city's general fund.



   (H)   Offensesandpenalties. Offenses which may be charged as
administrative offenses and the penalties for such offenses may be
established by the City Council from time to time, copies of which shall be
maintained in the administrative offices.



   (I)   Subsequentoffenses. In the event a party is charged with a
subsequent administrative offense (except speeding) within a 12 month period
of paying an administrative penalty for the same or substantially similar
offense, the subsequent administrative penalty shall be increased by 25%
above the previous penalty except as otherwise provided by resolution.



   (J)   (1)   Ordinance violation summonses.



      (2)   Issuance of ordinance violations.  Persons authorized
to issue summonses:



         (a)   The persons named in this division, as employees 
or agents of the city, shall have power to issue summonses authorized by city
ordinance, Administrative Offenses, § 10.98 and Uniform Traffic Code
Citations/Summonses with  complaints incorporated therein (citations), in
the form adopted by rule of the district court, but the issuance by those
named shall relate only to offenses involving this code, animal control, or
parking.  No such employee or otherwise shall take a violator into custody
or secure a promise to appear in court in lieu of arrest.



         (b)   Those authorized are as follows: Police Reserve
Officers.



(Ord. 880, passed 8-16-05; Am. Ord. 919, passed 12-5-06)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than that which is established by M.S. §
609.033, as may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than that which is established by M.S. § 609.0331, as may be
amended from time to time.



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   City seal; function



§ 11.01  CITY SEAL; FUNCTION.



   All contracts to which the city is a party, in addition to being signed
by the Mayor and the City Manager, shall be sealed with the city's seal. 
The seal shall be kept in the custody of the City Manager and affixed by him
or her.  The official city seal shall be a circular disk having engraved
thereupon, “The City of Waseca,” and other words, figures or emblems as
the Council may, by resolution, designate.



(`86 Code, § 2.52)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   DEPARTMENTS



      32.   CITY FUNDS



      33.   OFFICIALS AND PERSONNEL



      34.   CITY POLICIES



      35.   CRIMINAL HISTORIES AND BACKGROUND CHECKS



      36.   FEES



      37.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   30.01   Purpose and authority



§ 30.01  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   This title has been framed and proposed by the City Manager, and
enacted by the City Council, in accordance with City Charter §§ 2.02, 6.02
and 6.03, for the purpose of organizing the various municipal activities and
services and for effective and efficient enforcement of the administrative
powers relating thereto.



(`86 Code, § 2.01)



CHAPTER 31:  DEPARTMENTS



Section




General Provisions




   31.01   Departments generally




City Departments




   31.05   Police Department



   31.06   Fire Department



Cross-reference:



   Fire Prevention, see Ch. 93



   Police Department fees, see § 34.01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY.



   (A)   (1)   Each Department Manager shall be appointed by the
City Manager and shall perform all duties required of his or her office, by
ordinance or other law and duties as assigned by the City Manager.  Nothing
herein shall prevent the City Manager from assigning duties to a department
not specified for that department or specified for another department as the
best interests of the city.



      (2)   No public record, reports, correspondence or other data
relative to the business of any department required to be retained shall be
destroyed or removed permanently unless authorized by law, and then only with
the knowledge and approval of the City Manager.



      (3)   The Department Managers shall:



         (a)   Be immediately responsible to the City Manager for
effective administration of his/her Departments and all activities assigned
thereto;



         (b)   Keep informed as to the latest practices in their
particular fields and shall inaugurate with approval of the City Manager new
practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public;



         (c)   Submit reports of the activities of the
departments as requested by the City Manager;



         (d)   Establish and maintain a system of records and
reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper
control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the reports
required by the City Manager;



         (e)   Have power to delegate to members of departments
or divisions coming under their direction duties and responsibilities as may
be deemed advisable together with proportionate authority for their
fulfillment but in no case may they delegate their overall responsibility or
any of their accountability;



         (f)   Have authority to recommend to the City Manager
the appointment or removal of all subordinates under them; and



         (g)   Be responsible for the proper custody and
maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their departments.



      (4)   Departments shall furnish services, labor, equipment or
materials to other departments at the direction of the City Manager.



   (B)   The departments may include, but are not limited to the
following hereto:



      (1)   Public Utilities, consisting of Water, Sewer and
Electric;



      (2)   Finance/City Treasurer;



      (3)   Legal;



      (4)   Police;



      (5)   Fire;



      (6)   Public Works; and



      (7)   Community/Economic Development.



(Am. Ord. 674, passed 2-20-96; Am. Ord. 993, passed 10-1-13)



CITY DEPARTMENTS



§ 31.05  POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Police Department is hereby established.  The head of
this Department shall be known as the Chief of Police, and the number of
employees of the Police Department shall be determined by the Council, which
may be changed from time to time.  The Council shall have authority to
increase the number of members of the Police Department for temporary duty
when, in its judgment, an emergency exists for the preservation of life or
property.  The Chief of Police and all members of the Police Department
shall have the powers and authority of police officers generally and shall
perform the duties as are required of them by the Council, the City Manager
or by law.  The Chief of Police shall have general superintendence of the
Police Department and custody of all property used and maintained for the
purposes of the Department.



   (B)   The Council shall establish a voluntary police reserve within
the city to be known as the “Waseca City Police Reserve” pursuant to the
authority of the City Charter and the provisions of this section.



      (1)   The qualifications of the members of the Reserve shall
be determined by the Council with the advice and consent of the Chief of
Police.  These qualifications shall include, but not be limited to over the
age of 18 years, at least 20 hours of police, first aid and legal training,
unimpaired physically and mentally and of high moral character.



      (2)   The size of the Reserve shall be determined by the
Council.  The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the administration.



      (3)   The duties and obligations of the members of the Reserve
shall be to provide supplementary assistance at special events, traffic and
crowd control, and administrative or clerical assistance.  A reserve
officer’s duties do not include enforcement of the general criminal laws or
the state and the officer does not have full powers of arrest or
authorization to carry a firearm on duty.



      (4)   Individual members may be used as deemed necessary by
the Chief of Police, but the entire Reserve shall not be called out to duty
except upon direct order of the City Manager or named designate.  No member
of the Reserve or the Reserve itself shall exercise any authority outside the
limits of the city.



      (5)   Members of the Reserve shall receive no compensation for
their services, except that they shall be covered by worker’s compensation
insurance while on duty.  Upon separation, the reservist may participate in
the separation payment program which is based on years of volunteer service.



(`86 Code, § 2.29)  (Am. Ord. 571, passed 3-16-88; Am. Ord. 675, passed
3-19-96; Am. Ord. 894, passed 12-20-05; Am. Ord. 993, passed 10-1-13)



Cross-reference:



   Police Department fees, see § 34.01



§ 31.06  FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Department is hereby established.  The department
head shall be the Chief of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The size and composition (including, but not limited to a
determination as to permanent and volunteer members shall be established the
city, which may be changed from time to time.  The Council shall also
establish, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, written rules and
regulations of the Department including its internal structural organization,
a copy of which shall be distributed to each of its members.  The Chief of
the Fire Department shall have general superintendence of the Fire Department
and the custody of all property used and maintained for the purposes of the
Department.  He or she shall see that the same are kept in proper order and
that all rules and regulations and all provisions of the laws of the state
and ordinances of the city relative to the Fire Department and to prevention
and extinguishment of fires are duly observed.  He or she shall superintend
the preservation of all property endangered by fire and shall control and
direct all persons engaged in preserving the property.  In case of the
absence or disability of the Chief for any cause, the Assistant Chief shall
exercise all powers, perform all the duties and be subject to all of the
responsibilities of the Chief.



(`86 Code, § 2.30)  (Am. Ord. 674, passed 2-20-96; Am. Ord. 993, passed
10-1-13)



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 93



CHAPTER 32:  CITY FUNDS



Section



   32.01   Facsimile signatures



   32.02   Disbursement of funds; allowance of accounts



§ 32.01  FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.



   The City Manager is hereby authorized to request depositories of city
funds to honor an order for payment when the instrument bears a facsimile of
the signatures of the proper officers, and to charge the same to the account
designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though the
manually written signatures were affixed thereto.  The authority is granted
only for the purpose of permitting the officers an economy of time and effort.



(`86 Code, § 2.50)



§ 32.02  DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS; ALLOWANCE OF ACCOUNTS.



   All disbursements shall be made by order signed by the City Manager and
Finance Director, duly authorized by the Council, and every order shall
specify the purpose for which the disbursement is made, and indicate that it
is to be paid out of the proper fund.  No order shall be paid until there is
money to the credit of the account out of which it is to be paid sufficient
to pay the same together with all then outstanding encumbrances upon the
fund.  No claim against the city shall be allowed, except as otherwise
provided herein, unless accompanied by an itemized account and voucher,
payroll or time sheet signed by a responsible officer who has personal
knowledge of the facts in the case and certifies to the correctness and
reasonableness of the claim, and that it is a proper claim against the city;
provided, however, that the Council may provide for a regular payment without
specific individual authorization or filing of an itemized account and
voucher, payroll or time sheet of the salaries and wages of regular employees
or laborers, and any other fixed charges which have been previously duly and
regularly authorized.  Filing of a separate account verification may be
dispensed with by the City Manager if appropriately similar wording is
printed near the endorsement space on the order for payment form.



(`86 Code, § 2.51)



CHAPTER 33:  OFFICIALS AND PERSONNEL



Section



   33.01   Compensation



   33.02   Personnel policy



Cross-reference:



   Criminal history and background checks, see Ch. 35



§ 33.01  COMPENSATION.



   Salaries of the Mayor and Council members shall be established by
Council ordinance.



(`86 Code, § 2.54)



§ 33.02  PERSONNEL POLICY.



   An employee personnel policy shall be established upon the
recommendation of the City Manager and subsequent adoption by the Council. 
The policy shall thereupon become a part of the contract with employees, and
both the city and the employees shall be bound thereby.  All of the terms of
the employee personnel policy shall be distributed to each individual city
employee, and all amendments thereto shall be similarly distributed upon
adoption.  The City Manager is authorized to issue administrative directives
not inconsistent with this policy.  Administrative policies shall become a
part of the personnel policy upon being filed with the Finance Department and
distributed to each employee.



(`86 Code, § 2.53)



CHAPTER 34:  CITY POLICIES



Section



   34.01   Police Department fees



§ 34.01  POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES.



   (A)   The Police Department shall charge fees for the following
services:



      (1)   Pre-employment criminal history checks;



      (2)   Drivers license checks; and



      (3)   Copies of police reports.



   (B)   Fees charged for the services shall be determined by the City
Council.



(`86 Code, § 4.94)  (Am. Ord. 739, passed 11-16-99)



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned Property, see Ch. 90



CHAPTER 35: CRIMINAL HISTORIES AND BACKGROUND CHECKS



Section



   35.01   Definitions



   35.02   Applicant information required



   35.03   Tenant information required



   35.04   Background investigation on public safety sensitive positions



   35.05   Required disclosure



   35.06   Questioned identity



   35.07   Background investigation on tenants



   35.08   Background checks on managers



   35.09   Information to be protected



   35.10   Drivers license information



   35.11   Illegal acts



§ 35.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHILDREN.  Any person under 18 years of age.



   CRIMINAL RECORD CHECK.  An inquiry into public criminal arrest data,
for 15 years prior to inquiry or such period of time as may be amended from
time to time by the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension, the Police
Department and "CJIS" Minnesota Criminal Justice Information System
information obtained through the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension,
from the appropriate purpose code. The purpose code shall correspond with the
requested access for data.



   DRIVERS LICENSE RECORD.  Public data, which is obtained through the
Minnesota Department of Public Safety through the Bureau of Criminal
Apprehension.



   MANAGER.  The owner, the agent or any other individual responsible for
receiving lease applications or rent payments or authorizing the lease or
rent of an apartment, house, manufactured home or lot for the placement of a
manufactured home.



   PUBLIC SAFETY SENSITIVE POSITIONS.  Paid and volunteer positions with
the City of Waseca, which because of their nature and description require a
high level of interaction with the public, uncontrolled access to private
property and positions of influence and leadership over children and other
vulnerable individuals including, but not limited to volunteer fire fighters,
volunteer police reserve, civilian police personnel, city meter readers,
building official, rental inspector, neighborhood watch block captains,
hospital employees, hospital volunteers, ambulance service employees,
ambulance service volunteers and all other individuals who work directly with
children or vulnerable adults.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY MANAGERS.  Persons who are defined in and must
qualify under M.S. §§ 299C.67 through 299C.71.



   TENANT.  Any individual other than a relative who is renting or
attempting to rent or lease an apartment, house, manufactured home or a lot
for the placement of a manufactured home.



   VEHICLE REGISTRATION CHECK.  A record check through the Minnesota
Department of Motor Vehicles.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.02 APPLICANT INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   All individuals making an application for a public safety sensitive
position shall complete an application that shall contain the following:



   (A)   Full name, place and date of birth and the present residence
address and residence addresses for the past five years.



   (B)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name
other than his or her present name, and if so, what such name or names were
and information concerning dates and places where such names were used.



   (C)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime. If so,
the applicant shall furnish information as to the date, place and offense
resulting in the conviction.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.03 TENANT INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   Upon request of the manager for the purpose of a background check, all
persons making an application for housing shall complete an application,
which shall contain the following:



   (A)   Full name, place and date of birth and the present residence
address and residence addresses for the past five years of the tenant and
each person who will reside in the rental unit.



   (B)   Whether the tenant or any person residing with the tenant has
ever used or been known by a name other than his or her present name, and if
so, what such name or names were and information concerning dates and places
where such names were used.



   (C)   Whether the tenant or any person residing with the tenant has
been convicted of any crime. If so, the tenant shall furnish information as
to the date, place and offense resulting in the conviction.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.04 BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION ON PUBLIC SAFETY SENSITIVE POSITIONS.



   The Department Head responsible for the public safety sensitive
position employee shall furnish the application or copy of the application of
the applicant for a public safety sensitive position to the Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall complete a criminal record
check for background check crimes and drivers license record check of the
applicant. The Chief of Police shall disclose convictions for background
check crimes to the responsible Department Head and City Manager.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.05 REQUIRED DISCLOSURE.



   If the city rejects the applicant's application due, solely or in part,
to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, subject to the exception set
forth in M.S. § 364.09, the City Manager must notify the applicant in
writing of the following:



   (A)   The grounds and reasons for the rejection;



   (B)   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06;



   (C)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and



   (D)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.06  QUESTIONED IDENTITY.



   This section acknowledges that questioned identity situations may occur
and the city will provide a process to allow for fingerprint verification in
cases where it is not clear if a record based on a name and date of birth
search actually belongs to the person.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.07  BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION ON TENANTS.



   The Chief of Police shall conduct a criminal record check for
background check crimes and drivers license record check on a tenant for a
fee, for managers who provide consent for release of information signed by
the tenant, as determined by the City Council. Such consent release forms
shall contain:



   (A)   Notification to the tenant that the manager will request the
Chief of Police to conduct a criminal record check;



   (B)   Notification of the right to obtain a copy of the criminal
record check;



   (C)   Notification of the right to challenge the accuracy and
completeness of the criminal record report; and



   (D)   Notification of the right to be informed by the manager if the
application for housing has been denied based upon the presence of background
check crimes.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.08  BACKGROUND CHECKS ON MANAGERS.



   The Police Department shall provide background checks on the managers
of rental units as provided for in M.S. § 299C.67 to 299C.71 as may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.09  INFORMATION TO BE PROTECTED.



   Information that is gathered in the background investigation, which is
not deemed public data under the Minnesota Data Practices Act, shall not be
released to the requesting Department Head or manager. The information
gathered shall only be used by the manager for the purpose of approving or
rejecting the applicant for housing or by the Department Head for employment
purposes.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.10  DRIVERS LICENSE INFORMATION.



   A drivers license records check shall be made upon request for city
employees and public request.



   (A)   Upon request, the Chief of Police shall conduct a drivers
license records investigation of city employee applicants and employees for
insurance purposes and to assure compliance with driver license requirements
for city vehicle operation.



   (B)   Upon request of a citizen and upon verification of the
identification of the requesting person, the Chief of Police is authorized to
conduct a driver's license record check for that requesting citizen for a fee
as determined by the City Council.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



§ 35.11 ILLEGAL ACTS.



   It is a misdemeanor to furnish false information to the Chief of Police
for any purpose related to this chapter.



(Ord. 895, passed 12-20-05)



CHAPTER 36: FEES



Section



   36.01   Master fee schedule



§ 36.01  MASTER FEE SCHEDULE.



   The following fee categories shall be established, and the City Council
shall establish individual fees within these categories and fee amounts
adopted by resolution by the City Council, and may be amended from
time-to-time as necessary.



   (A)   General licenses/permits for the following:



      (1)   Cigarettes,



      (2)   Tobacco products,



      (3)   Electronic delivery devices,



      (4)   Peddler permit,



      (5)   Solicitor permit,



      (6)   Transient merchant permits,



      (7)   Investigative fee,



      (8)   Taxicabs (per cab),



      (9)   Garbage haulers,



      (10)   Duplicate license;



   (B)   Beer/liquor licenses;



   (C)   Rental housing permit fees;



   (D)   Building permit/inspection fees;



   (E)   False alarm responses (Police/Fire/both) fees;



   (F)   Community development/planning and zoning/economic development
fees;



   (G)   Miscellaneous other fees/charges for the following: special
assessment searches, dishonored checks;



   (H)   Parks reservation/shelter, pavilion and city facility
rental/miscellaneous park fees;



   (I)   Police Department fees and administrative fines;



   (J)   Violation of City Code fees and fines;



   (K)   Animal license fees;



   (L)   Animal impound fees;



   (M)   PEG access channel fees;



   (N)   Water park fees;



   (O)   Maps - printing and copying fees;



   (P)   Utility billing fees;



   (Q)   Distributed generation fees;



   (R)   Equipment billable rate fees.



(Ord. 979, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 1015, passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord. 1020, passed
4-1-14; Am. Ord. 1025, passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord. 1027, passed 4-7-15; Am. Ord.
1041, passed 3-2-16; Am. Ord. 1054, passed 4-4-17)



CHAPTER 37:  BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES



Section




General Provisions




   37.01   Boards and commissions; establishment, appointments and
authority




City Boards and Commissions




   37.10   Airport Advisory Board



   37.11   Joint Airport Zoning Board



   37.12   Park Advisory Board



   37.13   Community Education Advisory Board



   37.14   Planning Commission



   37.15   Human Rights Commission



   37.16   Charter Commission



   37.17   Heritage Preservation Commission




City Authorities




   37.20   Housing and Redevelopment Authority



   37.21   Economic Development Authority



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 37.01  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS; ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Establishment.



      (1)   Authority to establish.  Pursuant to M.S. § 412.621,
and other such statutes as specifically cited herein, the Council establishes
or continues the following boards and commissions to advise the Council with
respect to municipal functions and activities and to investigate subjects of
interest to the city.



      (2)   How established.  A board or commission may be
established by a majority vote of the Council.  An ordinance shall be
adopted prescribing the purpose, duties, and composition of the board or
commission.



      (3)   Applicability.  All boards and commissions established
by the City Council shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter,
unless a specific requirement or condition is imposed by the City Charter,
city ordinance or state law.



      (4)   Purposes and duties generally.  All boards and
commissions established by the Council shall be advisory to the Council and
shall have the responsibility to:



         (a)   Investigate matters within the scope of the
particular board or commission or as specifically directed by the Council.



         (b)   Advise the Council by communicating the viewpoint
or advice of the board or commission.



         (c)   At the direction of the Council, hold hearings,
receive evidence, conduct investigations, and, on the basis of such hearings,
evidence and investigations, make decisions and recommendations to the
Council.



         (d)   Advisory role.  A board or commission established
by the Council shall not assume the role of an administrative or legislative
body.



   (B)   Cooperation of city officials.



      (1)   All city officials, Department Managers, employees and
appointees shall cooperate with the commissions established by the Council
and render all reasonable assistance as directed by the City Manager.



      (2)   Each board and commission shall hold its regular
meetings at times established and approved by the City Manager.  The City
Manager shall be an ex-officio member of all boards and commissions.



   (C)   Membership.



      (1)   Members.  Any person wishing to serve on a city board
or commission must meet the following requirements:



         (a)   Age 18 or older on the date of appointment to the
boards and commission.



         (b)   A citizen of the United States.



         (c)   A person who resides within city limits.



            Exception: The Planning Commission may have one
non-resident member who resides outside of the municipal city limits, but
resides within the two-mile planning area. The Airport Advisory Board may
have up to two non-resident members who reside outside of the municipal city
limits, but reside within the limits of Waseca County.



      (2)   City Council representative.  Each board or commission
shall have a City Council representative.



   (D)   Ineligibility.  The following persons are ineligible to serve
on a city board or commission:



      (1)   Anyone convicted of treason or a felon whose rights have
not been restored.



      (2)   Anyone under guardianship.



      (3)   Anyone who is found by a court of law to be legally
incompetent.



      (4)   Full-time city employees; or part-time employees where
there is an incompatibility of office.



   (E)   Appointments and terms of membership.



      (1)   Members.  Board and commission members shall be
appointed at the first regular meeting of the Council in January of each
year, by majority vote of the Council and shall serve terms of membership not
to exceed three years per term.  Each member is eligible to serve four
consecutive three-year terms.  Terms expire on January 31.  Re-appointment
will take place at term expiration.  New appointees shall assume office on
February 1.



      (2)   Council Representatives.  Council Representatives shall
be appointed at the first regular meeting of the Council in January of each
year, by majority vote of the Council and shall serve a term of one year.



      (3)   Resignation and removal.  Members shall serve without
compensation and may resign voluntarily by letter or e-mail to the City
Manager or be removed by majority vote of the Council or pursuant to §
37.01(F)(5).



      (4)   Vacancies.  Vacancies in membership shall be filled by
majority vote of the Council for the balance of the unexpired term.



      (5)   Term of appointment to fill vacancy.  A person
appointed to fill a vacancy shall be eligible to serve three full terms in
addition to the balance of the unexpired term.



      (6)   Concurrent membership.  No person may serve
concurrently on more than two boards or commissions.



      (7)   Staggered terms.  Terms of membership shall be
staggered so that no more than one-half of the terms on a board or commission
expire in any particular year.



   (F)   Organization and bylaws.



      (1)   Bylaws.  Each board or commission shall adopt and be
governed by such bylaws as shall be necessary and desirable for the conduct
of its activities.  Bylaws shall be subject to review and approval by the
Council.



      (2)   Chairperson.  Each board or commission annually shall
elect from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson to serve a term of
one year.  No person shall serve more than two consecutive one-year terms as
chairperson of a particular board or commission.



      (3)   Meetings.



         (a)   Regular meetings.  All board and commission
meetings are open meetings subject to the Minnesota Open Meeting Law (M.S.
Ch. 13D) and shall be held at a fixed time, on a fixed date and in a fixed
place as shall be determined by the board or commission.  The Records
Secretary shall give notice of all board and commission meetings as required
for meetings of public bodies.



         (b)   Public comment.  All board and commission
meetings shall include scheduled time for public comment.



         (c)   Meetings conducted according to bylaws.  All
meetings shall be conducted according to the bylaws of the board or
commission.



      (4)   Meeting minutes.



         (a)   Official record.  Approved minutes of board or
commission proceedings shall be public record; the city shall retain a copy
of the official minutes of each board or commission meeting in accordance
with applicable state laws.



         (b)   Distributed to City Council.  Official minutes of
each board or commission meeting shall be distributed to the City Council.



      (5)   Removal.



         (a)   Any member of a board or commission established by
the Council who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings, or who
fails to attend at least 70% of the scheduled meetings in any calendar year
shall be deemed to have resigned as a member of the board or commission.



         (b)   Extraordinary circumstances such as serious
illness will be considered a waiver of these requirements.



         (c)   Members may be removed, from any advisory board or
commission, prior to the expiration of their term of office, by a majority
vote of the City Council.



      (6)   Vacancies.  The successor to any member of a board or
commission who has been removed pursuant to this section shall be appointed
pursuant to § 37.01(E).



      (7)   Quorum.  A majority of the appointed members of the
advisory board or commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.  An affirmative vote of the majority of a quorum in attendance at
any meeting shall be necessary to transact business or carry any proposition.



      (8)   Conflict of interest.  All members should be aware of
the need to avoid any instance of conflict of interest.



      (9)   Procedure.  The board or commission’s final action on
any proposal must be in the form of a recommendation of approval or
disapproval directed to the City Council.



   (G)   Remuneration.  All appointed board and commission members
shall serve without remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket
expenses incurred in performance of their duties when the expenses have been
authorized before they are incurred.



   (H)   Lobbying efforts consistent with city policy.



      (1)   Lobbying efforts by any advisory board or commission
member on legislative or political matters should contact the City Manager to
check for consistency with city policy.  In the event a position is taken
that differs from that of the city’s policy, an advisory board or
commission cannot represent that position publicly or before another body,
for example, the State Legislature or the Board of County Commissioners.



      (2)   An advisory board or commission member is free to
communicate positions to the City Council on matters pertaining to the
body’s purpose and function.



      (3)   A member of the advisory board or commission is not
authorized to speak for the board or commission, unless the board has
expressly authorized the member’s communication.



      (4)   An individual member is free to voice a position, oral
or written, on any issue as long as it is made clear that the member is not
speaking as a representative of the city, or as a member of an advisory board
or commission.



(`86 Code, § 2.02)  (Am. Ord. 683, passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord. 696, passed
3-18-97; Am. Ord. 760, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. 872, passed 4-19-05; Am. Ord.
917, passed 11-21-06; Am. Ord. 1000, passed 10-1-13; Am. Ord. 1046, passed
7-19-16)



CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



§ 37.10  AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Airport Advisory Board will act in an advisory
and review capacity to the City Council regarding the operation and
construction of the airport, and shall have the following responsibilities
and duties:



      (1)   To advise the Council in the establishment of the rules
and regulations, consistent with state and federal aviation authority, as may
be necessary or advisable for the operation and management of the municipal
airport, the same to be confirmed by the Council before they are placed in
effect;



      (2)   To advise the Council in the establishment of building
and tie-down sites and to approve and recommend all proposed construction on
the airport property and to request repair or removal of structures not
maintained in accordance with regulations as to construction or location; and



      (3)   To make other recommendations as may be necessary or
advisable for the safe and efficient management; operation and maintenance of
the municipal airport.



   (B)   Membership.  The Airport Advisory Board will consist of five
members, appointed pursuant to § 37.01.



(`86 Code, § 2.06)  (Am. Ord. 1000, passed 10-1-13)



§ 37.11  JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Joint Airport Zoning Board to have and exercise
the following powers: the power to administer and enforce airport zoning
regulations applicable to the airport hazard area in, on or about any airport
owned and controlled by the city and the airport hazard area appertaining to
the airport located outside the territorial limits of the city pursuant to
M.S. § 360.063, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Membership.  Joint Airport Zoning Board shall have as members
two representatives appointed by the city and two representatives from the
county and, in addition, the Chairperson elected by a majority of the members
so appointed.



(Ord. 1000, passed 10-1-13)



§ 37.12  PARK ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Park Advisory Board will act in an advisory and
review capacity to the City Council regarding the operations of the parks,
and shall have the following responsibilities and duties:



      (1)   To advise the Council in the establishment of the rules
and regulations, consistent with state authority, as may be necessary or
advisable for the operation and management of the park system, including the
Water Park, the same to be confirmed by the Council before they are placed in
effect;



      (2)   To advise the Council in the establishment of
recreational facilities and recommend all proposed construction on the park
property and to request repair or removal of structures not maintained in
accordance with regulations as to construction or location; and



      (3)   To make other recommendations as may be necessary or
advisable for the safe and efficient management, operation and maintenance of
the park system.



   (B)   Membership.  The Park Advisory Board will consist of five
members, appointed pursuant to § 37.01.



(`86 Code, § 2.08)  (Am. Ord. 696, passed 3-18-97; Am. Ord. 1000, passed
10-1-13)



§ 37.13  COMMUNITY EDUCATION ADVISORY BOARD.



   The Community Education Advisory Board was created through a joint
agreement with the City of Waseca and Independent School District No. 829 to
provide jointly sponsored recreation services, and passed by resolution in
1975, and updated in 1978, 1982 and 2010 as set forth in Resolution No. 10-33.



(Ord. 1000, passed 10-1-13)



§ 37.14  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The Planning Commission was established by the city pursuant to M.S.
Ch. 462, as it may be amended from time to time, through its zoning ordinance
in order to provide recommendations to the City Council and the Zoning
Administrator in the administration of the zoning ordinance.  The Planning
Commission will consist of five members, appointed pursuant to § 37.01.



(`86 Code, § 2.04)  (Am. Ord. 617, passed 3-2-92; Am. Ord. 1000, passed
10-1-13; Am. Ord. 1066, passed 9-18-18)



§ 37.15  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Human Rights Commission shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:



      (1)   To generally advise the Council regarding civil and
human rights problems, issues and policies;



      (2)   To develop, in cooperation with MnDHR, and implement
programs of formal and informal education; and



      (3)   To coordinate efforts with the Human Rights Commissions
of neighboring communities, where appropriate.



   (B)   Membership.  The Human Rights Commission will consist of five
members, appointed pursuant to § 37.01.



(`86 Code, § 2.12)  (Am. Ord. 693, passed 12-17-96; Am. Ord. 1000, passed
10-1-13)



§ 37.16  CHARTER COMMISSION.



   A Charter Commission is re-established consistent with M.S. Ch. 410 and
the City Charter to fulfill the statutory requirements for the City Charter
consistent with Minnesota Statutes.  The Charter Commission will consist of
seven members, appointed pursuant to § 37.01.



(Ord. 1000, passed 10-1-13)



§ 37.17  HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   The city established a Heritage Preservation Commission on April 15,
2008, pursuant to M.S. § 471.193.  The Heritage Preservation Commission
shall have the responsibilities and duties as set forth in Ch. 155.



(Ord. 1000, passed 10-1-13)



Cross-reference:



   Heritage Preservation Commission, see Ch. 155



CITY AUTHORITIES



§ 37.20  HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Municipal Housing and Redevelopment Authority
composed of five members, is hereby perpetuated as heretofore established by
resolution adopted pursuant to M.S. § 469.003, as it may be amended from
time to time.



   (B)   Membership.  Each member shall hereafter be appointed for a
term of five years, one member retiring each year.  Each member must reside
within city limits.



(`86 Code, § 2.05)  (Ord. 1000, passed 10-1-13)



§ 37.21  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Economic Development Authority was established
by the city to take action on economic development programs for businesses
and industries in the city.  The Economic Development Authority was
established by City Council resolution that was adopted on November 18, 1997;
and amended on January 16, 2001 and April 2, 2013.



   (B)   Membership.  The Economic Development Authority consists of
seven commissioners, all of whom are appointed as prescribed by M.S. §
469.095, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time, for six-year
terms.  Each member must reside within city limits.  Two Economic
Development Authority commissioners must be members of the City Council.



(Ord. 1000, passed 10-1-13)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC UTILITIES



Chapter



   50.   BILLING PROCEDURE; RATES



   51.   ELECTRICITY



   52.   GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS



   53.   SEWERS



   54.   SOLID WASTE



   55.   SURFACE WATER SYSTEM



CHAPTER 50:  BILLING PROCEDURE; RATES



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Fixing rates and charges



   50.03   Contractual contents



   50.04   Rules and regulations regarding municipal utilities



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS USE and INDUSTRIAL USE.  The use of premises, or a portion
thereof, for a purpose other than residential.



   COMPANY, GRANTEE and FRANCHISEE.  Any private utility system to which
a franchise has been granted by the city.



   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER.  Any user of a utility.



   MUNICIPAL UTILITY.  Any municipally owned utility system.



   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE and RESIDENTIAL USE.  Furnishing a utility to
premises all, or a portion of which, are used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family and two-family dwellings, but not including
hotels, motels, boarding houses or apartment houses, unless each unit or
apartment is metered separately.



   SERVICE.  Providing a particular utility to a consumer or customer.



   UTILITY.  All utility services, whether the same be public
municipally-owned facilities or furnished by private utility companies,
except those the regulation of which has been placed under the exclusive
authority of the state or federal government.



(`86 Code, § 3.01)



§ 50.02  FIXING RATES AND CHARGES.



   All rates and charges for utilities shall be fixed and determined by
the City Council.  Upon adoption, the rates and charges shall become
provisions of this chapter.



(`86 Code, § 3.02)



§ 50.03  CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.



   Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall
constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of
municipal utility services, and every consumer shall be deemed to assent to
the same.



(`86 Code, § 3.03)



§ 50.04  RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   All municipal utilities shall be billed in accordance
with city policy, as adopted by Council.



      (2)   A penalty as determined by the Council thereof shall be
added to, and become part of, all delinquent utility bills.



   (B)   For the cold weather period of October 15 to April 15, city
utilities may disconnect a customer's service unless they exercise their
rights under M.S. § 216B.097, as it may be amended from time to time.  The
charge for reconnecting full service will be set by the City Council.



   (C)   If any bill is not paid in full by the due date, delinquent
collection procedures will be implemented up to and including disconnection
of service.



   (D)   Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon
forms supplied by the city, and strictly in accordance therewith.  No
connection shall be made until the application has been approved. All
municipal utilities shall be billed based on the current utility billing rate
as approved by the City Council.



   (E)   All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued
whenever it is determined that:



      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any
person working on any connection with the municipal utility systems, has
violated any requirement of the city code relative thereto, or any connection
therewith;



      (2)   Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other
financial obligation imposed on the owner or occupant of the premises served,
is unpaid after due notice thereof; or



      (3)   There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or
occupant in connection with any application for service or delivery or
charges therefor.



   (F)   Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines and mains
shall be and remain in the city and no person shall own any part or portion
thereof, except property owners own and maintain service lines from water and
sewer mains including connections to the mains.



   (G)   The city has the right to enter in and upon private property,
including buildings and dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed
municipal utility, or connection therewith, at all times reasonable under the
circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, and for the purpose
of inspection and repair of meters or a utility system, or any part thereof.



   (H)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or
carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb or in any way interfere with
any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture or
appurtenance of any municipal utility system or commit any act tending to
obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection
with any municipal utility system without first having applied for and
received permission from the city to make the same.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a
utility when the same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for
non-payment of a bill.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to “jumper” or by any
means or device fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or
to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any
utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no
knowledge.



      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to construct a private
well for domestic, commercial, industrial, institutional or governmental
water use inside the corporate limits of the city after the effective date of
this chapter.



   (I)   (1)   No more than one house or building shall be supplied
from one service connection or lead for any municipal utility services, as
determined by the city.



      (2)   In the case of multiple dwelling or commercial units
where the owner desires more than one meter installed on a service, written
request shall be made for approval of the city after an inspection and
approval of the multiple metering.



(`86 Code, § 3.04)  (Ord. 704, passed 9-16-97; Am. Ord. 733, passed 7-6-99)



   (J)   (1)   In the event the City Council determines by
resolution that it cannot economically provide the availability of city
services including water, sanitary sewer, or both, to any parcel of land
within the city limits, then, in that case only, the City Council may
authorize the property owner to construct a well or septic system upon such
property.



      (2)   Any private water or sewer system may serve no more than
one lot.



      (3)   At such time as the city makes available city service to
the property, the city shall notify the property owner in writing.  The
property owner shall have a maximum of three years to connect to city
services and cease use of any private well or septic system with the
exception of a well used for non-potable uses.  Property owner shall have 12
months after connecting to city services to pay all hook-up charges and
assessments in full.



      (4)   Any well must be installed by a licensed Minnesota well
driller.



      (5)   Permits to install a well or septic system must be
obtained from city’s Building Inspector.  A fee as determined by the City
Council shall be charged for each permit.  Plans must accompany each permit
application and shall be kept on file at City Hall.



      (6)   Any septic system shall be subject to local and state
regulations including shoreland zoning restrictions if such property is
located within shoreland zoning area.



      (7)   Any conflict with city’s Well Head Protection Plan
would be reason for a permit application.



      (8)   If property has a private well but is connected to city
sanitary sewer, a meter shall be installed to measure the amount of
wastewater.



      (9)   There shall be no cross-connections to city water from
any private well.  This shall be subject to inspection by the city’s
Building Inspector at any time.



      (10)   At such time as the property is serviced by city water,
the well must be disconnected (unless maintained for non-potable purposes as
indicated above) and sealed in accordance with the laws of the state.



(Ord. 766, passed 5-15-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 51:  ELECTRICITY



Section



   51.01   Rules and regulations



§ 51.01 RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Before any electric installation is connected to the city
distribution system it must meet the requirements of all applicable codes and
ordinances.



   (B)   All rules and regulations shall comply with the policies as
adopted by the City Council.



(`86 Code, § 3.13)



CHAPTER 52:  GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Connections required; prohibitions



   52.03   Water and sewage sources other than city



   52.04   Water excluded from sewage system



   52.05   Sewage charges a lien



   52.06   Inspections



   52.07   Suspension of MS4 access



   52.08   Monitoring of discharges



   52.09   Watercourse protection



   52.10   Notification of spills



   52.11   Enforcement



   52.12   Nonessential water usage upon critical water deficiency



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from
raw materials storage.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 52.02.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted or approved by city or other authorized enforcement
agency; or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city or other authorized
enforcement agency.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any liquid, gaseous or solid waste substance
resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business, or
from development of any natural resource.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that
is not composed entirely of storm water.



   POTABLE WATER.  As defined in most current Minnesota Plumbing Code.



   POTABLE WATER SOURCES.  Flows from drinking water distribution
systems, including flows from system failures, pressure releases, system
maintenance, well development, testing, fire hydrant flow testing and
flushing, and dewatering of pipes, reservoirs, vaults, and wells.



   SEWAGE.



      (1)   Water-carried waste products from residences, public
buildings, institutions or other buildings or premises; and



      (2)   The excrement or other discharge from the bodies of
human beings or animals, together with the ground water infiltration and
surface water as may be present.



   SEWERAGE SERVICE.  The use of and benefit from the sewerage system,
including the collection, transportation, pumping, treatment and final
disposal of sewage.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM.



      (1)   All street lateral, main and intersecting sewers and
structures by which sewage or industrial wastes are collected, transported,
treated and disposed of.



      (2)   This shall not include plumbing inside or a part of a
building or premises served, or service sewers from a building to the street
lateral.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water
is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.



   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.



(`86 Code, § 3.20) (Am. Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.02  CONNECTIONS REQUIRED; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   The kind and size of all installations and connections with
mains shall be specified by the city.



   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person, not expressly
authorized by the city, to tap a water distribution main or sewerage
collection main.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the
Fire Department or another person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance
of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the
same or in any manner interfere therewith.  It is also unlawful for any
person so authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person
any hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to
their lawful use.



      (3)   No sewerage (including industrial wastes) shall contain
any substance which is deemed by the city to be deleterious to the operation
of the sewerage system.  If any person discharges any deleterious substances
therein, he or she shall be required to discontinue the discharge of the
substances into the sewerage system.  It is unlawful for any person to,
after ten days written notice from the city, continue discharging the
deleterious substance into the sewerage system.



      (4)   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to make or
maintain a connection, between eave troughs, rain spouts, footing drains or
any other conductor used to carry natural precipitation or ground water, and
the sewerage system or any part thereof.



         (b)   Minimum installation requirements for sump pumps
in any newly constructed housing or where new footing drains are added to
existing housing, or if repair or maintenance is done to an existing system.



            1.   A new sump pump shall be installed with a
minimum size of one and one-half inch of rigid pipe leading out of sump pit
to a one and one-fourth inch rubber splice (the splice is necessary for easy
removal of pump for repairs).  After the rubber splice, a check valve must
be installed to eliminate any back flow when pump stops or when pump is
removed from pit.



            2.   The sump pump outflow shall be piped, using a
minimum of one and one-fourth inch rigid pipe, underground to either the yard
or city storm sewer if available.  In no case should pipe cross property
lines or be connected to an unauthorized storm water drainage system.



            3.   A tee with a temporary cap fitting shall be
placed immediately outside the housing wall before pipe goes down to below
ground level.



      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter or
extend any drain or sewer connected or proposed to be connected to the
sewerage system, without first having the plans and specifications therefor
approved by the city.



      (6)   It is unlawful to connect a steam exhaust or blow-off
with a drain which also connects with the sewerage system.



      (7)   It is unlawful to connect a drain from a laundry, hotel,
restaurant or other public cooking establishment, with the sewerage system,
without a grease trap or grated basin.



      (8)   It is unlawful to drain waste from dyeing clothes,
cleaning or other establishments using naphtha, gasoline or other inflammable
liquids into the sewerage system.  It is unlawful to connect a drain from a
butcher shop, rendering establishment, packing house, creamery or other
establishment with the sewerage system, without intercepting it with some
form of catch-basin or grated basin.



      (9)   It is unlawful to connect an automobile or other similar
wash-rack drain with the sewerage system without providing for a catch-basin
approved by the city to prevent entrance of dirt and refuse from the
wash-rack.



      (10)   It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, agent, occupant
or other person having charge of any premises to maintain thereon any drain
or sewer connected with the sewerage system in a clogged, obstructed, broken
or damaged condition.



      (11)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause or
permit to be discharged any sewage or unwholesome matter into any lake or
public waters.
(`86 Code, § 3.21)



      (12)   It is unlawful to construct or maintain a cross
connection to the city potable water system, as defined by the ICBI
(International Building Code) standards.



      (13)   All unlawful acts, as defined by IBC (International
Building Code) are hereby unlawful.



   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not
limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as
follows:



      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this section: water line flushing or other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated
- typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any
other water source not containing pollutants.



      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the city or other
authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and
safety.



      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a
24-hour verbal notification to the city or other authorized enforcement
agency prior to the time of the test.



      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (D)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (1)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time,
of connection.



      (2)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows
such a connection to continue.



(Am. Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.03  WATER AND SEWAGE SOURCES OTHER THAN CITY.



   (A)   (1)   If any customer who discharges sewage or industrial
waste into the sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, obtains part
of all of the water used therein from sources other than the city and the
water so obtained is not measured by a meter in a manner which is acceptable
to the city, then in such case, the city shall permit the discharge of sewage
or industrial waste into its sewerage system only when the customer shall, at
his or her own expense, install and maintain a water meter or sewer meter
which shall be satisfactory to the city.



      (2)   The meters shall be installed so as to measure all water
received on the premises of the customer and the charges and rates shall be
applied to the quantity of water received, as measured by the meters.



      (3)   However, if it shall be deemed impracticable by the city
to measure the water used by the customer, a flat charge may be made in
accordance with the estimated use of the water.



   (B)   The Council may make contracts with responsible persons for
the disposal of sewage from premises located outside the city.  The
contracts shall provide for charges and rates and minimum charges and rates
as shall be determined and set by the Council, but in no event shall the
Council establish a minimum charge or rate for the sewer service at less than
twice the charge and rate for similar classification of service provided
within the city.



(`86 Code, § 3.21)



   (C)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public water
and sewer in compliance with a notice given, the city must undertake to have
the connection made and shall assess the cost thereof against the benefitted
property.  The assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the rate
determined by the City Council and shall be certified to the County Auditor
and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements.  The rights of the city shall be in
addition to any remedial or enforcement provisions hereof.



(`86 Code, § 3.41) (Am. Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.04  WATER EXCLUDED FROM SEWAGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   If a customer discharges sewage or industrial waste into the
sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, and the amount of water is
such that the rate of charge will be in excess of the minimum bill therefor,
and if it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering
that a portion of the water measured by the water meter or meters does not
and cannot enter the sewerage system, then, in that event, the Director of
Engineering is hereby authorized to investigate and determine, in the manner
and by the method as he or she may deem practicable, the percentage of the
water measured by the meter which enters the sewerage system.



   (B)   In such case the charges and rates shall be based upon the
percentage of the metered water so determined by the Director of
Engineering.  In the alternative, in any case, the Director of Engineering
is authorized to require, as a condition, or to permit the installation of
other or additional meters in a manner that the quantity of water which
actually enters the sewerage system may be determined.  In that case, the
charges or rates shall be based upon the amount of water shown actually to
enter the sewerage system.
(`86 Code, § 3.21)



   (C)   When the sewer and water system of the city is made available
to a property, as determined by city acceptance of the improvements, the
owner shall connect to the sewer and water system within 365 days.  Any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal systems shall
be cleaned of sludge, and the bottom shall be broken to permit drainage and
the tank or pit filled with suitable material as approved by the city. 
Wells shall be physically disconnected from the plumbing of any structures to
eliminate any potential cross-connections to the city potable water system. 
In addition, no water shall be discharged to the city sewerage system from
wells.



   (D)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public water
and sewer in compliance with a notice given, the city must undertake to have
the connection made and shall assess the cost thereof against the benefitted
property.  The assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the rate
determined by the City Council and shall be certified to the County Auditor
and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements.  The rights of the city shall be in
addition to any remedial or enforcement provisions hereof.



(`86 Code, § 3.41) (Am. Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.05  SEWERAGE CHARGES A LIEN.



   (A)   (1)   In the event premises being served by the sewerage
system are occupied by a person other than the owner thereof, statements for
sewer and water service charges shall be rendered to the person at the usual
times and in the usual manner.



      (2)   If any sewer or water service charge bill remains unpaid
for a period of more than 30 days, then statement of the delinquent and
unpaid sewer service charge shall be served by mail or personally upon the
owner of the premises served by the system.



   (B)   Each water and sewerage service charge levied by and pursuant
to this chapter is hereby a lien upon the premises served by a connection to
the sewerage system of the city and located within the city; and all charges
which are on September 30 of each year more than 30 days past due, and having
been properly billed to the occupant and owner of the premises served, shall
be certified by the Finance Department to the County Auditor between the
first and tenth day of October of each year, and the Finance Department in so
certifying the charges to the County Auditor shall specify the amount
thereof, the description of the premises served, the name of the owner
thereof; and the amount so certified shall be extended by the County Auditor
on the tax rolls against the premises in the same manner as other taxes, and
collected by the County Treasurer, and paid to the city along with other
taxes.



(`86 Code, § 3.21) (Am. Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.06  INSPECTIONS.



   An approved permit must first be obtained by every person who is
constructing or altering any sewer or drain connected or proposed to be
connected with the sewerage system when the work is ready for inspection and
before rendering the inspection impossible by covering the work.



(`86 Code, § 3.21) (Am. Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.07  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the city or other authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.



   (B)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this section
may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The city or other authorized enforcement agency
will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the city or other authorized enforcement agency for a
reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section,
without the prior approval of the city or other authorized enforcement agency.



(Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.08  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   This section applies to all facilities that have storm water
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.



   (B)   The city or its designee shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this section as often as may
be necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city or other
authorized enforcement agency.



   (C)   Facility operators shall allow the city or its designee ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



   (D)   The city or its designee shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city
or other authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling
of the facility's storm water discharge.



   (E)   The city or its designee has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.



   (F)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.



   (G)   Unreasonable delays as determined solely by the city, in
allowing the city or its designee access to a permitted facility is a
violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this section. A person who
is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water
associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies
the city or other authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this section.



   (H)   If the city or its designee have been refused access to any
part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this section or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city or other
authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.09  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse resulting in ponding or water flow outside
of the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse. Such violation of the unimpeded watercourse
shall be remediated as determined solely by the city.



(Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.10  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain
system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event
of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the city or other authorized enforcement agency in person or by
phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the city within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.



(Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.11  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the city may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
Such notice may require without limitation:



         (a)   The performance of monitoring, analysis, and
reporting;



         (b)   The elimination of illicit connections or
discharges;



         (c)   That violating discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist;



         (d)   The abatement or remediation of storm water
pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;



         (e)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



         (f)   The implementation of source control or treatment
BMPs.



      (2)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of
affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within
which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within
the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.



   (B)   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the city or other authorized enforcement agency. The notice
of appeal must be received within 15 days from the date of the notice of
violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her
designee shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee
shall be final.



   (C)   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an
appeal, within 15 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding
the decision of the city or other authorized enforcement agency, then
representatives of the city or other authorized enforcement agency shall
enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and
all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.



   (D)   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of
the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the amount of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid
within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal
authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the
charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable
to the city by reason of such violation.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision
or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. If a person
has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, the city
or other authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would
create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.



   (F)   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies
authorized by this section, the city or other authorized enforcement agency
may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm
drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.



   (G)   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of
the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, and
welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated
or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate,
enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



   (H)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this
section shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the
law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,000 per violation per
day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. The city
or other authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.



   (I)   The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and
it is within the discretion of the city or other authorized enforcement
agency to seek cumulative remedies.



(Ord. 1029, passed 5-19-15)



§ 52.12  NONESSENTIAL WATER USAGE UPON CRITICAL WATER DEFICIENCY.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager pursuant to Waseca City Charter
Chapter 6, § 6.01.



      DEPARTMENT. The Waseca City Water Department.



      EMERGENCY. The declaration of a critical water deficiency by the
governor.



      IRRIGATION. The watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas,
gardens, lawns, or any other outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation
utilized for agricultural purposes.



      NOTIFICATION TO PUBLIC. Notification through local media,
including interviews and issuance of news releases.



      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. The city or other entity that owns,
manages, or operates a public water supply, as defined in M.S. § 144.382,
Subd. 4.



      RECLAIMED WATER. Water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces,
or other collection devices and all water utilized more than once before
re-entering the natural water cycle.



      WATER RECIRCULATION SYSTEM. Any system which enables a user to
reuse water at least once prior to returning the water to the natural water
cycle.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   This section applies to all customers of public water
suppliers who own or control water use on any premises.



      (2)   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of
water received from a public water supply for residential, commercial,
industrial, governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any
provision in this section.



      (3)   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be
implemented based upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the
governor.



   (C)   Declaration of critical water deficiency. Upon the declaration
of a critical water deficiency by the governor, the city, who is the public
water supplier, shall immediately post notice of the emergency declaration at
the usual meeting place of the City Council. The city shall provide
notification to the public as quickly as possible or through established
water supply plans emergency response plans or procedures.



   (D)   Mandatory emergency water conservation measures. Upon
declaration of a water emergency and notification to the public, the
following mandatory restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be
enforced:



      (1)   Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses,
parklands, and other non- agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated
with reclaimed water, is prohibited.



      (2)   Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking
areas, tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any
pressurized source, including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate
health or safety hazards, is prohibited.



      (3)   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus
connected to a pressurized source is prohibited.



      (4)   Restaurants and other food service establishments are
prohibited from serving water to their customers, unless water is
specifically requested by the customer.



      (5)   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public
areas is prohibited.



      (6)   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other
exterior water features is prohibited.



      (7)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other
types of mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with
wash water recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing
to protect public health, safety, and welfare.



   (E)   Variances. The City Manager or their designee is authorized to
grant variances to this section where strict application of its provisions
would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted
only for reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the
denial of a variance within five days of the decision by submitting a written
appeal to the City Manager or their designee. The City Council shall hear the
appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is
final.



   (F)   Violation.



      (1)   Violations shall be determined and cited by the City
Manager or their designee. A violator may appeal the citation within five
days of its issuance by submitting a written appeal to the City Manager or
their designee. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City
Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final. Violators may be
granted an administrative waiver if evidence is provided that equipment
failure was the cause of the violation. A letter from a qualified vendor or
equipment invoice will be required to show proof of equipment failure.



      (2)   Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall
be issued, either personally or by U.S. First Class Mail, a letter that sets
forth the violation and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future
violations as set forth in § 36.01.



      (3)   Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the
violator shall be issued, either personally or by U.S. First Class Mail, a
fine that sets forth the violation and fee, and shall describe the remedy.
Fines shall be added to the monthly water bill of the owner or current
occupant of the premises where the violation occurred. The imposition of the
fine shall in no way limit the right of the city to pursue other legal
remedies. Failure to pay all fines in full may result in discontinuance of
city utilities services in accordance with city code and City Council policy.



   (G)   Enforcement.  The City Manager or his/her designee is
authorized to designate city employees or law enforcement personnel to
enforce the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1058, passed 9-19-17)



CHAPTER 53:  SEWERS



Section



Pretreatment Standards



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Discharge of substances



   53.03   Wastewater strength limitations



   53.04   Fees



   53.05   Administration; user reports



   53.06   Discharge permits; conditions



   53.07   Monitoring facilities



   53.08   Inspection and sampling



   53.09   Pretreatment



   53.10   Information confidential



Use Regulations



   53.25   Definitions



   53.26   Control of Director of Engineering



   53.27   Public wastewater disposal



   53.28   Private wastewater disposal



   53.29   Building and sewer connections



   53.30   Use of public services



   53.31   Damage of structures and equipment



   53.32   Inspectors; power and authority



Service Charge System



   53.45   Purpose



   53.46   Definitions



   53.47   Establishment of charge system



   53.48   Determination of charges



   53.49   Sewer Service Fund



   53.50   Administration



   53.99   Penalty



PRETREATMENT STANDARDS



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC §§ 1251 et seq.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD5.  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter according to the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per
liter, mg/l).



      CITY.  The City of Waseca.



      COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant
added to the water is heat.



      ENGINEER.  The Director of Engineering or the person's duly
authorized representative.



      INDUSTRIAL USER.  A person who discharges to the city's
wastewater disposal system liquid wastes resulting from the processes
employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments, or
from the development of any natural resource.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. 
Any permit or requirements issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33
USC §§ 1251 et seq.); for the purpose of regulating the discharge of
sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes under the authority of Section 402
of the Act.



      PERSON.  The state or any agency or institution thereof, any
municipality, governmental subdivision, public or private corporation,
individual, partnership or other entity, including, but not limited to
association, commission or any interstate body, and including any officer or
governing or managing body of any municipality, governmental subdivision or
public or private corporation, or other entity.



      pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.



      PRETREATMENT.  The process of reducing the amount of pollutants,
eliminating pollutants or altering the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing the pollutants into the city's wastewater disposal
system.  The reduction, elimination or alteration may be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user of the city's
wastewater disposal system which:



         (a)   Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per
average work day;



         (b)   Has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined
pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or Minnesota Statutes and Rules;



         (c)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal
system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions
generated by the system;



         (d)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow of the
city's wastewater disposal system; or



         (e)   As established by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency through the NPDES permit issued to the city.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT.  Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof), issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system, as
defined by M.S. § 115.01 (8), as it may be amended from time to time.



      STORM WATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



      SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of the wastewater disposal
system of the city or the person's duly authorized representative.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by a standard glass fiber filter.



      USER.  Any person who discharges, causes or permits the
discharge of wastewater into the city's wastewater disposal system.



      WASTEWATER.  The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into
or permitted to enter the city's wastewater disposal system.



      WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM or SYSTEM.  Any devices, facilities,
structures, equipment or works owned or used by the city for the purpose of
the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of industrial
and domestic wastewater or necessary to recycle or reuse water, including
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection system, pumping power
and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide
a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear
well facilities; and any works, including land that will be an integral part
of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues
resulting from the treatment.



      WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.



   (B)   Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be given in M.S. Chs.
115 and 116, as amended.



(`86 Code, § 3.28)



§ 53.02  DISCHARGE OF SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any of the following described substances into the wastewater
disposal system to any public sewer except as permitted in writing by the
Director of Engineering:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system; 
(At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at
the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system, be more
than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of
the meter.  Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides
and sulfides.)



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation
of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to grease,
garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal
guts or tissues, animal feces, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, gas tar, asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil,
mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes;



      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than
9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal
system;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
wastewater disposal system;  (A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be
limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act.)



      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for their maintenance and/or repair;



      (6)   Any substance which may cause the wastewater disposal
system's effluent or any other product of the wastewater treatment process
such as residues, sludge or scum, to be unsuitable for, or interfere with,
normal disposal practices;



      (7)   Any substance which will cause the wastewater disposal
system to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the
receiving water quality standards;



      (8)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to dye wastes, ink and
vegetable tanning solutions;



      (9)   Any wastewater causing, individually or in combination
with other wastewater, the influent at the wastewater 104° F. (40° C.);



      (10)   Any slug load, which shall mean any pollutant,
including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD5, COD and the like), released in a
discharge of the volume or strength as to cause interference in the
wastewater disposal system;  (In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate
or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any
time period longer than 30 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration of quantities, or flow during normal operation.)



      (11)   Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to
cooling water, storm water or groundwater;



      (12)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 250 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 0° C. and 65°
C.; and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral
origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not; and/or



      (13)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate) in the quantities that they would cause interference with the
wastewater disposal system.



(`86 Code, § 3.29)



   (B)   (1)   Sludges, floats, skimmings and the like generated by
an industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall not be placed in to the
city's wastewater disposal system.  The sludges shall be contained,
transported and disposed of by haulers in accordance with all federal, state
and local regulations.



         (a)   Enforcement.



            1.   Users shall notify the Superintendent
immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances or
wastewater in violation of this chapter in order to enable countermeasures to
be taken to minimize damage to the wastewater disposal system and the
receiving waters.  The notification will not relieve users of liability for
any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater disposal system and/or
treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof
under any state or federal law.



            2.   The city may suspend the wastewater treatment
service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when the suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the City Council in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment or to
the wastewater disposal system, or would cause the city to violate any
condition of its NPDES or state disposal system permit.



            3.   Any user notified of a suspension of the
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall
immediately stop the discharge.  In the event of a failure of the user to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Engineer shall take the
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater disposal system
or endangerment to any individuals.  The Engineer shall reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon
proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge.  A detailed written
statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the slug or
accidental discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence
shall be submitted to the City Manager within 15 days of the date of
occurrence.



         (b)   Revocation of permit.  In accordance with the
procedures given herein, the City Council may revoke the permit of any user
which fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge; which fails to report significant changes
in wastewater constituents or characteristics; which refuses reasonable
access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
for violation of conditions of its permit, this chapter or applicable state
and federal regulations.



         (c)   Notification of violation.  Whenever the city
finds that any person has violated or is violating this subchapter,
wastewater discharge permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirement
contained herein, the city may serve upon the person a written notice stating
the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan
for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the
user.



         (d)   Show cause hearing.



            1.   If the violation is not corrected by timely
compliance, the city may order any user which causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to show cause before the City Council why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.  A notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City
Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken,
the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before
the City Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail at least ten days before the hearing.  Service may be made on
any agent or officer of a corporation.



            2.   The City Council may itself conduct the
hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any officer or employee of
the city to:



               a.   Issue, in the name of the City Council,
notice of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and
the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearings;



               b.   Take the evidence; and



               c.   Transmit a report of the evidence and
hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the City Council for action thereon.



            3.   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter,
testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically.  The
transcript so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or
any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefore.



            4.   After the City Council has reviewed the
evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that following a specified time period, the sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated.  Further
orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.



         (e)   Legal action.  If any person discharges sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment
requirements or any order of the city, the City Attorney may, following the
authorization of the action by the City Council, commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief.



         (f)   Annual publication.  A list of the users which
were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standard at
least once during the previous 12 months shall be published annually in the
city's official newspaper.  The notification shall also summarize any
enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months.



      (2)   Costs of damage.  Any user violating any discharge
limitation of this subchapter or who has a discharge which causes a deposit,
obstruction, damage or other impairment to the city's wastewater disposal
system shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused
by the violation or discharge.  The city may add to the user's charges and
fees the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused
by the violation or discharge.  Any refusal to pay the assessed costs shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter.



      (3)   Falsifying information.  Any industrial user or
representative or employee thereof, who knowingly makes any false statements,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
subchapter, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this subchapter, may, upon conviction, have its permit revoked by the City
Council.



      (4)   Conflict.  All other ordinances and parts of other
ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this subchapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict.



(`86 Code, § 3.32)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.03  WASTEWATER STRENGTH LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Federal pretreatment standards promulgated by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act shall be met by all
users which are subject to the standards in any instance where they are more
stringent than the limitations in this subchapter unless the city has applied
for, and obtained from, the MPCA approval to modify the specific limits in
the federal pretreatment standards.  When requested, an application for
modification of the federal pretreatment standards will be considered for
submittal when the city's wastewater system achieves consistent removal of
the pollutants.



   (B)   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall be met
by all users which are subject to the standards in any instance in which they
are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this
subchapter.



   (C)   (1)   The city reserves the right to establishment by
ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives
presented herein.



      (2)   The user shall be notified of any proposed changes at
least 90 days before establishment of a change in this subchapter.



   (D)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any
way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained
herein, contained in the federal pretreatment standards, or contained in any
state requirements.



   (E)   (1)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
subchapter.  Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's
own cost and expense.



      (2)   Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Engineer for
review, and shall be approved by the Engineer before construction of the
facilities.  Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter.



(`86 Code, § 3.30)



§ 53.04  FEES.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery
of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein.  The applicable charges of
fees shall be set forth by the city, to be recommended, from time to time, by
the City Manager and approved by the City Council.



   (B)   The City Manager shall recommend charges and fees which may
include:



      (1)   Fees for monitoring and inspection procedures;



      (2)   Fees for permit applications;



      (3)   Appeal fees;



      (4)   Surcharge fees, as deemed necessary by the city to
recover costs incurred for treatment of waste which exceeds parameters
contained in the permit for significant industrial user; and



      (5)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements of this subchapter.



(`86 Code, § 3.31)



§ 53.05  ADMINISTRATION; USER REPORTS.



   The city may require that any significant industrial user discharging
or proposing to discharge wastewater to the wastewater disposal system file a
periodic self-monitoring discharge report.  The discharge report shall
include, but be limited to daily and monthly flow rates, pH, BOD5, 
suspended solids, oil and grease and frequency analysis.  The reports may
also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous
materials stored on site, even though they may not normally be discharged. 
A summary of the data indicating each industrial user's compliance with this
subchapter shall be prepared monthly and submitted to the Director of
Engineering.  In addition to discharge reports, the city may require
information in the form of wastewater discharge permit applications and
compliance schedules.



(`86 Code, § 3.32)



§ 53.06  DISCHARGE PERMITS; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Mandatory permits.  All significant industrial users
proposing to connect or to commence a new discharge to the wastewater
disposal system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting
to or discharging into the wastewater system.  All existing significant
industrial users or industrial users subject to federal pretreatment
standards under Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, connected to or
discharging into the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater
discharge permit within 90 days after the effective date of this subchapter.



   (B)   Permit application.  Users required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the Director of Engineering, an
application in the form prescribed by the Engineer, and accompanied by a fee
as set by the City Council.  Significant industrial users shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after the effective date of this
subchapter, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to
connecting or discharging to the wastewater disposal system.  In support of
the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:



      (1)   Name, address and location (if different from address);



      (2)   SIC number according to the Standards Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of Budget, 1972, as amended;



      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including,
but not limited to those governed herein as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association;



      (4)   Time and duration of discharge;



      (5)   Average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily
wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation; if available on existing facilities;



      (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
discharged;



      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal
pretreatment standards, and for existing discharges, a statement regarding
whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards; and



      (9)   Any other information as may be deemed by the Director
of Engineering to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.  The
Director of Engineering will evaluate the date furnished by the user and may
require additional information.  After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms
and conditions provided herein.



   (C)   Permit conditions.  Wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this subchapter and all other
applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city.
Permits shall contain the following:



      (1)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics;



      (2)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;



      (3)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports;



      (4)   Requirements for notification to the Director of
Engineering and Superintendent of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in volume or character of the
wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system; and



      (5)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges to the
Superintendent.  Permits may contain the following:



         (a)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater disposal system;



         (b)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of
discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;



         (c)   Requirements for installation and maintenance on
inspection and sampling facilities;



         (d)   Requirements for installation, operation and
maintenance of pretreatment facilities;



         (e)   Compliance schedules;



         (f)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant
records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Director of
Engineering, and affording the Director of Engineering and Superintendent
access thereto; and



         (g)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city
to ensure compliance with this subchapter.



   (D)   Permit duration.  Permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period
less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.  The user
shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing permit.  The terms and conditions of the
permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the
permit as limitations or requirements identified herein are modified or other
just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his
permit at least 120 days prior to the effective date of change.  Any changes
or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.



   (E)   Permit transfer.  Wastewater discharge permits are issued to
a specific user for a specific operation.  A wastewater discharge permit may
be reassigned to a new owner, new user, at the same premises.  Any
succeeding owner or user shall comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit.



(`86 Code, § 3.32)



§ 53.07 MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems shall be
provided and operated by all significant industrial users.  The monitoring
facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the Director
of Engineering may, when a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.



   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for
analysis.  The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the
expense of the user.



   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications.  Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the Engineer, unless a time extension is otherwise
granted by the City Council.



(`86 Code, § 3.32)



§ 53.08  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The Director of Engineering or his or her designee shall
inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this
subchapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. 
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged
shall allow the Director of Engineering or his or her designee ready access
at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling and/or records examination.  The Director of Engineer
or his or her designee, MPCA and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
user's property the devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.



   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with any security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director of Engineering or
his or her designee, MPCA and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay,
for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.



(`86 Code, § 3.32)



§ 53.09  PRETREATMENT.



   (A)   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required
to comply with this subchapter. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the user's expense.



   (B)   Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the Director of Engineering for
review, and must be approved by the Director of Engineering before
construction of the facility. The review of the plans and operating
procedures will not relieve the user from the responsibility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the city.  Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes.



   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available by the city to officials of the EPA or MPCA on
request.



(`86 Code, § 3.32)



§ 53.10  INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.



   (A)   Information and data on a user, obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspection shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of the
information would divulge information, processes or methods or production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this subchapter, the NPDES permit, state disposal system permit
and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that the portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or, enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing
the report.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.



   (C)   Information accepted by the city shall not be transmitted to
any governmental agency or to the general public until and unless a ten-day
notification is given to the user.



(`86 Code, § 3.32)



USE REGULATIONS



§ 53.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also referred to as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC §§ 1251 et seq.



   ASTM.  American Society for Testing Materials.



   AUTHORITY.  The City of Waseca, Minnesota, or its representative
thereof.



   BOD5 or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days as 20° C., in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning four feet outside the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also referred to as a house connection or
service connection.



   CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of Waseca, as
presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time.  The term CITY, when used herein, may also be used to refer to
the City Council and its authorized representative.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH
and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the
NPDES/SDS permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat the
pollutants to a degree which complies with effluent concentration limits
imposed by the permit.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.  A structure specially constructed for the purpose of
measuring flow and sampling of wastes.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   FECAL COLIFORM.  Any number of organisms common to the intestinal
tract of humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator
of pollution.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater.



   GARBAGE.  Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.



   INDUSTRY.  Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of a publicly
owned treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A,
B, D, E and I.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from
industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the
development, recovery and processing of natural resources, as distinct from
residential or domestic strength wastes.



   INFILTRATION.  Water entering the sewage system (including building
drains and pipes) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe
joints, connections and manhole walls.



   INFILTRATION/INFLOW or I/I.  The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.



   INFLOW.  Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to roof
leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm
sewers, catch basins, surface run-off, street wash waters and drainage.



   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the city's wastewater
disposal system contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's
NPDES and/or SDS permit.  The term includes of sewage sludge use or disposal
by the city in accordance with published regulations providing guidelines
under Section 405 of the Act or any regulations developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act
or more stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use
employed by the city.



   MPCA.  Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in
publicly-owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not
susceptible to treatment by the treatment facilities or would interfere with
the operation of the treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 307 (b) of the
Act.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.  A
permit issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may
legally discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to
Sections 402 and 405 of the Act.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewers, which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or ground water.



   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as
air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only
pollutant added, is heat.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastewater that is primarily
introduced by residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than
300 mg/l and a suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 300 mg/l.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in terms of grams per liter of solution.



   PRETREATMENT.  The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources
prior to the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned
treatment works.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under flow conditions prevailing in public sewers with
no particle greater than ½-inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.



   SEWAGE.  The spent water of a community.  The preferred term is
“wastewater.”



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.



      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER.  A sewer whole primary purpose is to
collect wastewater from individual point source discharges and connections.



      (2)   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer intended to serve as a
sanitary sewer and a storm sewer.



      (3)   FORCE MAIN.  A pipe in which wastewater is carried
under pressure.



      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER.  A sewer whose primary purpose is to
transport wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.



      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER.  A sewer which is not owned and
maintained by a public authority.



      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer owned, maintained and controlled
by a public authority.



      (7)   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer intended to carry only liquid
and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and
surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.



      (8)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A drain or sewer intended
to carry storm waters, surface run-off, ground water, sub-surface water,
street wash water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user of the wastewater
treatment facility which has a discharge flow:



      (1)   In excess of 25,000 gallons per average work day;



      (2)   Has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the
treatment facility;



      (3)   Whose waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts
pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act; or



      (4)   Whose discharge has a significant effect, either singly
or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater
disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or
emissions generated by the treatment system.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of
any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 30 minutes or more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration of flows during normal operation.



   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT.  Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system, as
defined by M.S. § 115.01 (8), as it may be amended from time to time.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent or a
deputy, agent or representative thereof.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS).  The total
suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in
water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering
as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organization will
cause adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307
(a) of the Act.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.



   USER.  Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city's wastewater disposal system.



   WASTEWATER.



      (1)   The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage.



      (2)   From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination
of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutes together with any ground water, surface
water and stormwater that may be present.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS.  An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or
structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and
their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water
supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any
works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is
used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from the treatment.



   WATERCOURSE.  A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.



   WPCF.  The Water Pollution Control Federation or its most current
designated form.



(`86 Code, § 3.39)



§ 53.26  CONTROL BY THE DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING.



   The Director of Engineering or his or her designee shall have control
and general supervision of all public sewers and service connections in the
city, and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this
subchapter to the end that a proper and efficient sewer is maintained.



(`86 Code, § 3.40)



§ 53.27  PUBLIC WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the city, or in any area under jurisdiction, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this subchapter and the
city's NPDES/SDS permit.



   (C)   Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.



   (D)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes from which the city
and adjacent to any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the
city, shall be required at the owner(s) expense to install a suitable service
connection to the public sewer in accordance with provisions of this code. 
All future buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public sewer
shall be required to immediately connect to the public sewer.  If sewer
connections are not made pursuant to this section, an official notice shall
be served instructing the affected property owner to make the connection.



(`86 Code, § 3.41)  (Am. Ord. 774, passed 9-4-01)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.28  PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 52.04, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater
disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by
the city.  The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary to the city.



   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of
the city or its authorized representative.  The city or its representative
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in
any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered.  The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of
notice.



   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of 6 MCAR
4.8040, entitled, “Individual Sewage Treatment System Standards.” No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



   (E)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
city.



   (F)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or
the Department of Health of the state.



(`86 Code, § 3.42)



§ 53.29  BUILDING AND SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Any new connection(s) to the sanitary sewer system shall be
prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream
facilities including, but not limited to capacity for flow, BOD5 and
suspended solids, as determined by the Director of Engineering.



   (B)   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.



   (C)   Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or
authorized agent and the party employed to do the work, and shall state the
location, name of owner, street number of the building to be connected and
how occupied.  No person shall extend any private building drain beyond the
limits of the building or property for which the service connection permit
has been given.



   (D)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:



         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and



         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial
wastes.



      (2)   In either case, the application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications or any other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the city.  The industry, as a condition of permit
authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics and type of activity.



   (E)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s).  The
owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be
directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (F)   (1)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
construed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway.  The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered one building sewer.



      (2)   The city does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any connection
aforementioned.



   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent or his or her representative, to meet all requirements of this
subchapter.



   (H)   (1)   The size, slopes, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling of the trench, shall
all conform to the requirements of the Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code
or other applicable rules and reputations of the city.



      (2)   In the absence of code provisions or in the
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, shall apply.



   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by any
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (J)   (1)   Prohibited discharges, storm water drainage.  No
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any “storm water
drainage” defined as any storm water, ground water or flow from roof
runoff, surface runoff, subsurface drainage, down spouts, yard drains, sump
pumps, yard fountains, drains, swimming pools, ponds, cistern overflows or
lawn sprays into any sanitary sewers.



      (2)   Unlawful acts.  It is unlawful for any person to make
or maintain a connection between eaves troughs, rainspouts, footing drains or
any other conductor used to carry natural precipitation or ground water and
the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof.



         (a)   Any property owner in violation of this section
and upon receiving notice of the violation, shall disconnect the conductor
from the sanitary sewer system within the designated time specified within
the notice or one year whichever is shorter.  Any property owner in
violation of this division (J) shall be assessed a monthly surcharge of an
amount as set by the City Council and as amended from time to time for each
month that the conductor is not permanently disconnected.  Failure to
permanently disconnect the conductor, or reconnection of the disconnected
conductor, may result in the suspension of water and sanitary sewer service.



         (b)   The property owner shall allow a city inspector on
the premises to conduct inspection of the sanitary sewer service and any
connections.  Failure to allow the inspector on the premises shall warrant
the surcharge and potential suspension of service as an illegal connection
above.



         (c)   Prior to change of ownership of any building
within the city, the seller shall provide a copy of a certificate of
compliance to the buyer and the city.



   (K)   (1)   The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Minnesota Building and
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city.



      (2)   All connections shall be made gas tight and water tight,
and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of
infiltration/inflow.



      (3)   Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city prior to installation.



   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer.  The connection and inspection shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or authorized representative thereof.



   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
distributed in the course of the work, shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.



   (N)   No person shall make a service connection with any public
sewer unless the work is under the supervision of a state licensed master
plumber or included under city contract, and no permit shall be granted to
any person except a licensed master plumber.



(`86 Code, § 3.43)  (Am. Ord. 769, passed 3-19-02)



§ 53.30  USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
unpolluted water such as stormwater, ground water, roof run-off, surface
drainage or non-contact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
the sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or
natural outlet on approval of the city and upon approval and the issuance of
a discharge permit by the MPCA.



   (C)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of
the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either atone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system; 
(Prohibited materials included, but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xytene, ethers, alcohols ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.)



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction
to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to grease, garbage
with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent
hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing
wastes;



      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.5 or greater
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal
system; and/or



      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit
or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater
disposal system.  A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act.



   (D)   (1)   The following described substances, materials, water
or wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm either sewers, the
wastewater treatment works treatment process or equipment, will not have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream and/or soil, vegetation and ground
water, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or
constitute a nuisance.  The city may set limitations lower than limitations
established in the regulations below if, in its opinion, more severe
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives.



      (2)   In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of
wastes, the city will give consideration to the factors as the quantity of
subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, the
city's NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment plant and
other pertinent factors.  The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which
shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows:



         (a)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than
150° F. (65° C.), or causing, individually or in combination with other
wastewater, the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to have a
temperature exceeding 104° F. (40° C.), or having heat in amounts which
will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment works resulting
in interference therein;



         (b)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils of animal or vegetable origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.); and any
wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral origin of
greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;



         (c)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations or both
which constitute a “slug,” as defined herein;



         (d)   Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined in
§ 53.25;  (Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes,
hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or
similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food on the
premises or when served by caterers.)



         (e)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids
which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent
entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair;



         (f)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not
removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions;



         (g)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm,
drainage or ground water;



         (h)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such
as, but not limited to Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate) in quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater
disposal system;



         (i)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



         (j)   Any waters or wastes containing the following
substances to a degree that any material received in the composite wastewater
at the wastewater treatment works that wilt violate the city's NPDES permit
for the following materials is prohibited:



            1.   Arsenic;



            2.   Cadmium;



            3.   Copper;



            4.   Cyanide;



            5.   Lead;



            6.   Mercury;



            7.   Nickel;



            8.   Silver;



            9.   Total chromium;



            10.   Zinc; and/or



            11.   Phenolic compounds which cannot be removed
by city's wastewater treatment system.



         (k)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near
the wastewater disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation
or ordinance of any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body;
and/or



         (l)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended
solids of the character and quantity that unusual review and approval prior
to construction of the attention or expense is required to handle the
materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific written agreement subject to the provisions of divisions (F) and (G)
below.



   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which contain substances to
the public sewers which contain substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in division (D) above, and/or which in the judgment of the city,
may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities,
processes or equipment; receiving waters and/or soil, vegetation and ground
water; or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may:



         (a)   Reject the wastes;



         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge to public sewers, pursuant to Section 307 (b) of the Act and
all addendums thereof;



         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and



         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of
handling, treating and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or
sewer service charges.



      (2)   If the city permits and pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design, installation and maintenance of the facilities and
equipment shall be made at the owners' expense, and shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.



   (F)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any
manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitation contained in
divisions (C) and (D) above or contained in the national categorical
pretreatment standards or any state requirements.



   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner(s).



   (H)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified, any
flammable wastes as specified in division (C)(1) above, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units.  All interceptors shall be of the type to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.  In the
maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means,
and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which are subject
to review by the city.  Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials
not performed by the owner's personnel, must be performed by a currently
licensed waste disposal firm.



   (I)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure or control manhole, with necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
wastes.  The structure shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city.  The structure
shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained
by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times.



   (J)   (1)   The owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be
required to provide laboratory measurements, tests or analyses of waters or
wastes to illustrate compliance with this subchapter and special condition
for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.  The number, type and frequency of sampling
and laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated
by the city.



      (2)   The industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with
federal, state and local standards are being met.  The owner shall report
the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at the times
and in a manner as prescribed by the city.  The owner shall bear the expense
of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city.  At times
as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an independent laboratory.



   (K)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association.  Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies
are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the
Superintendent.



   (L)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this subchapter. 
Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense.  Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the city for approval of the facility.  Review and
approval of the plans and operating procedures shall not relieve any user
from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet
the requirements of this subchapter.  Users shall notify the Superintendent
immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances of
wastewater in violation of this subchapter to enable countermeasures to be
taken by the Superintendent to minimize damage to the wastewater treatment
works.  The notification will not relieve any user of any liability for any
expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment
process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any
state and federal law.  Employees shall insure that all employees who may
cause or discover a discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedure.



   (M)   No person, having charge of any building or other premises
which drains into the public sewer, shall permit any substance or matter
which may form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public
sewer.  Within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the city, the
owner shall install a suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or
if one already exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the same, after 30
days, the city may cause the work to be completed at the expense of the owner
or representative thereof.



   (N)   Whenever a service connection becomes clogged, obstructed,
broken or out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or
unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause the work
to be done as the city may direct.  Each day after seven days that a person
neglects or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of this
division, and the city may then cause the work to be done, and recover from
the owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in the manner of the city.



   (O)   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or
servicing facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all
times, a catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent
grease, oil, dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer
system.



   (P)   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation
of any provision of this subchapter, the city may assess against any person
the cost of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as
a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes by the person, and may collect
the assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system
or in any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.



   (Q)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment,
therefore, by the industrial concern, providing that national categorical
pretreatment standards and the city's NPDES and/or state disposal system
permit limitations are not violated.



(`86 Code, § 3.44)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.31  DAMAGE OF STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.



   No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface of tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities.  Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest.



(`86 Code, § 3.45)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.32  INSPECTORS; POWERS AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Superintendent or the duly authorized employees of the
city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observations,
measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city's
sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system.  An industry may withhold information considered
confidential, however, the industry must establish that the revelation to the
public of the information in question, might result in an advantage to
competitors.



   (C)   While performing necessary work on private properties, the
Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and
the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property
by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 53.30.



   (D)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.



(`86 Code, § 3.47)



SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM



§ 53.45  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter shall provide for sewer charges to cover costs
associated with:



   (A)   Operation, maintenance and replacement to ensure effective
functioning of the city's sanitary sewer system; and



   (B)   Local capital costs incurred in the construction of the city's
sanitary sewer system.



(`86 Code, § 3.56)



§ 53.46  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATION.  Those fixed costs attributable to administration of
the wastewater treatment works (i.e. billing and associated bookkeeping and
accounting costs).



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD5.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.



   CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of Waseca, Minnesota,
as presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at
a future time.  When used herein, the term city may also refer to the City
Council or its authorized representative.



   COMMERCIAL USER.  Any place of business which discharges sanitary
waste as distinct from industrial wastewater.



   COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER.  Domestic wastewater emanating from a place of
business as distinct from industrial wastewater.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  A charge levied on uses of wastewater treatment
facilities for the cost of repaying money bonded to construct the facilities.



   EXTRA STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastewater having a BOD and/or TSS greater than
domestic waste, as defined herein, and not otherwise classified as an
incompatible waste.



   GOVERNMENTAL USER.  Users which are units, agencies or
instrumentalities of federal, state or local government discharging normal
domestic strength wastewater.



   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE.  Waste that either singly or by interaction with
other wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a
hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard
in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL USERS or INDUSTRY.



      (1)   Entities that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater
treatment works, liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in
industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development of any natural
resources.  These are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented
under one of the following divisions:



         (a)   Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;



         (b)   Division B, Mining;



         (c)   Division D, Manufacturing;



         (d)   Division E, Transportation, Communications,
Electric, Gas and Sanitary Sewers; and



         (e)   Division I, Services.



      (2)   For the purpose of this definition, domestic waste shall
be considered to have the following characteristics:



         (a)   BOD5  less than 300 mg/l; and/or



         (b)   Suspended solids less than 300 mg/l.



      (3)   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment
works which discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic
pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge
of any municipal systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage
treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals,
creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect
on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER or DOMESTIC FLOW.  Wastewater that
is primarily produced by residential users, with BOD5 concentrations not
greater than 300 mg/l and suspended solids concentrations not greater than
300 mg/l.



(`86 Code, § 3.57)



§ 53.47  ESTABLISHMENT OF CHARGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   The city hereby establishes a sewer service charge system
whereby all revenue collected from users of the sanitary sewerage facilities
will be used to affect all expenditures incurred for annual operation,
maintenance and replacement and for debt service on capital expenditure
incurred in constructing the wastewater treatment works.



   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation
maintenance and replacement costs of the treatment works, based on the users
proportionate contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users.



   (C)   Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local
capital costs as determined by the City Council.



   (D)   Sewer service rates and charges to users of the sanitary
sewerage facility shall be determined and fixed in a sewer service charge
system developed according to the provisions of this subchapter. Subsequent
changes in sewer service rates and charges shall be adopted by the City
Council.



   (E)   Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a
separate fund known as the Sanitary Sewer Fund.  Income from revenues
collected will be expended to offset the cost of operation, maintenance and
equipment replacement for the facility and to retire the debt for capital
expenditure.



   (F)   Sewer service charges and the Sewer Service Fund will be
administered in accordance with the provisions of § 53.50.



(`86 Code, § 3.58)



§ 53.48  DETERMINATION OF CHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   Users of the city sewerage facilities works shall be
identified as belonging to one of the following user classes:



         (a)   Residential;



         (b)   Commercial;



         (c)   Industrial; or



         (d)   Institutional and governmental.



      (2)   The allocation of users to these categories for the
purpose of assessing user charges and debt service charges shall be the
responsibility of the city staff.  Allocation of users to user classes shall
be based on the substantive intent of the definitions of these classes
contained herein.



   (B)   The user shall pay operation, maintenance and replacement
costs in proportion to the user's proportionate contribution of wastewater
flows and loadings to the treatment plant, with the minimum rate for loadings
of BOD and of TSS being the rate established for concentrations no greater
than 300 mg/l BOD and 300 mg/l TSS (i.e. normal domestic strength wastewater).



   (C)   (1)   Unit costs for treatment of flow, BOD and TSS shall
be determined and fixed annually in the sewer service charge system according
to the following procedure:



         (a)   Determine the annual O, M & R budget;



         (b)   Allocate total annual O, M & R costs to flow, BOD
and TSS proportionately, according to the costs of collection, and of the
specific treatment processes required to affect or reduce flow, BOD and TSS;
and



         (c)   Divide the O, M & R costs attributable to flow,
BOD and TSS respectively, by the total annual volume and loadings of flow,
BOD and TSS, to arrive at unit costs.



      (2)   For purposes of determining user charges, the following
definitions of unit costs shall apply:



         (a)   OF equals the unit cost for treatment of domestic
flow in $/ccf.



         (b)   UBOD equals the unit cost for treatment of BOD in
$/lb.



         (c)   UTSS equals the unit cost for treatment of TSS in
$/lb.



   (D)   User charges for normal domestic strength users.



      (1)   The billable amount of flow will be calculated from the
volume of metered water usage, or at the discretion of the city, from the
measurement of effluent flow at user's point of discharge. Measurements shall
be according to a regular program prescribed by the city.  The billable
amounts of BOD and TSS are included in the domestic flow unit charge.



      (2)   Calculating user charges.



      UC(NDS) = (OF x F)



         (a)   UC(NDS) equals user charge for treatment of normal
domestic strength wastewater.



         (b)   OF equals the unit cost for treatment of domestic
flow in $/ccf.



         (c)   F equals the billable flow in ccf.



   (E)   User charges for users contributing wastes greater than normal
domestic strength.



      (1)   The billable amount of flow will be calculated from the
volume of metered water usage, or at the discretion of the city, from the
measurement of effluent flow at user's point of discharge. Measurements shall
be according to a regular program prescribed by the city.  The billable
amounts of BOD and TSS will be calculated by the measurement of these wastes
according to a program prescribed by the city in keeping with the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and
in accordance with Ordinance No. 555, “An Ordinance Establishing Sewer Use
Regulations.”



      (2)   Calculating user charges.



      UC(GNDS) = (OF x F) + (UBOD x QBOD) + (UTSS x QTSS)



         (a)   UC(GNDS) equals the user charge for treatment of
wastewater that is greater than normal domestic strength.



         (b)   OF equals the unit costs for treatment of domestic
flow in $/cff.



         (c)   F equals the billable flow in ccf.



         (d)   UBOD equals the unit cost for treatment of BOD in
$/lb.



         (e)   QBOD equals the quantity of BOD greater than
domestic strength in lbs.



         (f)   QTSS equals the unit cost for treatment of BOD in
$/lb.



         (g)   QTSS equals the quantity of TSS greater than
domestic strength in lbs.



   (F)   The city may, at its discretion, require nonresidential users
to install wastewater flow meters or additional water meters as may be
necessary to determine wastewater volume.  The city may require residential
connections to install water meters for the purpose of determining wastewater
volume.  When so required, the meters shall be of a type approved by the
city equipped with remote registering recorders, and located at an accessible
site on the owner's property.



   (G)   A portion of new construction costs for the sanitary sewerage
facility will be recovered from users in proportion to their contributions of
wastewater flow and loadings into the treatment facility as follows:



      (1)   Unit costs for debt service of capital expenditures
attributable to flow, BOD and TSS shall be calculated according to the sewer
service charge system.  For purposes of determining debt service charges,
the following definitions shall apply:



         (a)   DF equals the unit cost for debt service of
capital expenditures attributable to domestic flow.



         (b)   DBOD equals the unit costs for debt service of
capital expenditures attributable to SOD.



         (c)   DTSS equals the unit cost for debt service of
capital expenditures attributable to TSS.



         (d)   The calculation of flows and loadings for the debt
service charge shall be the same as described in divisions (D) and (E) above.



      (2)   For normal domestic strength users:



      DC(NDS) = (DF x F)



      (3)   For users contributing wastes greater than normal
domestic strength:



      DC(GNDS) = (DF x F) + (DBOD x QBOD) + (DTSS x QTSS)



         (a)   DC(NDS) equals the debt service charge to normal
domestic strength users.



         (b)   DC(GNDS) equals the debt service charge to users
contributing wastewater that is greater than normal domestic strength.



         (c)   DF equals the unit cost for debt service of
capital expenditures attributable to flow in $/ccf.



         (d)   F equals the billable flow in ccf.



         (e)   DBOD equals the unit cost for debt service of
capital expenditures attributable to BOD in $/lb.



         (f)   KBOD equals the constant used to calculate the
quantity of BOD in lbs./ccf of NDSW (300 mg/l BOD) as follows.



         (g)   KBOD equals .00834 x 300 mg/l (BOD concentration
of NDS waste).



         (h)   DTSS equals the unit cost for debt service of
capital expenditures attributable to TSS in $/lb.



         (i)   KTSS equals constant used to calculate the
quantity of TSS in lbs./ccf of NDSW (300 mg/l TSS) as follows.



         (j)   KTS equals .00834 x 300 mg/l (TSS concentration of
NDS waste).



         (k)   QBOD equals the quantity of BOD in lbs.



         (l)   QTSS means the quantity of TSS in lbs.



         (m)    SSC equals Uc + Dc.



            1.   SSC equals the annual sewer service charge.



            2.   Uc equals the annual user charge.



            3.   Dc equals the annual debt service charge.



   (H)   A portion of new construction costs for the sanitary sewer
facility will be recovered through a per connection charge based on the total
annual debt service and the total number of connections as follows:



   Dc =   TDS 



      TC



         (a)   Dc equals the annual debt service charge
attributable to connections.



         (b)   TDS equals the total annual debt service.



         (c)   TC equals the total number of connections.



   SSC  = Uc + Dc



         (a)   SSC equals the annual sewer service charge.



         (b)   Uc equals the annual user charge.



         (c)   Dc equals the annual debt service charge.



(`86 Code, § 3.59)



§ 53.49  SEWER SERVICE FUND.



   (A)   The city hereby establishes the Sanitary Sewer Fund as an
income fund to receive all revenues generated by the sewer charge system, and
all other income dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement and
construction of the wastewater treatment works, including taxes, special
charges, fees and assessments intended to retire construction debt.  The
city also establishes the following accounts as income and expenditure
accounts within the Sanitary Sewer Fund:



      (1)   Operation and Maintenance Account;



      (2)   Equipment Replacement Account; and



      (3)   Debt Retirement Account.



   (B)   All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and
all other income pertinent to the treatment system, including taxes and
special assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by
the Finance Department separate and apart from all other funds of the city.



   (C)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system
sufficient to insure adequate replacement throughout the design of useful
life, whichever is longer, of the wastewater facility shall be held separate
and apart in the “Equipment Replacement Account” and dedicated to
affecting replacement costs.



(`86 Code, § 3.60)



§ 53.50  ADMINISTRATION.



   The charge system and Sanitary Sewer Fund shall be administered
according to the following provisions:



   (A)   (1)   The Finance Department shall maintain a proper system
of accounts suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment
replacement and debt retirement costs of the treatment works, and shall
furnish the City Council with a report of the costs annually.



      (2)   The City Council shall annually determine whether or not
sufficient revenue is being generated for the effective operation,
maintenance, replacement and management of the treatment works, and whether
sufficient revenue is being generated for debt retirement.



      (3)   The city shall reassess and as necessary revise the
sewer service charge system then in use to insure the proportionality of the
user charges and to insure the sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity
and performance to which the facilities were constructed, and to retire the
construction debt.



   (B)   Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a monthly
basis succeeding the period for which the service was rendered.  Any bill
not paid by the due date will be considered delinquent.  At that time, the
city shall notify the delinquent owner/occupant in writing regarding the
delinquent bill and subsequent penalty.  The penalty shall be computed at a
rate of interest prescribed by Council.



   (C)   The owner of the premises may be liable to pay for the service
to the premises, as determined by the Council, and the service is furnished
to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises is liable therefore to the city.



   (D)   Any additional costs caused by discharges to the sanitary
sewerage facilities of toxic or other incompatible wastes, including the cost
of restoring wastewater treatment services, clean up and restoration of the
receiving waters and environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the
discharger(s) of the wastes, at no expense to the city.



(`86 Code, § 3.61)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any user who is found to have violated §§ 53.01 through
53.10 or who has not taken action within its means to comply with any
provision of these sections, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be fined not less than $100 nor more than $5,000 for
each offense.  Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense.  In addition to the penalties,
provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court
costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by an
appropriate action against the person found to have violated §§ 53.01
through 53.10. 



(`86 Code, § 3.32)



   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of
§§ 53.25 through 53.32 shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period
of time stated in the notice permanently cease all violations.



      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for in division (B)(1) above, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.  Each day in which any violation occurs shall be deemed as a
separate offense.



      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 53.25
through 53.32 shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by the city by reason of the violation.



      (4)   Properties in violation of §§ 53.29 or 53.30 may be
charged three times the normal sewer charges if the violations are not
corrected within 90 days of written notification of the violation being given
to the owner and/or occupant of the structure found to be in violation.  The
City Council may by policy provide for a longer period within which to comply
without charging three times the normal sewer charges where compliance would
require elimination of footing drain connections for a building lacking a
sump pit or other means of readily connecting the illegal discharge to a
legal mews.



      (5)   Persons connected to city sanitary sewer systems shall
permit inspection of their connections to the sanitary sewer system and means
of handling surface water run-off, roof drain water and groundwater for
compliance with §§ 53.25 through 53.33 or re-inspection to confirm
compliance with any orders to correct violations of §§ 53.25 through 53.33.
The inspection or re-inspections shall be permitted by the owner and/or
occupant within ten days of request by the city to conduct an inspection. 
The inspection shall be scheduled within ten days of request by the city and
shall occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.  Failure to permit
the inspection or reinspections if warranted to confirm compliance with
orders to correct violations of §§ 53.25 through 53.33 shall result in the
charging of three times the normal sewer rates until the inspection or
re-inspections are permitted.



('86 Code, § 3.48)  (Am. Ord. 653, passed 6-21-94)



   (C)   (1)   Each and every sewer service charge levied by and
pursuant to §§ 53.45 through 53.50 is hereby made a lien upon the lot or
premises service, and all charges which are past due and delinquent, shall be
certified to the County Auditor as taxes or assessments on the real estate. 
Nothing in §§ 53.45 through 53.50 shall be held or construed as in any way
stopping or interfering with the right of the city to levy as taxes or
assessments against any premises affected any delinquent or past due sewer
service charges.



      (2)   As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at
its discretion, file suit in a civil action to collect the amounts as are
delinquent and due against the occupant, owner or user of the real estate,
and shall collect as well all attorney's fees incurred by the city in filing
the civil action.  The attorney's fees shall be fixed by order of the court.



      (3)   In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and
chargeable to recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the
owner or user of the real estate being serviced by the treatment works shall
be liable for interest upon all unpaid balances as established by the City
Council.



(`86 Code, § 3.62)



CHAPTER 54:  SOLID WASTE



Section



   54.01   Collection service



Cross-reference:



   Garbage Haulers, see Ch. 118



§ 54.01  COLLECTION SERVICE.



   (A)   Every residential household and business in the city shall
make arrangements to provide for solid waste collection service with a
collector licensed under Ch. 118 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   A residential household or business may request exemption from
the requirements in division (A) above by demonstrating to the Records
Administrative Secretary that the household or business has an
environmentally sound alternative to contracting with a solid waste
collection service.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a residential household or business
in the city to violate division (A) above after receipt of written
notification from the Records Administrative Secretary of violation and
failure to make arrangements for solid waste collection service within 30
days after the written notice of violation or failure to obtain an exemption
pursuant to division (A) above.



   (D)   The Records Administrative Secretary shall annually do a
random sampling of at least 10% of households and residences, or upon
complaint do an investigation, to ensure compliance with the requirements of
division (A) above.  For purposes of compliance with division (A) above,
proof of compliance would include providing the name and address of a solid
waste collection service with which the residential household or business has
a contract.  The Records Administrative Secretary shall further conduct a
random sampling to confirm the existence of contractual arrangement with
solid waste collection services.  Proof of compliance with division (A)
above shall also include proof of purchase of bags used by a solid waste
collection service and/or confirmation from a solid waste collection service
that the bags are picked up from the residential household of business.



(`86 Code, § 4.385)  (Am. Ord. 623, passed 8-18-92)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 55:  SURFACE WATER SYSTEM



Section



   55.01   Findings and purpose



   55.02   Establishment



   55.03   Definitions



   55.04   Surface water utility factors



   55.05   Credits to fees



   55.06   Exemptions



   55.07   Other land uses



   55.08   Setting of rates



   55.09   Account responsibility of utility account holder or property
owner



   55.10   Payment of fees



   55.11   Appeal of fee



   55.12   Surface water utility fund



§ 55.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is for the efficient, economic and safe
operation of the surface water system for the protection of the health,
safety and general welfare of the public within the city.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.02  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A municipal surface water system utility (the “surface water
utility”) is hereby established and shall be operated pursuant to M.S. §
444.075 of 1992 from which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions
of this section and other laws.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT BUDGET.   The annual budget approved by the
City Council for surface water management including planning, monitoring,
capital expenditures, maintenance, personnel, and equipment.



   SURFACE WATER UTILITY FEE.   The annual charge developed for each
parcel of land.



   UTILITY FACTOR.   The ratio of runoff volume, in inches, for a
particular land use, to the runoff volume, in inches, for a one-quarter-acre
residential lot with 38% impervious surface, assuming a 2.5-inch 24-hour
one-year rainfall event and Soil Conservation Service (SCS) “type B” soil
conditions.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.04  SURFACE WATER UTILITY FACTORS.



 


Classification

 

Land Use

 

Utility Factor






1

 

Residential

 

1.0




2

 

Duplex/triplex

 

.5




3

 

Apartment or townhome - separate utility accounts

 

.25




4

 

Manufactured home

 

.25




5

 

Apartment building - single utility account

 

2.6




6

 

Commercial or industrial

 

2.6




7

 

Public/quasi public institutions

 

2.6





 



   The surface water management fee for each tax parcel classified as 1 is
the single-family residential fee.  The fee for classifications 2, 3 and 4
is the single-family residential fee multiplied by the utility factor.  The
fee for classifications 5, 6, and 7 is calculated as follows:  fee for
single-family residential multiplied by the utility factor multiplied by the
acreage of the parcel.  For tax parcels classified 5, 6, or 7 with less than
42% impervious surface the fee shall be adjusted by multiplying the fee by
the percentage of impervious surface and then dividing by 42%.



      Classes 1-4    =    Base Fee X Utility Factor



      Classes 5-7, >   42% impervious surface



            =    Base Fee X Utility Factor X Acreage



      Classes 5-7, <   42% impervious surface



            =    Previously Calculated Fee X (% Impervious
Surface/.42)



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.05  CREDITS TO FEES.



   The Council may adopt policies, by resolution, for adjustment of the
surface water utility fees for parcels based upon hydrologic data to be
supplied by property owners, which data demonstrates a hydrologic response
substantially different from the standards.  Such adjustments of fees shall
not be retroactive.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.06  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following land uses are exempt from the surface water utility fee.



   (A)   Cemeteries.



   (B)   Public right-of-way.



   (C)   Lakes and wetlands.



   (D)   Railroads.



   (E)   Agricultural without a home.



   (F)   Undeveloped land with no impervious surface coverage.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.07  OTHER LAND USES.



   Other land uses not listed in the foregoing table shall be classified
by the City Engineer by assigning them to classes most nearly like the listed
uses runoff volumes for a standard rainfall event.  An appeal from the City
Engineer’s determination of a classification may be made to the City
Council provided written notice is served as provided therein not later than
30 days from the date written notice of the decision of the City Engineer is
given to the owner of the property which is the subject of the classification.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.08  SETTING OF RATES.



   The rate for surface water utility charges shall be determined from
time to time by the Council by resolution.  In doing so, the Council shall
determine and set an annual budget for the system, including management,
planning, inventory, capital expenditures, personnel, equipment and
operations.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.09  ACCOUNT RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY ACCOUNT HOLDER OR PROPERTY OWNER.



   All accounts shall be the responsibility of the utility account
holder.  In the situation that the property does not have a city water, city
sewer, or city electric account, the account shall be the responsibility of
the property owner.  The utility account holder or property owner shall be
liable for the surface water management fee for his or her property, whether
or not he or she is occupying the property and any charges unpaid shall be a
lien upon the property.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.10  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   The surface water fee will be invoiced every month with water, sewer,
and electric utility bills.  In the absence of an existing water, sewer or
electric utility account, the surface water fee may be billed on an annual
basis.  The fee shall be due and payable on the same terms as water, sewer,
and electric bills.  If a bill is not paid in full on or before the due
date, a late fee equal to 10% of the current billed amount shall be added to
the charges.  Any prepayment or overpayment of charges shall be retained by
the city and applied against subsequent fees.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.11  APPEAL OF FEE.



   If a property owner or person responsible for paying the surface water
fee believes that a particular fee is incorrect, such person may request that
the fee be recomputed.  A user or customer requesting an adjustment may be
required at the user or customer’s cost to provide supplemental information
to the city including but not limited to a title or mortgage survey or other
documentation to support calculation of the impervious surface area of the
property.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



§ 55.12  SURFACE WATER UTILITY FUND.



   All fees collected for the surface water utility shall be placed in a
fund for exclusive uses as permitted by M.S. § 444.075.  Administration of
the fund will be the responsibility of the City Engineer.



(Ord. 1010, passed 11-19-13)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



   70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



   71.   PARKING RULES



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   70.01   Parades



   70.02   Truck routes



   70.03   Railroad tracks



   70.04   Driving rules; adoption by reference



   70.05   Snowmobiles



   70.06   Roller skates; skateboards



   70.07   Jake braking



   70.08   Intent



§ 70.01  PARADES.



   (A)   The term “parade” means any movement of vehicles, persons
or animals, or any combination thereof, which either moves together and as a
body so as to in some way impede or affect the free and unobstructed flow of
traffic, or which moves so that some part thereof is in violation of one or
more traffic laws or regulations, if the movement is without a permit
hereunder.



   (B)   It is unlawful to sponsor or participate in a parade for which
no permit has been obtained from the city, and it is also unlawful to obtain
a parade permit and not conduct the same in accordance with a permit granted
by the city.  Application for the permit shall be made to the City Manager
at least 45 days in advance of the date on which it is to occur and shall
state the sponsoring organization or individuals, the route, the length, the
estimated time of commencement and termination, the general composition and
the application shall be executed by the individuals applying therefor or the
duly authorized agent or representative of the sponsoring organization.



   (C)   (1)   The City Manager shall forthwith refer all
applications for parades to the Chief of Police and Director of Engineering
for his or her consideration which shall take no longer than seven days.



      (2)   If any state trunk highways are in the route, the Chief
of Police shall make all necessary arrangements with the Minnesota Highway
Department for alternate routes or whatever may be necessary.



      (3)   If the Chief of Police finds that a parade will not
cause a hazard to persons or property, and will cause no great inconvenience
to the public, and if he or she is able to make arrangements for necessary
direction and control of traffic, he or she shall endorse his or her
acceptance and return the application to the City Manager who shall then
issue the permit.



      (4)   If the Chief of Police finds the parade described in the
application to be a hazard, a substantial inconvenience, or if he or she is
unable to make adequate arrangements for direction or control of traffic, he
or she shall return the same to the City Manager with his or her reasons for
denial, and the permit shall not be granted unless all conditions and
objections of the Chief of Police are met or removed by the applicant.



      (5)   If the Director of Engineering finds the parade
described in the application will not cause a substantial inconvenience, and
if he or she is able to make adequate arrangements, he or she will endorse
his or her acceptance and return the application to the City Manager, who
shall issue the permit.



      (6)   It shall be the responsibility of the sponsoring
organization or its duly authorized agent, to provide the necessary
provisions for cleanup prior to, during, and within a specific time period
following the parade.



(`86 Code, § 5.14)  (Am. Ord. 947, passed 3-17-09; Am. Ord. 965, passed
2-1-11)



§ 70.02  TRUCK ROUTE.



   It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural
implement, truck (other than pick-up truck), automobile trailer or automobile
to which a trailer is attached, in through traffic, upon any street except
those which have been designated and sign-posted as “truck routes.”  For
the purpose of this section, “through traffic” means originating without
the city and with a destination without the city, as distinguished from
“local traffic” which means traffic either originating or having a
destination within the city.



(`86 Code, § 6.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  RAILROAD TRACKS.



   (A)   (1)   When any person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade crossing and a clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train, the driver of the
vehicle shall stop not less than ten feet from the nearest track of the
railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do safely.



      (2)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain standing
and not traverse a grade crossing when a human flagperson gives or continues
to give a signal for the approach or passage of a train.



   (B)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire,
or of any school bus whether carrying passengers or not, or of any vehicle
carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids, or liquid gas under
pressure as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track or
tracks of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle not less than ten feet from the
nearest rail of the railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train, and for signals
indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall
not proceed until he can do so safely.  No stop need be made at any the
crossing where a police officer or a traffic-control signal directs traffic
to proceed.



   (C)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate or move any
caterpillar tractor, steam shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or
structure having a normal operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a
vertical body or load clearance of less than nine inches above the level
surface of a roadway upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing
without first complying with this chapter.



      (2)   Before making any crossing the person operating or
moving any vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than ten
feet nor more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of the railway, and while so
stopped shall listed and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and
shall not proceed until the crossing can be made safely.



      (3)   No crossing shall be made when warning is given by
automatic signal or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach of a
railroad train or car.



(`86 Code, § 6.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.04  DRIVING RULES; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
vehicle on a public highway, street, parking lot, alley or other public
property in a manner as to cause the tires to squeal, the gears to grind, the
motor to backfire, or the vehicle to “fishtail;” except when an
emergency, created by causes other than the above described and prohibited
conduct of vehicle operation, creates the necessity for the operation.



      (2)   (a)   Except in real emergency, during authorized
public parades, or when making legal signals, no person shall drive or ride
in a vehicle on any public highway, street, alley, parking lot or any other
public places:



            1.   With any part of his or her person extending
outside the window of the vehicle;



            2.   While sitting, reclining or being on the
tailgate of a station wagon; or



            3.   While standing or being above a normal
sitting position in an open convertible.



         (b)   It shall be a separate offense for the driver or
operator of any vehicle to drive or operate the vehicle upon any public
highway, street, alley, parking lot or any other public places at a time when
any passenger in the vehicle is committing any of the hereinabove prohibited
acts.



      (3)   No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle
with an unnecessary exhibition of speed on any public or private way within
the city limits.  Prima-facie evidence of unnecessary exhibition of speed
shall be unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or
the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the vehicle or both.



(`86 Code, § 6.03)



   (B)   The regulatory provisions of M.S. Chs. 168, 169 and 171, as
amended, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the use of
highways, streets, alleys and other lands within the city and are hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as completely as if set out
here in full.  Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in this
section is a violation of this code and a violator guilty of the offense
shall be punished by the penalty as is prescribed by those statutes, or, if
no penalty is provided in the statutes, by § 10.99 of this code. 



(`86 Code, § 6.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.05  SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding provisions of this chapter to the contrary,
this section shall apply to control of traffic and regulation of that certain
class of vehicles falling within the definition of snowmobiles as to matters
set forth herein.  All provisions of this chapter, not relating to matters
herein stated, apply as equally to snowmobiles as other vehicles.



   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile
on any freeway, interstate highway, state trunk highway, county state-aid
highway or county highway except as otherwise permitted in this section.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile,
except while passing, in any portion of a street other than the most
right-hand lane.



      (3)   No person may operate a snowmobile in excess of 15 mph.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on
a public sidewalk, on boulevards or on private property without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of the property.



      (5)   Snowmobiles may be operated upon the ditch bottom or
areas outside of the main traveled portion of trunk highways, county
state-aid and county highways where the highways are so configured within the
city.



      (6)   It is required that individuals operating a snowmobile
shall exit the corporate limits by the shortest, legal route possible.



   (C)   A snowmobile may be operated across a street or highway only
as herein set forth, and it is unlawful to do so otherwise.  The crossing
shall be made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees with the direction of
the street or highway, and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing; the snowmobile shall be brought to a complete stop before
crossing the shoulder or main traveled way the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard;
in crossing a divided street, the crossing shall be made only at an
intersection of the street or highway with another public street or highway;
and, if the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise, or during conditions of reduced visibility,
it shall be made only if both front and rear lights are on and in operating
condition.



   (D)   It is unlawful to enter any intersection with a snowmobile
without yielding the right-of-way to any other vehicles or pedestrians at the
intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate
hazard.



   (E)   (1)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate a
snowmobile on a street or make a direct crossing of a trunk highway, county
state-aid or county highway, or other street.  A person 14 years of age or
older, but less than 20 years of age, may operate a snowmobile on streets and
highways as permitted by this section and make the direct crossings of
streets and highways only if he or she has in his or her immediate possession
a valid snowmobile safety certificate or a driver's license or identification
card with a valid snowmobile qualification indicator issued by the state. 
The certificate or qualification indicator may only be issued upon successful
completion of the course as provided by Minnesota Statutes.



      (2)   It is unlawful for a snowmobile owner to permit
operation in violation of this division.



   (F)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile in
violation of this section.



      (1)   To tow any person or thing in a public street except
with the use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile;



      (2)   Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating
rink or sliding area where the operation would conflict with use or endanger
persons or property; and/or



      (3)   Leave a snowmobile in a public place without locking the
ignition, removing the key, and taking the key away from the snowmobile.  No
person may intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal with a
snowmobile.



   (G)   It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile unless it is equipped
as follows:



      (1)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which
reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for
operation;  (No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe or
similar device on a snowmobile motor.)



      (2)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop
and hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation;



      (3)   A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in
operating condition;  (A safety or “deadman” throttle is defined as a
device which, when pressure is removed from the engine accelerator throttle,
causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track.)



      (4)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility,
at least one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to
reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during
the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions; and  (The head
lamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of
an oncoming snowmobile operator.  It shall also be equipped with at least
one red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to
exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear
during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.)



      (5)   Running lights or reflective material at least 16 square
inches on each side, forward of the handlebars so as to reflect or beam light
at a 90-degree angle.



   (H)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile in the
city except during set hours.



      (1)   No person shall operate a snowmobile in the city except
during the following hours: Sunday through Thursday — 9:00 a.m. to 10
p.m.  Friday, Saturday and evening before Christmas, Thanksgiving, Easter,
President's Day, Martin Luther King Day, New Year's Day — 9:00 a.m. to 1:00
a.m.



(`86 Code, § 6.05)  (Am. Ord. 618, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 728, passed
1-5-99; Am. Ord. 852, passed 9-7-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.06  ROLLER SKATES; SKATEBOARDS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      OPERATE.  To ride on or upon or control the operation of a
skateboard or roller skates.



      OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical
control of a skateboard or roller skates.



      PERSON.  An individual partnership, corporation, the state and
its agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated
or not.



      ROLLER SKATE.  A form of skate with small wheels or rollers
instead of a runner.



      SKATEBOARD.  A device for riding upon, usually while standing,
consisting of an oblong piece of wood or of other composition mounted on
skate wheels.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard or
roller skates under the circumstances set forth as follows:



      (1)   On private property of another without the express
permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the property;



      (2)   In any careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to
endanger, or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property of
any other person;



      (3)   Upon any public street or upon any public sidewalk
within the downtown area designated as an area bounded on the south by 5th
Avenue South, on the west by 2nd Street West, on the north by 4th Avenue
North and on the east by 3rd Street East, and including the area of
designated streets and the sidewalks parallel thereto on both sides of the
street;  (This division shall not apply to persons on roller skates, but
shall not in any way modify the prohibition contained in (B)(8) below
prohibiting the use of roller skates on state highways, including state
highways within the downtown area.)



      (4)   Emerge from an alley, driveway or building upon
approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway and
not yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching the sidewalk area
and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway;



      (5)   To operate a skateboard or roller skates and attach the
same or the person of the operator to any vehicle upon a roadway;



      (6)   To operate a skateboard or roller skates upon a roadway
and not ride as close as possible to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway;



      (7)   To roller skate or use a skateboard upon a public
street, sidewalk or other roadway after sunset and before sunrise; and



      (8)   To roller skate or use skateboards upon a state highway
in the city.



   (C)   A person apprehended by a police officer in violation of this
section does by his or her use of the public streets and sidewalks consent to
the impoundment by a police officer of the skateboard or roller skates for a
period of three days upon a first offense, one week upon the second offense
and 30 days upon a third offense.  Any operator aggrieved by the impoundment
of his or her skateboard or roller skates may petition the Council for
hearing hereon at the next regular Council meeting following the
impoundment.  This division is in addition to the provisions for fines and
penalties as set out herein.



(`86 Code, § 6.07)  (Am. Ord. 570, passed 9-1-87; Am. Ord. 654, passed
8-16-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.07  JAKE BRAKING.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.



         (a)   Distinct and loudly audible noise that
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort and repose of
any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property’s value;



         (b)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.69, as it may be amended from time to time, which requires every motor
vehicle to be equipped with a muffler in good working order; or



         (c)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.693, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules parts
7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these rules may be amended from time to time,
which establish motor vehicle noise standards.



      ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE.  A dynamic brake, Jake Brake, Jacobs
Brake, C-Brake, Paccar Brake, transmission brake or other similar engine
retarding brake system which altersthe normal compression of the engine and
subsequently releases that compression.



   (B)   Discharge.  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
the exhaust or permit the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle
except through a muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive
noise and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations.



   (C)   Unlawful operation.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any truck to intentionally use an engine retarding brake on any public
highway, street, parking lot or alley within the city which causes abnormal
or excessive noise from the engine because of an illegally modified or
defective exhaust system, except in an emergency.



   (D)   Adoption by reference.  M.S. §§ 169.69 and 169.693 (motor
vehicle noise limits) and Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as
these statutes and rules may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted
by reference.



   (E)   Sign installation.  Signs stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS
ENFORCED” may be installed at locations deemed appropriate by the City
Council to advise motorists of the prohibitions contained in this section,
except that no sign stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” shall be
installed on a state highway without a permit from the Minnesota Department
of Transportation.  The provisions of this section are in full force and
effect even if no signs are installed.



   (G)   Penalty.  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and punished as provided by § 10.99.



§ 70.08  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this section to supplement the laws of the State of
Minnesota, Chapter 84, Minnesota Statutes, with respect to the operation of
certain motor vehicles commonly called trail bikes, mini-bikes, power-boards,
go-carts and scooters. This provision is not intended to allow what the State
statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the State statutes expressly allow.



(Ord. 68-6, passed 2-5-68; Am. Ord. 69-90, passed 11-10-69)



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      OFF-ROAD VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle, power assisted
vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle
powered by a motor having a piston displacement capacity of over 25 cubic
centimeters or an electric motor that is capable of propelling the vehicle at
a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour on a flat surface, including but not
limited to all-terrain vehicle, hovercraft, or motor vehicle licensed for
highway operation which is being used for off-road recreational purposes.



      OPERATE. No person may operate any trail bike, mini-bike,
power-boards, go-carts and scooters or similar devices at a rate of speed
that is greater than 20 mph or the posted speed limit in the area designated
by City Ordinance.



      RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle, power
assisted vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled
vehicle powered by a motor having a piston displacement capacity of 25 cubic
centimeters or less or an electric motor that is incapable of propelling the
vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour on a flat surface,
including but not limited to trail bike, mini-bike, go-cart, motorized
scooter, or motorized skateboard (also known as “powerboard”).



      TRAIL BIKES, MINI-BIKES, POWER-BOARDS, GO-CARTS AND SCOOTERS.
Every vehicle which is self-propelled either by electric or gas propelled
motor. This does not include a vehicle moved solely by human power.



(Ord. 69-90, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 70-49, passed 11-9-70; Am. Ord. 76-1,
passed 1-27-76)



      VEHICLES REGULATED BY STATE LAW. This provision does not apply to
snowmobiles as defined in § 70.05 and M.S. §84.81 and regulated by M.S. §
84.81 et seq.; licensed mopeds; motorized bicycles, as defined by M.S. §
169.01 subd. 4a and regulated by M.S. § 169.222—223; electric personal
assistive mobility devices (also known as “Segways”), as defined in M.S.
§ 169-01, subd. 90 and regulated by M.S. § 169.212 or electric assisted
bicycle, as defined in M.S. § 169-01, subd. 4b and regulated by M.S. §
169.222—223.



(Ord. 74-48, passed 5-28-74; Am. Ord. 2003-56, passed 12-1-03)



   (B)   Regulations.



      (1)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any trail bikes, mini-bikes, power-boards, go-carts and scooters or
similar devices on publicly or privately owned property, not owned by the
operator or used with the permission of the property owner, within the city.



      (2)   Exceptions. This prohibition shall not apply to:



         (a)   The loading of any trail bikes, mini-bikes,
power-boards, go-carts and scooters upon a trailer or the removal therefrom;



         (b)   The use of trail bikes, mini-bikes, power-boards,
go-carts and scooters for a rescue, emergency, or law enforcement purposes.



(Ord. 69-4, passed 1-6-69; Am. Ord. 70-49, passed 11-9-70; Am. Ord. 76-1,
passed 1-27-76; Am. Ord. 76-2, passed 2-23-76)



   (C)   Prohibited areas and acts.  It is unlawful for any person to
operate a recreational motor vehicle or off-road vehicle:



      (1)   On private property of another without specific written
permission of the owner of the property. Written permission may be given by a
posted notice of any kind or description, so long as it specifies the kind of
vehicles allowed, that the owner, occupant, or lessee prefers such as by
saying “Recreational Vehicles Allowed,” “Trail Bikes Allowed,”
“All-Terrain Vehicles Allowed,” or words substantially similar.



      (2)   On publicly owned land including school grounds, park
property, playgrounds, recreation areas and golf courses, except where
permitted by this provision.



      (3)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary, or
unusual noise which disturbs, annoys, or interferes with the peace and quiet
of other persons.



      (4)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for
pedestrian travel.



      (5)   At any place while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or narcotics or controlled substances as defined by state law.



      (6)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper
under all the surrounding circumstances.



      (7)   At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent
manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or
to cause injury or damage thereto.



      (8)   On any public street, highway, or right-of-way, unless
licensed pursuant to Minnesota law.



      (9)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over, or kill any
animal, wild or domestic.



      (10)   To operate or halt any recreational motor vehicle or
off-road vehicle carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or the
safety of others, in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any
person or property or in excess of 20 miles per hour on publicly owned lands.



      (11)   Within 150 yards of any public recreational area or
gathering of people. This provision does not apply to the occasional use of
recreational motor vehicles on private property for the purpose of loading or
unloading it from a trailer or for mechanically checking it.



(Ord. 74-48, passed 5-28-74; Am. Ord. 2003-56, passed 12-1-03; Am. Ord. 852,
passed 9-7-04)



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING RULES



Section



   71.01   Presumption



   71.02   General prohibitions; unauthorized removal



   71.03   Manufactured home, mobile home and travel trailer parking



   71.04   Direction to proceed



   71.05   Method of parking



   71.06   Winter parking; snow emergencies



   71.07   Parking regulations



   71.08   Postal delivery boxes



   71.09   Private parking lots and roadways



   71.10   Parking of "for sale" vehicles on non-residential property



§ 71.01  PRESUMPTION.



   As to any vehicle parked in violation of this code, when the driver
thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same,
or that the driver was acting as the agent of the owner.



(`86 Code, § 7.01)



§ 71.02  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS; UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic of in compliance
with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device in
any of the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;



      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;



      (8)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;



      (9)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station;



      (10)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (11)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street;



      (12)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
street;



      (13)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; or



      (14)   In any alley in an area bounded by 2nd Street on the
east and west, 4th Avenue on the north and 3rd Avenue on the south.



(`86 Code, § 7.02)



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by
the person into any prohibited area or away from a curb a distance as is
unlawful. 



(`86 Code, § 7.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  MANUFACTURED HOME, MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKING.



   It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a manufactured home,
mobile home, travel trailer or other vehicle which can be towed and which is
primarily designed for permanent or temporary living accommodations on or
within the limits of any street or right-of-way, except where signs are
erected designating the place as a campsite, for more than six hours.



(`86 Code, § 7.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  DIRECTION TO PROCEED.



   It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street
when directed or ordered to proceed by any police officer invested by law
with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.



(`86 Code, § 7.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  METHOD OF PARKING.



   (A)   Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and
indicated by curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway where there is an adjacent curb shall be
stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with,
and within 12 inches of, the right-hand curb and, where painted marking
appear on the curb or street, the vehicle shall be within the markings, front
and rear, provided that upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so
parked, except that the left-hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with
and within 12 inches from the left-hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in
any event and with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the
direction of the flow of traffic upon the one-way street. It is unlawful to
park in violation of this division. 



(`86 Code, § 7.06)



   (B)   Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as
shown by curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or
parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with the front
wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or
street, provided that the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the
portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of one-way traffic.  It is
unlawful to park in violation of this division. 



(`86 Code, § 7.07)



   (C)   Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped
or parked parallel and to the right of the paving, improved or main traveled
part of the street.  It is unlawful to park in violation of this division. 



(`86 Code, § 7.08)



(Am. Ord. 862, passed 11-16-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  WINTER PARKING; SNOW EMERGENCIES.



   To facilitate snow removal, the following additional parking
restrictions shall be in effect.



   (A)   A snow emergency will be declared by the Director of
Engineering, premised upon threatening or existing adverse weather or street
condition, or when discretion necessitates. Notification procedures of the
snow emergency shall be as per the Snow and Ice Control Policy adopted by the
City Council.  During a declared snow emergency, it is unlawful to park or
leave a vehicle standing on any street or avenue until the time as the street
or avenue has been substantially cleared of snow from curb to curb, or until
the snow emergency has been canceled.



   (B)   No owner, tenant or manager of any premises in the city shall
allow snow and ice accumulations in off-street parking areas which reduces
the number of parking stalls available for use below the number of required
off-street parking stalls under Ch. 154 of this code, or under a conditional
use permit.  The owners, tenants or property managers shall have 24 hours to
clear required parking areas after a snowfall.



   (C)   Following the accumulation of three inches or more of snow
fall in the City of Waseca it shall be unlawful for the driver or owner of
any motor vehicle, trailer or implement to park or leave standing such a
vehicle, trailer or implement on any street or alley within the corporate
limits of the City of  Waseca.  Parking may not be resumed on any streets
or alleys until snow removal has been completed on said streets.



(`86 Code, § 7.10)  (Am. Ord. 707, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord. 811, passed
3-4-03; Am. Ord. 862, passed 11-16-04)



§ 71.07  PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      IMPLEMENT.  Any device, not a trailer, capable of being towed by
a vehicle.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled.



      OWNER.  A person, other than a secured party, having the
property in or title to a motor vehicle, including a lessee.



      PERSON.  A natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, 
corporation, or governmental organization; and in the case of a
co-partnership, to also include any partner.



      STATIONARY.  For the purposes of this section and any
regulations relating to limited parking, a vehicle moved to another location
within 100 feet of the first location during the limited parking period is
deemed to have remained STATIONARY.



      STREET.  Any street,  avenue, place, drive or any other public
way in the city.



      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   (B)   Maximum parking period on any public right-of-way.  It is
unlawful for any person to stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle upon any
street for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours.



   (C)   City Council designation.  The Council may designate no
parking or limited time parking zones by a resolution setting forth the
location of the zone, and the time limit imposed, if applicable.  The
Director of Engineering must post signs indicating a no parking zone or the
specified time limit for parking.  If there is a raised curb, the curb must
be painted yellow at the designated no parking zone.  A person must not park
a vehicle contrary to these postings or designations.



   (D)   Posted no parking zones.  A person must not park a vehicle
where permanent or temporary signs are posted by the city, or by authorized
personnel acting at the city’s direction, that state “no parking.”



   (E)   Fire lane.  A person must not park in an area designated and
posted as a fire lane.



   (F)   Existing signs.  Existing signs that have been posted by
direction of the council, Director of Engineering or the Chief of Police
regulating parking of vehicles will be recognized as properly placed under
this section until changed by proper direction of the Council.



   (G)   Trailers other than house trailers.  A person may not park a
trailer, other than house trailers which are specifically dealt with in
another section of the city code, without first having obtained an
obstruction permit as specified in the city’s Right-Of-Way Ordinance.



   (H)   Truck parking.  It is unlawful to park a detached
semi-trailer upon any public right-of-way, or municipally-owned parking
lot.  It is unlawful to park a semi-trailer, whether or not attached to a
truck tractor, within an area zoned as a residential district, except for the
purpose of loading or unloading the same.



   (I)   Displaying a vehicle for sale.  It is unlawful to park a
vehicle on a public right-of-way or municipally owned parking lot for the
purpose of displaying it for sale.



   (J)   Municipal parking lots.  In municipally owned parking lots,
the Council may limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked
thereon, hours of parking and prescribed method of parking; provided that,
the limitations and restrictions are properly posted or marked on the
paving.  It is unlawful to park any vehicle in any municipally owned parking
lot contrary to the restriction or limitations so posted.



   (K)   Parking in alleys.  A person must not park a vehicle or
permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, on an alley within the
city; provided that a vehicle may for the purpose of access to abutting
property load and unload merchandise or other material when parking on the
property itself is not available for an hour or less, and when properly
signed on the ends of the alley.



   (L)   Blocking entrances to structures.  A person must not park a
vehicle so as to block a fire escape or the entrance or exit from a building,
whether on public or private property.



   (M)   Temporary restricting of traffic or parking.  The City
Engineer is hereby authorized to restrict traffic flow or parking for the
purposes of maintenance, construction or any other purpose specifically
allowed in the City Code.  The Director of Engineering shall cause the
restrictions to be properly and clearly posted or marked.  It is unlawful to
restrict block traffic except as allowed herein.



   (N)   Fire hydrants.  It is unlawful for a person to park or stop a
vehicle so as to block access to a fire hydrant, and in no event on a street
or parking lot within ten feet of a fire hydrant.



   (O)   Peace officer direction.  It is unlawful for a person to stop
or park a vehicle on a street or highway when directed or ordered to proceed
by a peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic or by an authorized person under the direction and control
of a peace officer.



   (P)   Certain designated parking spaces.  It is unlawful for a
person to park a vehicle in an area designated by posted signs for certain
types of vehicles unless the vehicle is one of the types of vehicles
specifically permitted.



   (Q)   Impounding and removing vehicles.  When any police officer
finds a vehicle standing upon a street or municipally-owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, the officer is hereby authorized to
require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to remove the
same to a position in compliance with this code.  When any police officer
finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or municipally-owned parking lot
in violation of any parking regulation, the officer is hereby authorized to
impound the unlawful parked vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof
and to remove the same to a convenient garage or other facility or place of
safety; provided that, if any charge shall be placed against the vehicle for
cost of removal or storage, or both, by anyone called upon to assist
therewith the same shall be paid prior to removal from such place of storage
or safekeeping.



   (R)   Operating a vehicle in a parking lot.  A person must not
operate a motor vehicle on a public or private parking lot at a speed greater
than is safe and reasonable under the conditions of traffic then existing,
and in no event at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour.  Parking of vehicles
on those lots must conform to any stalls or positions for parking designated
on the surface of the parking area.  A vehicle must not be parked or allowed
to stand in an area designated or is used for a lane of moving traffic so as
to interfere with the movement of traffic.



   (S)   Parking privileges for physically handicapped.



      (1)   Any physically handicapped person who displays
prominently upon the automobile parked by him or her or under his or her
direction and for his or her use, the distinguishing certificate or insignia
specified by state or federal law shall be entitled to park in spots
designated for their use.



      (2)   If the police of the city shall find that the
certificate or insignia is being used improperly, they shall report the same
to the Chief of Police, and the Chief of Police shall in turn, report the
improper use to the Secretary of State, who may, in his or her discretion,
remove the privilege.  Any person who is does not display the proper
insignia and who parks in handicapped designated spaces is guilty of a
misdemeanor.



   (T)   Loading zones.  A person may request in writing that the city
establish a loading zone abutting premises that the person occupies.  If,
the City Council grants the request, the city will bill the applicant for the
estimated cost of placing appropriate signs and painting the curb.  When the
amount is paid to the city, the City Engineer will install the necessary
signs and paint the curb.  The person occupying the property shall be
subject to the annual maintenance cost of maintaining the signage and
markings.  During posted loading zone hours, a person must not stop, stand
or park a vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers
or freight and then only for no longer than necessary.  A person must not
occupy a loading zone with a vehicle for more than 15 minutes during those
hours.



(Ord. 794, passed 6-4-02; Am. Ord. 862, passed 11-16-04)



§ 71.08  POSTAL DELIVERY BOXES.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid  conflicts with other traffic or in compliance with the directions
of a police officer or traffic-control device, within ten feet of any type of
postal delivery box.  This section shall be in effect Monday through
Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The exception to the
identified day and time restrictions shall be those days when the normal
delivery of mail is suspended (federal holidays, etc.).  The intent of this
section is to allow for the unobstructed delivery of mail by the U.S. Postal
Service.



(Ord. 862, passed 11-16-04)



§ 71.09 PRIVATE PARKING LOTS AND ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Any roadway or parking lot used by the public  as a street
for public traffic or parking shall be considered "open to the public" for
the purposes of this section.



   (B)   Parking of vehicles on private parking lots shall conform to
the markings or stalls or positions for parking designated on the surface of
the parking area and no vehicle shall be parked or allowed to stand in any
area of such parking lot which has been designated or is used for a lane for
moving traffic.



   (C)   Any person involved in a collision between the vehicle they
are driving and any other vehicle parked on a private roadway or parking lot
open to the public shall leave a notice upon each unattended vehicle with
which they have collided, giving their name, address and vehicle license
number.



(Ord. 862, passed 11-16-04)



§ 71.10  PARKING OF "FOR SALE" VEHICLES ON NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide regulations
pertaining to the sale of motor vehicles on public and private,
non-residential property.



   (B)   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this
section shall have the following meaning ascribed to them, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning: MOTOR VEHICLE shall include
motor vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles, and boats.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store a motor
vehicle, marked or advertised for sale or exchange, on public or private,
non-residential property from the hours of 1:00 a.m. through 6:00 a.m.



   (D)   Evidence that a motor vehicle is for sale or exchange
includes, but is not limited to  "For Sale" signs, signs of price markings,
and informational signage. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be displayed in
violation of this section when found  parked on public or private,
non-residential property bearing a sign or other markings indicating that it
is for sale or exchange.



   (E)   This section does not apply to motor vehicles of licensed
motor vehicle dealers parked on private, non-residential property within the
scope of the motor vehicle dealer's business activity or any public or
private, non-residential property that is open for business 24 hours a day.



   (F)   Any motor vehicle found parked in violation of this section
may be towed and  impounded at the expense of the registered owner.  Each
day that a motor vehicle is parked in violation of this section shall be a
separate offense.



   (G)   Violation of this section shall be deemed a petty misdemeanor
parking violation.



(Ord.  862, passed 11-16-04)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



   90.   ABANDONED PROPERTY



   91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES



   92.   ALARM SYSTEMS



   93.   FIRE PREVENTION



   94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



   95.   ANIMALS



   96.   PUBLIC PARKS



   97.   SPECIAL EVENTS



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Disposition of abandoned property



Abandoned Vehicles



   90.15   Findings and purpose



   90.16   Definitions



   90.17   Violation to abandon motor vehicle



   90.18   Authority to impound vehicles



   90.19   Sale; waiting periods



   90.20   Notice of taking and sale



   90.21   Right to reclaim



   90.22   Operator's deficiency claim; consent to sale



   90.23   Disposition by impound lot



   90.24   Disposal authority



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Procedure.  Except for abandoned and junked vehicles, all
property lawfully coming into possession of the city shall be disposed of as
provided in this section which is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 471.195, as it
may be amended from time to time.  Abandoned and junked vehicles shall be
disposed of according to the procedures of §§ 90.15 et seq.



   (B)   Storage.  The department of the city acquiring possession of
the property shall arrange for its storage.  If city facilities are
unavailable or inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at a
privately-owned facility.



   (C)   Claim by owner.  The owner may claim the property by
exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or
maintenance costs incurred by it.  A receipt for the property shall be
obtained upon release to the owner.



   (D)   Sale.  If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of
the city for 60 days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a
public auction conducted by the city or its designee after two weeks’
published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the
property to be sold.



   (E)   Disposition of proceeds.  The proceeds of the sale shall be
placed in the general fund of the city.  If the former owner makes
application and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within six months
of the sale, the former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the
property less the costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of
published notice and other costs of the sale.



ABANDONED VEHICLES



§ 90.15  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   M.S. Ch. 168B, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.  Sections 90.15 through 90.25
of this code are adopted under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, Subd. 2, as
it may be amended from time to time.  If any of these provisions are less
stringent that the provisions of M.S. Ch. 168B or Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as it
may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take precedence.



§ 90.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (1)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may
be amended from time to time, that:



         (a)   Has remained illegally:



            1.   For a period of more than 48 hours on any
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more than four hours
on that property when it is properly posted; or



            2.   On private property for a period of time, as
determined under § 90.18(B), without the consent of the person in control of
the property; and



         (b)   Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable
condition that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent
with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage
building.



      (2)   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. §
168.10, as it may be amended from time to time, is not considered an
abandoned vehicle.



      (3)   Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile
graveyards that are defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with M.S.
§ 161.242 as it may be amended from time to time, or that are licensed and
maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not
considered abandoned vehicles.



      (4)   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being
held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not
considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police
hold, writ or court order is in effect.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.



   IMPOUND.  To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody.  There are two
types of impounds:  public and non-public.



   IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR.  A person who engages in impounding
or storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. 
OPERATOR includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot,
regardless of whether tow truck service is provided.



   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that cannot be driven upon the
public streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, does not have a valid current
registration, or incapable of being moved under its own power. See also:
Waseca Property Maintenance Code, Section 202, as amended.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE.  Has the meaning given “motor vehicle”
in M.S. § 169.01, as it may be amended from time to time.



   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE.  Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the
operation of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as
tires and used motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.



   MPCA or AGENCY.  The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NON-PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT.  An impound lot that is not a public impound
lot.



   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT.  An impound lot owned by or contracting with a
unit of government under § 90.24.



   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is subject to removal and
impoundment pursuant to § 90.18(B), or M.S. § 169.041, as it may be amended
from time to time, but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.



   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT.  Includes a state department or agency, a special
purpose district, and a county, statutory or home rule charter city or town.



   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS.  Those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things
as the motor, drive train and wheels.



(Am. Ord. 1016, passed  3-18-14)



§ 90.17  VIOLATION TO ABANDON MOTOR VEHICLE.



   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private
property, without the consent of the person in control of the property, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.18  AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.



   (A)   Abandoned or junk vehicles.  The city or its designee or any
peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may
take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle if the vehicle is
on public property.  If the abandoned or junk vehicle is located on private
property, the vehicle shall not be removed or impounded until the provisions
of § 90.18(C) are complied with.



   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles.  The city, its designee or any peace
officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may take
into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under M.S. § 169.041, as
it may be amended from time to time.  A vehicle may also be impounded after
it has been left unattended in one of the following public or private
locations for the indicated period of time:



      (1)   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 169.041, as
it may be amended from time to time:



         (a)   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace
officer, four hours;



         (b)   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic
hazard to the traveling public, as determined by a peace officer,
immediately; or



         (c)   That is a parking facility or other public
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, four
hours; or



      (2)   On private property, only with the express permission of
the owner of the property, a resident or other person in control of the
premises:



         (a)   That is single-family or duplex residential
property, immediately;



         (b)   That is private, nonresidential property, properly
posted, immediately;



         (c)   That is private, nonresidential property, not
posted, 24 hours; or



         (d)   That is any residential property, properly posted,
immediately.



      (3)   If under division (B)(2) of this section, permission is
not granted, then the city shall not remove and impound any vehicle until the
procedure established in division (B)(2) of this section have been followed.



   (C)   If the vehicle is on private property, the city or his or her
designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for
by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle
on private property only with the permission of the owner of the property, a
resident or other person in control of the premises. If permission is denied,
the city may declare the existence of the abandoned or junk vehicle to be a
nuisance and proceed to abate the nuisance as provided for in §§ 92.15
through 92.24.  Once the abatement procedure has been completed, the city
may apply for an order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the
removal and impoundment of the vehicle and, after the order has been granted,
the city may then remove and impound the vehicle.



§ 90.19  SALE; WAITING PERIODS.



   (A)   Sale after 15 days.  An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 90.23, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be:



      (1)   A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
division; or



      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.



   (B)   Sale after 45 days.  An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 90.23, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.



§ 90.20  NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.



   (A)   Contents; notice given within five days.  When an impounded
vehicle is taken into custody, the city or impound lot operator taking it
into custody shall give notice of the taking within five days.  The notice
shall:



      (1)   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year,
make, model and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if the
information can be reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is
being held;



      (2)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to
reclaim the vehicle under § 90.21; and



      (3)   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the
appropriate time allowed under § 90.19 shall be deemed a waiver by them of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to
the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents
pursuant to § 90.23.



   (B)   Notice by mail or publication.  The notice shall be sent by
mail to the registered owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all
readily identifiable lienholders of record.  The Department makes this
information available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. 
If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned.  Published notices may be grouped
together for convenience and economy.



   (C)   Unauthorized vehicles; notice.  If an unauthorized vehicle
remains unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under
division (B) of this section, a second notice shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the
unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record.



§ 90.21  RIGHT TO RECLAIM.



   (A)   Payment of charges.  The owner or any lienholder of an
impounded vehicle shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or
impound lot operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and
storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or
45 days, as applicable under § 90.19, after the date of the notice required
by § 90.20.



   (B)   Lienholders.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state, or the right
of a lienholder to foreclose.  For the purposes of this section,
GARAGEKEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator
of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for
the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



§ 90.22  OPERATOR'S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.



   (A)   Deficiency claim.  The nonpublic impound lot operator has a
deficiency claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the
reasonable costs of services provided in the towing, storage and  inspection
of the vehicle minus the proceeds of the sale or auction.  The claim for
storage costs may not exceed the costs of:



      (1)   25 days storage for a vehicle described in § 90.19(A);
and



      (2)   55 days storage for a vehicle described in § 90.19(B).



   (B)   Implied consent to sale.  A registered owner who fails to
claim the impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under
§ 90.19 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to
the disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title.



§ 90.23  DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.



   (A)   Auction or sale.



      (1)   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents
taken into custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under §
90.21, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible
pursuant to §§ 90.20 and 90.21.



      (2)   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title
to dispose of the vehicle.  The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to
register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and claims of ownership.  Before a vehicle is issued a new
certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.



   (B)   Unsold vehicles.  Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the
city or public impound lots pursuant to division (A) of this section shall be
disposed of in accordance with § 90.24.



   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities.  From the proceeds of a sale
under this section by the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or
unauthorized motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of
towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice
and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this
chapter.  Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city.



   (D)   Sale proceeds; non-public impound lots.



      (1)   The operator of a non-public impound lot may retain any
proceeds derived from a sale conducted under the authority of division (A) of
this section.



      (2)   The operator may retain all proceeds from sale of any
personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that  were not claimed by
the owner or the owner’s agent before the sale, except that any suspected
contraband or other items that likely would be subject to forfeiture in a
criminal trial must be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency.



§ 90.24  DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.



   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal.  The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than five abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day period.



CHAPTER 91:  HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES



Section



Burning Prohibitions, Restrictions and Regulations



   91.01   Negligent fires



   91.02   Open burning or leaves



   91.03   Campfires



   91.04   Food preparation or recreational fires



   91.05   Recreational burning in a pit



General Nuisances



   91.20   Noise, odor and the like



   91.21   Grass, weeds and trees in streets



   91.22   Noise, noisy parties or gatherings and electronic sound
system/audio equipment



   91.23   Visibility at street intersections



Public Nuisances



   91.35   Public nuisance defined



   91.36   Public nuisances affecting health



   91.37   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   91.38   Duties of city officers



   91.39   Enforcement



   91.40   Abatement by city



   91.41   Recovery of cost



   91.42   Coal tar sealant products



 



   91.99   Penalty



BURNING PROHIBITIONS, RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS



§ 91.01  NEGLIGENT FIRES.



   It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit a fire to get out of
control and thereby create an unreasonable risk and high degree of
probability of damage or injury to another and the property or person of
another.



(`86 Code, § 8.31)  (Am. Ord. 744, passed 4-4-00)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.02  OPEN BURNING OF LEAVES.



   (A)   Subject to applicable Minnesota Statutes and regulations the
open burning of dried leaves only between October 15 and November 15 is
hereby permitted subject to the stated limits and conditions of the city code.



   (B)   (1)   The burning should be limited to areas of the city
zoned and used for residential purposes only.



      (2)   Burning shall be permitted only between the hours of
2:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.



      (3)   All burning shall be conducted a minimum of 25 feet from
all buildings, structures, flammable materials and tall grasses and weeds.



      (4)   No person shall kindle a fire on land of another without
first obtaining permission of the owner or his or her agent.



      (5)   No burning is permitted in any public streets.  Any
burning that takes place on the in-drive of a property owned or occupied by
the burner must be cleaned following the burning.



      (6)   All fires shall be attended at all times by a person of
suitable age and discretion.



      (7)   No burning shall take place during an air pollution
alert, warning or emergency declared by the Pollution Control Agency or
during a fire alert or warning declared by the city and the Fire Chief may
prohibit burning of leaves when atmospheric or local conditions make the
burning hazardous.



      (8)   The burning of other refuse is prohibited.



(`86 Code, § 8.31)  (Am. Ord. 744, passed 4-4-00)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  CAMPFIRES.



   Camp fires in a commercial recreational campground are permitted within
a properly constructed fire ring, but limited to one fire ring per camp site.



(`86 Code, § 8.31)  (Am. Ord. 744, passed 4-4-00)



§ 91.04  FOOD PREPARATION OR RECREATIONAL FIRES.



   Fires set for food preparation or social purposes are allowed without a
permit provided that only unpainted and untreated wood or charcoal is burned
and provided further the fire is contained within a grill, firebox made of
metal, fireplace or other fire burning equipment designated for such purpose
and further complies with all other state regulations pertaining to open
burning.



(`86 Code, § 8.31)  (Am. Ord. 744, passed 4-4-00)



§ 91.05  RECREATIONAL BURNING IN A PIT.



   (A)   The burn pit cannot exceed three feet in diameter and must be
at least 18 inches deep.



   (B)   (1)   Fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a
building or combustible materials unless contained in a barbecue pit.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         BUILDING.  As defined in the 1997 Uniform Fire Code,
adopted by the City Council.



   (C)   No materials other than untreated wood or charcoal may be
burned for recreational purposes.



   (D)   The fire cannot be larger than three feet diameter and the
flames cannot be higher than three feet.



   (E)   Buckets, shovels, garden hoses or fire extinguishers shall be
readily available.



   (F)   Fires shall be constantly attended by a person knowledgeable
in the use of extinguishing equipment.



   (G)   The fire shall be supervised by an adult until fully
extinguished.



   (H)   The Fire Department or Police Department may require the fire
to be extinguished if it becomes a hazardous situation or there are
complaints about smoke from the neighbors.



(`86 Code, § 8.31)  (Am. Ord. 744, passed 4-4-00)



GENERAL NUISANCES



§ 91.20  NOISE, ODOR AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, liquid or
solid wastes, heat, glare, dust or other adverse influences shall be
permitted in any district that will in any way have an objectionable effect
upon adjacent or nearby property.  All wastes in all districts shall be
disposed of in a manner that is not dangerous to public health and safety nor
will damage public waste transmission or disposal facilities.  No uses of
property shall be permitted that cause public nuisance conditions.



   (B)   Measurements of noise shall not exceed the minimum noise
requirements by state noise statutes set forth is Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as it
may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   The following vibrations are prohibited:



      (1)   Any vibration discernible (beyond property line) to the
human sense of feeling for three minutes or more duration in any one hour;
and/or



      (2)   Any vibration resulting in any combination of amplitudes
and frequencies beyond the “safe” range of most current standards of the
U.S. Bureau of Mines on any structure.



(`86 Code, § 9.52)  (Am. Ord. 785, passed 2-5-02)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.21  GRASS, WEEDS AND TREES IN STREETS.



   (A)   The city shall have control and supervision over all shrubs
and trees upon, or overhanging all streets, rights-of-way or other public
property, and all grass plats upon streets or other public property.



   (B)   Every owner of property abutting on any street shall cause the
grass and weeds to be cut from the property.  If the grass or weeds in such
a place attain a height in excess of six inches it shall be prima facie
evidence of a failure to comply with this section.



   (C)   A permit must be obtained at City Hall before planting any
tree in any right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city.  Trees are
to be purchased and planted by the property owner of the land abutting the
right-of-way or by the person retained by the property owner.  Varieties of
trees approved are trees of the hardwood variety, good appearance, adaptable
to the climate, long life cycle and generally free from injurious insects and
diseases.  No person shall plant bushes, shrubs or hedges within a city
right-of-way.  The City Council shall adopt a tree planting permit policy
within city rights-of-way.



   (D)   The city will perform all trimming of right-of-way trees. 
Residents, through a permit process, may contract a tree service to trim an
adjacent right-of-way tree.  The property owner shall bear the entire cost
of tree trimming when using a contracted tree service.  The City Council
shall adopt a tree trimming permit policy within city rights-of-way.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any
person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other
tree on public property.  Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of
limbs to stubs within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.  Any person or firm which has received
approval for the trimming of trees on public property or right-of-way shall
use trimming practices as outlined in the city’s tree policy.  Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruninq practices are impractical may
be exempted from this subchapter according to city tree policy.  Violation
of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Every owner of any property upon which any tree
overhanging any street or right-of-way is located, shall trim the branches of
the tree in a manner that the branches shall not obstruct the light of any
street light or the view of any street intersection, and in such a manner
that there exists a clear space of eight feet above any sidewalk or
right-of-way and 14 feet above any street (mature trees) beneath the tree.



   (E)   The city will remove trees that are determined by the city’s
Park Director to be diseased, dying, dangerous or is a public nuisance or
hazard.  The City Council shall adopt a tree removal permit policy within
city rights-of-way.



      (1)   In the event an owner of an abutting property request a
permit for removal of a tree, the owner shall remove the tree in accordance
with policy regulations established and that the owner assume all or any part
of the cost of the removal if “just cause” is not verified.



      (2)   Every such owner shall remove any dead, diseased or
dangerous tree, or any broken or decayed limb, in which tree or limb may
endanger the public.  The city may trim any tree or shrub located on private
property, in event tree or shrub obstructs the light of street lights, or
obstructs the visibility of any traffic-control device or sign, provided that
trimming be confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way.



   (F)   The city shall serve notice upon the owner of the property to
trim or remove the tree, limb, shrub nuisance stating that in the event the
owner does not comply with the order, the city shall perform the work,
keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece or parcel
of land abutting the street.  The city’s Park Director shall prepare and
mail to the owner an invoice setting forth the charge for the work, which
charge shall be immediately due and payable at City Hall.



   (G)   If the maintenance work is performed by the city as set forth
in the foregoing subdivision, the City Manager shall forthwith upon
completion thereof ascertain the cost attributable to each lot, piece or
parcel of abutting land.  The City Manager shall, at the next regular
meeting thereof, present the certificate to the Council and obtain its
approval thereof.  When the certificate has been approved it shall be
extended as to the cost therein stated as a special assessment against such
abutting land and the special assessment shall, at the time of certifying
taxes to the County Auditor, be certified for collection as other special
assessments are certified and collected.



   (H)   No person shall willfully damage, injure, mar, deface or
destroy any street tree, park tree or other trees on public property. 
Violation of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 791, passed 5-7-02)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.22  NOISE, NOISY PARTIES OR GATHERINGS AND ELECTRONIC SOUND
SYSTEM/AUDIO EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Noisy parties and gatherings.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to permit or to be present
at or participating in a noisy party or gathering of people from which noise
emanates of sufficient volume or nature so as to disturb the peace, quiet or
comfort of another or interferes with the right of another to use peacefully
his or her property, whether on public or private property. It shall be
presumed that a violation of this section has occurred when any noise from a
gathering is audible, at a distance of 50 feet or more, between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person, owning or possessing
property upon which a party or gathering prohibited herein is in progress, to
fail to abate such noise upon as order of a police officer. When a police
officer has probable cause that a violation of this section is occurring, the
officer may order all persons present, other than the property owner or
person in possession of the property, to leave the property immediately and
failure of any person, other than the owner or person in possession of the
property, to refuse to leave after being so ordered by the police officer
shall be unlawful.



   (B)   Electronic sound system/audio equipment.



      (1)   No person shall use or operate any electronic sound
system or audio equipment including, but not limited to, any compact disc
player, cassette tape player AM-FM radio, citizen band radio, paging system,
or any other device designed to produce or reproduce audio sound; in such an
unreasonable loud manner that disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of
others or interferes with the right of another to use peacefully his or her
property or public property without disturbance.



      (2)   It shall be presumed that a violation of this section
had occurred when any electronic sound system or audio equipment is operated
in a manner in which it is audible at a distance of 50 feet or more.



      (3)   When sound violating this section is produced by an
electronic sound system or audio equipment that is located in or on a
vehicle, the vehicle's owner is in violation of this section, provided that
if the vehicle's owner is not present, the person in charge of the vehicle at
the time of the violation is guilty of the violation.



      (4)   This section shall not apply to sound produced by the
following:



         (a)   Amplifying equipment used in connection with
activities for which a permit has been granted or in connection with
activities of any organized school, church, civic, or other event or activity
open to the public;



         (b)   Anti-theft devices;



         (c)   Church bells, chimes or carillons, school bells,
or emergency civil defense warning signals; and



         (d)   Authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicle
required by law to be equipped with sound devices.



(`86 Code, § 9.52)  (Ord. 785, passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 855, passed
9-7-04)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.23  VISIBILITY AT STREET INTERSECTIONS.



   On corner lots (including rural areas), nothing shall be placed or
allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a
height of two and one-half and ten feet above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets within the shaded area of the clear sight triangle shown
below. The point of intersection dimensions shown are based upon the
projected intersection of the gutter lines in the case of urban design
sections, or the outside edge of the projected intersection of the designated
shoulders in the case of rural design sections, or in the case of combination
urban and rural design sections, the projected intersection of the gutter
line and the projected outside edge of the shoulder.







 



(Ord. 884, passed 12-6-05)



PUBLIC NUISANCES



§ 91.35  PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.



   Whoever, by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty,
intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public
nuisance, which is a petty misdemeanor:



   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which reasonably annoys,
injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public;



   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage,
any street, public right-of-way or waters used by the public; or



   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this
subchapter to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically
provided.



(`86 Code, § 8.55)  (Am. Ord. 687, passed 11-19-96)



§ 91.36  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health.



   (A)   Accumulations; organic matter.



      (1)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter; and



      (2)   Accumulations of manure.



   (B)   Accumulations; refuse and debris.



      (1)   Accumulations of refuse or other debris; and



      (2)   Garbage cans and privy vaults which are not rodent-free
or fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or
to emit foul and disagreeable odors.



      (3)   See also: Waseca Property Maintenance Code, Section
302.1.



   (C)   Animals at large, rodents and vermin.



      (1)   All diseased animals running at large;



      (2)   Wandering livestock, including poultry, cattle, sheep or
horses;



      (3)   Rodents and vermin, as defined by state law. See also:
Waseca Property Maintenance Code, Section 302.5; and



      (4)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24
hours after death.



   (D)   Air, water, wastewater and soil pollution.



      (1)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;



      (2)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or
lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other
substances; the effluence from any cesspool; septic tank, drain field or
human sewage disposal system discharging upon the surface of the ground or
dumping the contents thereof at any place;



      (3)   Discharge of toxic or noxious matter across the
boundaries of any lot or through percolation into the atmosphere or the
subsoil beyond the boundaries of the lot wherein such use is located; toxic
or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger
the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or damage to
property or businesses; and



      (4)   Emissions of smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, other
particulate matter or cinders, to a degree that is detrimental to or
endangering public health, safety, comfort or general welfare.  For the
purpose of this subchapter, the regulations and standards adopted by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency shall apply.



   (E)   Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds, as defined by state law. See
also: Waseca Property Maintenance Code, Section 302.4.



   (F)   Refrigerators and other containers; exposed and accessible. 
The ownership, possession or control of any unused refrigerator or other
container, with doors which fasten automatically when closed, or sufficient
size to retain any person, to be exposed and accessible to the public without
removing the doors, lids, hinges or latches or providing locks to prevent
access by the public.



(`86 Code, § 8.55)  (Am. Ord. 687, passed 11-19-96; Am. Ord. 1016, passed
3-18-14)



§ 91.37  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety.



   (A)   Unattended or discarded furniture, appliances, materials and
debris.



      (1)   Unless housed in or placed upon a lawfully erected
building or receptacle; household furnishings or appliances, discarded or
disused machinery, automobile bodies, paper, boxes, wood, metal, concrete,
cans, bottles, trash, ashes or debris of any description whatsoever
unattended or accumulating, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items
so accumulated;



      (2)   The sorting, piling or keeping of old machinery or other
junk or debris upon any public or private property; and



      (3)   Placing paper, materials, litter or debris on public or
private property, including parked vehicles or throwing paper, litter or
debris from motor vehicles or buildings.



   (B)   Woodpiles and brushpiles.



      (1)   Woodpiles, unless erected, located and maintained as
follows:



         (a)   In neat and secure stacks;



         (b)   At a height of not more than six feet;



         (c)   Stored in the rear yard at least five feet away
from any lot line and at least ten feet away from any structure; and



         (d)   Wood stacks, together with accessory structures in
the rear yard, shall not occupy more than 25% of the rear yard area.



      (2)   Wood stored or kept in a covered structure impervious to
the elements is exempt from the conditions outlined in this division.  No
wood held for resale or any commercial use shall be stored on any residential
property in the city.



      (3)   Brushpiles which are fire hazards or otherwise
detrimental to the health or appearance of a neighborhood.



   (C)   Grass, weeds and leaves; unkempt and/or unattended.



      (1)   Any grass or weeds taller than six inches in height; or



      (2)   Grass clippings or leaves raked or placed in city
streets or upon any city right-of-way.



      (3)   See also: Waseca Property Maintenance Code, Section
302.4.



   (D)   Inoperable motor vehicle, racing cars and stock cars.



      (1)   The keeping, storing or permitting the parking of an
inoperable motor vehicle, racing car or stock car upon any public or private
property, with the exception of cars bearing current state license and being
repaired on property zoned for the activity and at a facility meeting
state’s Building Code and other applicable state standards for performing
the work.



      (2)   Servicing, repairing, replacing parts or doing
maintenance work on an inoperable motor vehicle, racing car or stock car on a
public street or on any private lands or premises unless it shall be within a
building on such private premises that is authorized by the zoning ordinance,
state’s Building Code and other applicable state law for conducting the
activity.



      (3)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         INOPERABLE.   Lacking vital component parts essential to
the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to the
motor, drive train and wheels.



         INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.   Any vehicle which is
inoperable, or which is partially dismantled, or which is used for sale of
parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicle, or
which is kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is
not properly licensed for operation within the state by the state.



         RACING CAR.   Any motor vehicle designed or intended for
operation on a speedway, racetrack or other facility used or designed for
high speed contests between two or more vehicles or for timing of speed.



         STOCK CAR.  Any motor vehicle of standard design and
construction which is modified, adapted or altered in any manner to increase
its speed or safety, and designed or intended for operation on a speedway,
racetrack or other facility used or designed for high speed contests between
two or more vehicles or for timing of speed.



   (E)   Obstructions in the public right-of-way and interference with
lines of sight.



      (1)   Placing objects, including gravel, stones and
landscaping materials, on any portion of a public right-of-way or roadway
easement dedicated to the public.



      (2)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary
public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such
conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law.



      (3)   Placing any architectural projection, sign, fence or
object within clear sigh triangle areas at street intersections, as defined
in this code of ordinances.



      (4)   Installing or growing trees, shrubbery or other
vegetation within clear sight triangle areas at street intersections, as
defined in this code of ordinances, or set back less than 15 feet from any
street right-of-way, alley right-of-way or driveway, unless the vegetation is
2½ feet or shorter in height.



      (5)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures
over streets and sidewalks situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance.



      (6)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or
sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds
of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or
sidewalk.



   (F)   Causing or allowing conditions that endanger public safety.



      (1)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24
hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased
to fall, pursuant to this code of ordinances.



      (2)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or
maintained in a dangerous manner.



      (3)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any
building or structure so as to accumulate upon any sidewalk.



      (4)   Shrubbery or other obstructions preventing view of
street address numerals from the street right-of-way.



      (5)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place,
or so situated or operated on private property as to attract the public.



      (6)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets
or other public properties.



      (7)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left
uncovered or in such other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child
or other person coming on the premises where it is located.



      (8)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the
ground and within three feet of a public sidewalk or way.



      (9)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural
waterway or a public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash or other
materials.



      (10)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or
other public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance
which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when
passing over the substance.



      (11)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public
right-of-way or on adjacent private property.



      (12)   All other conditions or things which are likely to
cause injury to the person or property of anyone.



   (G)   Noises.  Causing or allowing unnecessary noises, in violation
of § 91.20.



(`86 Code, § 8.55)  (Am. Ord. 687, passed 11-19-96; Am. Ord. 780, passed
11-20-01; Am. Ord. 792, passed 5-7-02; Am. Ord. 1016, passed 3-18-14)



§ 91.38  DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   Any officer of the Waseca Police Department, or any other person
employed by the city, authorized in writing by the City Manager shall have
authority to enforce the provisions of this subchapter relating to nuisances
affecting public safety, and the Police Department or other authorized
employees shall enforce provisions relating to other nuisances and shall
assist the other designated officers in the enforcement of provisions
relating to nuisances affecting public safety.  The officers or other
authorized employees shall have the power to inspect private premises and
take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of
public nuisances.



(`86 Code, § 8.55)  (Am. Ord. 687, passed 11-19-96; Am. Ord. 1016, passed
3-18-14)



§ 91.39  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Notice to abate.  Whenever a nuisance, as defined by this
subchapter is determined to exist, the designated officer shall serve a
written notice to abate the nuisance within ten days.  The notice may be
served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises or by mail.  If
the premises are unoccupied, the notice may be served by posting it on the
premises.



   (B)   Permitting a public nuisance.  It is unlawful for any person
to permit real property under his or her control to be used to maintain a
public nuisance, or let the same to another knowing it is to be so used.



   (C)   Violations.  A violation of this subchapter shall be a petty
misdemeanor, provided that the offender has been given notice to abate as
provided above.  A second violation within three years of a prior conviction
under this subchapter shall be a misdemeanor.



(`86 Code, § 8.55)  (Am. Ord. 687, passed 11-19-96)



§ 91.40  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   (A)   Civil actions.  The city may exercise the powers granted
under M.S. §§ 463.15 et seq., as the same may be from time to time amended,
or may institute any other appropriate civil proceeding to abate nuisances.



   (B)   Emergency abatement; summary enforcement.  In cases of
emergency, where delay in abatement required to complete the notice and
procedure requirements set forth in this section will permit a continuing
nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.  To proceed
with summary enforcement, the officer charged with enforcement shall
determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in
the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably
endanger public health, safety or welfare.  The enforcement officer shall
notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the
nuisance and of the city’s intention to seek summary enforcement.  The
City Council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the
notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety
or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to
complete the procedure set forth in this section, and may order that the
nuisance be immediately terminated or abated.  If the nuisance is not
immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.



   (C)   Immediate abatement.  Nothing in this subchapter shall
prevent the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating
any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or
safety.



(`86 Code, § 8.55)  (Am. Ord. 687, passed 11-19-96)



§ 91.41  RECOVERY OF COST.



   (A)   Personal liability.  The owner of premises on which a
nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost
to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs.  As soon as
the work has been completed and the cost determined, the Finance Department
shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.  Thereupon, the
amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the Finance
Director.



   (B)   Assessment.  If the nuisance is a public health or safety
hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks or ways, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the
traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the Finance
Department shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other such charges as
well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or
parcel to which the charges are attributable.  The Council may then spread
the charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding
ten, as the Council may determine in each case.



(`86 Code, § 8.55)  (Am. Ord. 687, passed 11-19-96)



§ 91.42  COAL TAR SEALANT PRODUCTS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The City of Waseca understands that lakes, rivers,
streams and other bodies of water are natural assets which enhance the
environmental, recreational, cultural and economic resources and contribute
to the general health and welfare of the community.



      (2)   The use of sealers on asphalt driveways is a common
practice.  However, scientific studies on the use of driveway sealers have
demonstrated a relationship between stormwater runoff and certain health and
environmental concerns.



      (3)   The 2013 Minnesota Legislature enacted a statewide
prohibition on the use and sale of coal tar sealant products.  This new
statewide prohibition has been codified under M.S. § 116.202 and is
effective on January 1, 2014.



      (4)   The purpose of this section is to prohibit violations of
M.S. § 116.202 in the City of Waseca, Minnesota, in order to protect,
restore, and preserve the quality of its waters.



   (B)   Definitions.  Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly
implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted
definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:



      ASPHALT BASED SEALER.   A petroleum based sealer material that
is commonly used on driveways, parking lots, and other surfaces and does
contain PAHs.



      CITY.   The City of Waseca.



      COAL TAR.   A byproduct of the process used to refine coal.



      COAL TAR SEALANT PRODUCT.   A surface applied sealing product
containing coal tar, coal tar pitch, coal tar pitch volatiles, or any
variation assigned the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers 65996-93-2,
65996-89-6, or 8007-45-2.



      MPCA.   The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



      PAHs.   Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.  A group of organic
chemicals formed during the incomplete burning of coal, oil, gas, or other
organic substances.  Present in coal tar and believed harmful to humans,
fish, and other aquatic life.



   (C)   Prohibitions.  In accordance with M.S. § 116.202:



      (1)   No person shall apply a coal tar sealant product on
asphalt paved surfaces within the city.



      (2)   No person shall allow a coal tar sealant product to be
applied upon property that is under that person’s ownership or control.



      (3)   No person shall contract with any commercial sealer
product applicator, residential or commercial developer, or any other person
for the application of any coal tar sealant product to any driveway, parking
lot, or other surface within the city.



      (4)   No commercial sealer product applicator, residential or
commercial developer, or other similar individual or organization shall
direct any employee, independent contractor, volunteer, or other person to
apply any coal tar sealant product to any driveway, parking lot, or other
surface within the city.



   (D)   Exemption.  Upon the express written approval from the MPCA
and in accordance with M.S. § 116.202, a person who conducts research on the
environmental effects of coal tar sealant product or where the use of coal
tar sealant product is necessary in the development of an alternative
technology shall be exempt from the prohibitions provided in division (C) of
this section.  Any person that is granted approval by the MPCA must provide
a copy of the written approval from the MPCA to the City of Waseca, Minnesota
20 days before conducting the research.



   (E)   Asphalt based sealcoat products.  The provisions of this
section shall only apply to coal tar sealant products in the city and shall
not affect the use of asphalt based sealer products within the city.



(Ord. 1014, passed 2-18-14)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty has been provided shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of § 91.42 is
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, plus the costs of
prosecution in either case.



(Ord. 1014, passed 2-18-14)



CHAPTER 92:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Proper operation and maintenance



   92.03   Informational sheet



   92.04   User fees



   92.05   Confidentiality of records



   92.06   Intentional false alarms



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  A device or system that emits, transmits or relays a
signal intended to summon or that would reasonably be expected to summon
public safety services of the city.  For the purpose of this chapter, ALARM
SYSTEM does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is
permanently located at a site.



   ALARM USER.  The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind that uses an alarm system to protect its
premises, regardless of whether it owns or leases the system.



   CALENDAR YEAR.  The period from January 1 through December 31 of each
year.



   FALSE ALARM.  Any activation of an alarm system that results in a
response by public safety personnel where an emergency does not exist. 
FALSE ALARM includes, but is not limited to activation of an alarm system
through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, negligent use
or maintenance of the alarm system by the alarm user or the alarm user's
employee or agents or the failure of a keyholder to respond to an alarm. 
FALSE ALARM does not include alarm activation caused by utility company power
outages, by climatic conditions such as unusually strong winds or lightning
or by any other conditions that are clearly beyond the control of the alarm
manufacturer, installer and user. FALSE ALARM does not include activation of
an alarm system as the result of an effort or order to upgrade, install, test
or maintain the system if the Waseca County Law Enforcement Dispatch and,
where applicable, the central monitoring agency for the alarm system are each
notified before the work on the alarm system.



(`86 Code, § 4.64)



§ 92.02  PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The alarm user shall maintain the alarm system and premises in
a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms.



   (B)   The alarm user or a designated representative shall appear at
the alarm system location within a reasonable period of time when notified by
the County Law Enforcement Dispatch or Police Department to deactivate a
malfunctioning alarm system or to provide access to the premises.  Inability
to reach an alarm user's representative is a failure to respond.



   (C)   Alarm systems with exterior audible signals shall be set so
that the exterior signal will not sound for more than ten minutes after the
alarm has been activated.



(`86 Code, § 4.64)



§ 92.03  INFORMATIONAL SHEET.



   Each alarm user shall file with the County Law Enforcement Dispatch and
the Police Department an informational sheet established by public safety
personnel with the information as may be required.



(`86 Code, § 4.64)



§ 92.04  USER FEES.



   (A)   Any alarm user that produces a false alarm and does not have
an informational sheet on file as provided in § 92.03 shall be charged a
user fee per false alarm of an amount set by the City Council.



   (B)   Fees charged per calendar year and per false alarm shall be
set by the City Council.



   (C)   Alarm user fees must be paid to the city within 30 days from
the date of written notice by the city to the alarm user.  Fees under appeal
pursuant to division (E) below must be paid within five days written notice
of denial of appeal or within 30 days of the original written notice,
whichever is greater. Fees not paid within the time specified will be subject
to a 10% penalty charge.



   (D)   All delinquent charges shall be certified to the city who
shall prepare an assessment roll providing for assessment of the delinquent
amounts against the respective properties.  This assessment roll shall be
delivered to the Council for adoption in the manner provided by law.  The
action may be optional or subsequent to taking legal action to collect
delinquent accounts.



   (E)   An alarm user charged with an alarm user fee may make a
written appeal of the false alarm charge to the City Manager within 15 days
notice of the charge.  The City Manager will make the final determination
whether the appeal will be upheld or denied.



(`86 Code, § 4.64)  (Am. Ord. 739, passed 11-16-99)



§ 92.05  CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.



   All information and statistics collected and maintained in the
administration of this chapter shall be deemed nonpublic data and security
information exempt from disclosure pursuant to state statute.



(`86 Code, § 4.64)



§ 92.06  INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARMS.



   No person shall intentionally cause a false alarm.



(`86 Code, § 4.64)  (Am. Ord. 723, passed 8-4-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 93:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section



   93.01   Fire prevention; escape plan



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see § 31.06



§ 93.01  FIRE PREVENTION; ESCAPE PLAN.



   (A)   Every structure or part thereof rented as a dwelling
containing four units or more shall conform to the requirements of this
section regardless of when the structure may have been constructed or
repaired, except dormitories owned and controlled by an established
educational institution and motel or hotel rooms customarily rented for one
night only.



   (B)   (1)   Every owner or agent thereof shall have a fire
prevention and escape plan which shall include the following:



         (a)   Smoking regulations;



         (b)   Provision for the storage of flammable liquids;



         (c)   Fire extinguisher locations;



         (d)   Fire door identification and operating
instructions; and



         (e)   Fire escape routes and alternate routes where
applicable.



      (2)   The plan shall be given to each tenant and shall be
available to city officials at all reasonable times.



(`86 Code, § 8.85)



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Construction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk and the like;
reconstruction



   94.02   Vacation of streets



   94.03   Obstructions



   94.04   Identifiable address



   94.05   Sewer and water main service lateral installation



   94.06   Load limits



   94.07   Private use of public streets and lots



   94.08   Curb setback



Right-of-Way Management



   94.20   Definitions



   94.21   Administration



   94.22   Registration and right-of-way occupancy



   94.23   Registration information



   94.24   Reporting obligations



   94.25   Permit requirement



   94.26   Permit applications



   94.27   Issuance of permit; conditions



   94.28   Permit fees



   94.29   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   94.30   Joint applications



   94.31   Supplementary applications



   94.32   Other obligations



   94.33   Denial of permit



   94.34   Installation requirements



   94.35   Inspection



   94.36   Work done without a permit



   94.37   Supplementary notification



   94.38   Revocation of permits



   94.39   Mapping data



   94.40   Location of facilities



   94.41   Relocation of facilities



   94.42   Damage to other facilities



   94.43   Right-of-way vacation



   94.44   Indemnification and liability



   94.45   Completion certificate



   94.46   Abandoned and unusable facilities



   94.47   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



Cross-reference:



   Visibility at street intersections, see § 91.23



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  CONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY SURFACING, SIDEWALK AND THE LIKE;
RECONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Methods of procedure.



      (1)   Abutting or affected property owners may contract for,
construct or reconstruct roadway surfacing, sidewalk or curb and gutter in
accordance with this section if advance payment is made therefor or
arrangements for payment considered adequate by the Council are completed in
advance.



      (2)   With or without petition by the methods set forth in the
Local Improvement Code, M.S.§§ 429.011 et seq., as the same may from time
to time be amended.



   (B)   Permit required.



      (1)   It is unlawful to construct a sidewalk, curb and gutter,
or roadway surfacing in any street or other public property in this city
without a permit in writing from the Council. Application for the permit
shall be made on forms approved and provided by the city and shall
sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of
beginning of work, and the length of time required for any improvement
ordered installed by the Council.  All applications shall contain an
agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and, as to roadway and
curb and gutter improvements, plans and specifications consistent with the
provisions of this chapter and good engineering practices shall also
accompany the application.  A permit from the city shall not relieve the
holder from damages to the person or property of another caused by the work.



      (2)   It is unlawful to cut the curb on any street or public
property in the city without first having obtained a written permit to do so
from the City Manager or, by his or her designation, the Director of
Engineering.  The permit to cut the curb shall be obtained from the Council
where the contemplated improvement is in any public street or public property
abutting or within areas zoned commercial or where proposed improvement is on
State Highway 13 or U.S. Highway 14.



      (3)   No permit shall be issued for construction of the
sidewalk, curb and gutter, or the roadway surfacing except in accordance with
the provisions herein contained.



   (C)   Specifications and regulations.



      (1)   All sidewalks and curb and gutter constructed in or upon
any street or other public property shall be constructed according to the
specifications on file with the Director of Engineering.



      (2)   Before any construction work is begun, the city will
furnish stakes for the establishment of grade and for the lines of the
improvement and all construction therein shall be in accordance with
established grades and lines, and costs of the engineering shall become a
part of the cost of the project and assessed accordingly.



   (D)   Inspection.  The Council shall designate a suitable and
competent person to perform inspection required herein and other inspection
of the work as deemed necessary.  Any work not done according to the plans
and specifications, including the specification of file with the Director of
Engineering, shall be removed and corrected at the expense of the permit
holder.  Any work done hereunder may be stopped by the Inspector if found to
be unsatisfactory, but this shall not place a burden upon the city to
continually inspect or supervise the work.



(`86 Code, § 5.03)



§ 94.02  VACATION OF STREETS.



   (A)   No public grounds or streets shall be vacated except upon the
Council's own motion or upon the petition directed to the Council of a
majority of the owners of property on the line of the public grounds or
streets residing within the city, and completion of the procedure hereinafter
specified.  The petition shall set forth the reasons for the desired
vacation, accompanied by a plat of the public grounds or streets proposed to
be vacated, and the petition shall be verified by the oath of a majority of
the petitioners residing within the city.



   (B)   If, in the discretion of the Council, it is expedient that the
matter be proceeded with, it may order the petition filed for record with the
Records Administrative Secretary, order a hearing on the petition and fix the
time and place of the hearing.



   (C)   The Records Administrative Secretary shall give notice of the
hearing by publication once at least 15 days in advance of the hearing, and
by mail to the last known address of all the owners of property on the line
of the public grounds or streets proposed to be vacated at least ten days in
advance of the hearing, the last known addresses to be obtained from the
office of the County Auditor.  The notice shall state in brief the object of
the hearing, the time, place and purpose thereof, and the fact that the
Council, or a board or commission designated by them, shall hear the
testimony and examine the evidence of the parties interested.



   (D)   The Council, after hearing the same, or upon the report of the
Board or Commission designated to hold the hearings, may be ordinance passed
by a vote of at least five members, declare the public grounds or streets
vacated, or deny the petition.  The ordinance, if granting the petition,
shall be certified by the Records Administrative Secretary and shall be filed
for record and duly recorded in the county office of the County Recorder.



(`86 Code, § 5.05)



§ 94.03  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit any
fence or other obstruction upon any street without first having obtained a
written permit to do so from the City Manager, and then only in compliance in
all respects with the terms and conditions of the permit, and taking
precautionary measures for the protection of the public.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a
fire upon a roadway.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in any
street or any other public place any nails, dirt, glass, tin cans, metal
scraps, garbage, shreds or rubbish or to empty any water containing salt or
other injurious chemical thereon.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain a
sign or other appurtenance in the traveled or untraveled portion of any
street.  In a district zoned for commercial or industrial enterprises,
special permission allowing an applicant to erect and maintain signs
overhanging the street maybe granted upon the terms and conditions as may be
set forth in the zoning or construction provisions of the city code.



(`86 Code, § 5.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.04  IDENTIFIABLE ADDRESS.



   (A)   (1)   Every principal residential building shall be
identified with its legal street address in numerical form.  The numerals
shall be at least three inches in height, and either contrasting in color
from the principal building, made of reflective material or illuminated. 
The numerals (street numbers) which shall be readable from the nearest
adjacent roadway serving the premises.



      (2)   Should the building numerals not be visible from the
roadway, an address post displaying the identification numerals of the same
minimum height shall be placed adjacent to the driveway in a manner as to be
readable from the roadway.



   (B)   Numerals identifying street addresses for commercial and
industrial buildings, including multiple-family dwellings shall be a minimum
of six inches high and shall comply with the other requirements of division
(A) above.  All buildings having multiple street addresses shall be required
to identify rear door entrances in the same manner as main entrances.



   (C)   No property owner will be subject to prosecution for violation
of this section until after two written warnings have been sent to them by a
representative of the city.



(`86 Code, § 5.08)  (Am. Ord. 560, passed 5-4-86)



§ 94.05  SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL INSTALLATION.



   (A)   No petition for the improvement of a street shall be
considered by the Council if the petition contemplates construction therein
any part of a pavement or stabilized base, or curb and gutter, unless all
sewer and water main installations shall have been made therein, including
the installation of service laterals to the curb, if the area along the
street will be served by the utilities installed in the street.



   (B)   No sewer system shall be hereafter constructed or extended
unless service lateral to platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be
extended simultaneously with construction of mains.



   (C)   The Council may waive the requirements of this section only if
it finds the effects thereof are burdensome and upon notice and hearing as
the Council may deem necessary or proper.



(`86 Code, § 5.10)



§ 94.06  LOAD LIMITS.



   (A)   All streets classified as local shall be designed for and
restricted to a seven-ton axle loading unless posted otherwise.  All streets
classified as collectors and all municipal state aid streets shall be
designed for and restricted to a nine-ton axle loading unless otherwise
posted.  The Director of Engineering may impose lower load limits on streets
if, in the judgement of the Director of Engineering, the structural integrity
of the street warrants the action.  Signs shall be posted indicating the
lower load limit.



   (B)   Anyone operating a vehicle upon a city street in violation of
division (A) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (C)   During the spring load limit period (as designated by the
Minnesota Department of Transportation), all seven-ton axle-loading streets
shall be restricted to a five-ton axle-loading streets. During the period of
time, all nine-ton axle-loading streets shall be reduced to a seven-ton axle
loading. All other posted streets shall be restricted to an axle loading of
one ton less than the posted limit.



   (D)   The Director of Engineering may issue special permits to
exceed the load limit when in the judgement of the Director it is
necessary.  The Director of Engineering shall issue the permits in
writing.  The permits shall include the specific date of any special permit
and any conditions attached to the use of the special permit.  The permit
shall be in the possession of the user during its use.



   (E)   (1)   The Police Department shall have the authority to
require vehicles to be weighed at any time to determine if the vehicle
exceeds the axle load limit.



      (2)   In the event the vehicle exceeds the allowable load
limit, the operator and owner of the vehicle shall be charged pursuant to
division (B) above and, in addition, may be held financially responsible for
the cost to repair any damage to street structure caused by the vehicle.  If
it is determined that the vehicle has not exceeded the axle load limit, the
city shall be responsible for the weighing fee.



(`86 Code, § 5.11)  (Am. Ord. 747, passed 6-6-00)



§ 94.07  PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND LOTS.



   (A)   The Council may, in its discretion, grant special permission
whereby on-street parking or the use of city-owned parking lots or public
sidewalks may be temporarily or permanently prohibited or restricted for
private reasons and purposes, including, but not limited to establishment of
private or “leased” parking, “loading zones” or display of
merchandise on sidewalks, at the places, on the terms and for the
compensation as the Council may deem just and equitable.  In establishing
the amount of the compensation to be paid to the city, the Council shall
consider the amount of space, location thereof, loss of parking meter
revenues, if any, public inconvenience and hazards to persons or property. 
Upon complaint of any aggrieved person at any time and by reason of any
specific special permission so granted, the Council shall, at its next
regular meeting after receipt of the complaint, call a hearing thereon to be
held after a ten-day notice in writing to applicant and complainant and
published notice at least ten days prior to the hearing.  After the hearing,
the Council shall by resolution decide whether to terminate, continue or
redefine the terms of the permission and the decision shall be final and
binding on all persons directly or indirectly interested therein, except that
the Council



   (B)   Free and reserved on-street parking shall be limited to city
owned and operated vehicles.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to park or otherwise infringe
upon a grant of right under this section, when clearly and distinctly marked
or sign-posted.  It is unlawful for any person not granted the right to
assert the same, or for any grantee of the right to exceed the same under
claim thereto.



(`86 Code, § 5.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.08  CURB SETBACK.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to hereafter remove, or cause to
be removed, any curb from its position abutting upon the roadway to another
position without first making written application to the Council and
obtaining a permit therefor.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued until the applicant, and abutting
landowner if other than applicant, shall enter into a written agreement with
the city agreeing to pay all costs of constructing and maintaining the
setback area in at least as good condition as the abutting roadway, and
further agreeing to demolish and remove the setback and reconstruct the area
as was at the expense of the landowner, his or her heirs or assigns if the
area ever, in the Council's opinion, becomes a public hazard.  The agreement
shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and shall run with
the adjoining land.



   (C)   “ANGLE PARKING ONLY” signs shall be purchased from the
city and erected and maintained at the expense of the adjoining landowner in
all setback areas now in use or hereafter constructed.  It is unlawful for
any person to park other than at an angle in the setback areas, as the angle
parking is herein described and allowed.



   (D)   The setback parking areas shall be kept open for public
parking and the abutting landowner shall at no time acquire any special
interest or control of or in the areas.



(`86 Code, § 5.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



§ 94.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED FACILITY.  A facility no longer in service and physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility that is in use or still carries services.  A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.



   APPLICANT.  Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.



   CITY.  The City of Waseca, Minnesota.  For purposes of § 94.47, 
CITY means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents.



   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND.  Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee’s option:



      (1)   Individual project bond;



      (2)   Cash deposit;



      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. §
15.73 (3), as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;



      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and



      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the local government
unit, or other form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form
acceptable to the city.



   DEGRADATION.  A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST.  The cost to achieve a level of restoration as
determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the
maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in proposed PUC Rules
Parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.



   DEGRADATION FEE.  The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation costs.



   DELAY PENALTY.  The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in right-of-way construction or restoration as required.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Public Works of the city.



   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR.  Any person authorized by the Director to carry
out inspections related to the provisions of this subchapter.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Engineering of the city or her or his
designee.



   EMERGENCY.  A condition that:



      (1)   Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or
of a significant loss of property; or



      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities
in order to restore service to a customer.



   EQUIPMENT.  Any tangible asset used to install, repair or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.



   EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this section, must
be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way.  An EXCAVATION
PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in the permit.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in § 94.29.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES.  Any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.



   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN.  Projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years in its Capital Improvement Plan (CIP).  Having
the same meaning as 5-YEAR CIP.



   HOLE.  An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length less than the width of the pavement.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE.  A local person or persons, or designee of such
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
section.



   MANAGEMENT COSTS.  The actual costs the city incurs in managing its
rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way permit
applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining,
supporting, protecting or moving user facilities during right-of-way work;
determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct
the work; and revoking right-of-way permits.  MANAGEMENT COSTS do not
include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the
right-of-way, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation
of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as
they may be amended from time to time, or any ordinance enacted under those
sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant hereto.



   OBSTRUCT.  To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this section, must
be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for
the duration specified therein.  A permit is required for any obstruction
over two hours, or obstructing more than one lane of traffic.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by a permittee to
cover the costs as provided in § 94.29.



   PATCH or PATCHING.



      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature.



      (2)   A PATCH consists of:



         (a)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base;
and



         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement
for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all
directions.



      (3)   A PATCH is considered full restoration only when the
pavement is included in the city’s five-year project plan.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this section.



   PERSON.



      (1)   An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of
this state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or
foreign, whether for profit or non-profit, and whether natural, corporate or
political.



      (2)   Examples include:



         (a)   A business or commercial enterprise organized as
any type or combination of corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited liability partnership, proprietorship, association,
cooperative, joint venture, carrier or utility and any successor or assignee
of any of them;



         (b)   A social or charitable organization; and



         (c)   Any type or combination of political subdivision,
which includes the executive, judicial or legislative branch of the state, a
local government unit, or a combination of any of them.



   PROBATION.  The status of a person that has not complied with the
conditions of this section.



   PROBATIONARY PERIOD.  One year from the date that a person has been
notified in writing that they have been put on probation.



   REGISTRANT.  Any person who:



      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located
in any right-of-way; or



      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or place its facilities in the right-of-way.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION.  The process by which an excavated public
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement, foundation and
associated landscaping is returned to the same condition that existed prior
to excavation.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane, public sidewalk and boulevard in which the
city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of the city.  A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include
the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.  Either the excavation permit or the obstruction
permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this section.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.



      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
M.S. § 237.162 (4), as it may be amended from time to time; or



      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the public
right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility
service, and who has a right under law, franchise or ordinance to use the
public right-of-way.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION.  An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.



   TEMPORARY SURFACE.  The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation.  It is temporary in nature, except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is
considered full restoration.



   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.



   TWO-YEAR PLAN.  Those projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two years as part of the city’s CIP.



   UTILITY SERVICE.



      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02 (4) and (6), as they may be amended from time to time;



      (2)   Those services of a telecommunications right-of-way
user, including the transporting of voice data information;



      (3)   Those services provided by a cable communications system
as defined in M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by a local government unit;



      (5)   Those services provided by a cooperative electric
association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may be amended from time to
time; and



      (6)   Water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.21  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits and the ordinances
related thereto.  The Director may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.22  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Each person who occupies, uses or seeks to occupy or use, the
right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in the right-of-way,
including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the Director. 
Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a
registration fee.



   (B)   This section, and any reference to registration will be
instituted only when the Director, in his or her opinion, finds it necessary
to do so.  However, this shall not negate any other requirements, except for
the actual registration.



   (C)   No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate or
perform any other work on, Or use any facilities or any part thereof in any
right-of-way without first being registered with the Director.



   (D)   Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain
boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their
property and the street curb.  Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way,
and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other
requirements for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens
under this chapter.  However, nothing herein relieves a person from
complying with the provisions of the M.S. Ch. 216D, “One Call” Law, as it
may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.23  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   The information provided to the Director at the time of registration
shall include, but not be limited to:



   (A)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One-Call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address if applicable and telephone
and facsimile numbers;



   (B)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative;  (The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times.  Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration.)



   (C)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



      (1)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to
the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State
of Minnesota, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the Director;



      (2)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims
for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage
arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant,
its officers, agents, employees and permittees and placement and use of
facilities in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including, but not limited to protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities
and collapse of property;



      (3)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverage required herein is in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;



      (4)   Requiring that the Director be notified 30 days in
advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage
term; and



      (5)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the director in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to
carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



   (E)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.



   (F)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.



   (G)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of
authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable
state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the
certificate from the Commission or other state or federal agency.



   (H)   The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above
current at all times by providing to the Director information as to changes
within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of
any change.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.24  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration
and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance
plan for underground facilities with the Director.  The plan shall be
submitted using a format designated by the Director and shall contain the
information determined by the Director to be necessary to facilitate the
coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions
of rights-of-way.



      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to the
following information:



         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year
(in this section, a “next-year project”); and



         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and
estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the
five years following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year
project”).



      (3)   The term “project” in this section shall include
both next-year projects and five-year projects.



      (4)   By January 1 of each year the Director will have
available for inspection in the Director’s office a composite list of all
projects of which the Director has been informed in the annual plans.  All
registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current
status of this list.



      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each Registrant may change
any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the Director
and all other registrants of all such changes in the list.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director will not deny an
application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project in a
plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially reasonable
efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.25  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may
obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the Director to do so.



      (1)   Excavation permit.  An excavation permit is required by
a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the
permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein.  An excavation permit shall include such
modifications as landscaping and curb cuts.



      (2)   Obstruction permit.  An obstruction permit is required
by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to
the extent and for the duration specified therein.  An obstruction permit is
not required for City Council designated community wide events.  An
obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid
excavation permit for the same project.  An obstruction permit shall be
required for the placing of such as construction materials, barricades,
gravel, dirt, dumpsters or any other obstruction that precludes free and open
passage of pedestrians or vehicles.



   (B)   No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the
date or dates specified in the permit unless the person:



      (1)   Makes a supplementary application for another
right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and



      (2)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.



   (C)   Notwithstanding § 94.21, the city shall establish and impose
a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching or restoration.  The amount of the delay penalty shall
be established from time to time by the Director.



   (D)   Permits issued under this subchapter shall be conspicuously
displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and
shall be available for inspection by the Director.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99; Am. Ord. 886, passed 10-18-05)



§ 94.26  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the Director.



   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the
following provisions:



      (1)   Registration with the Director pursuant to this
subchapter if in effect as established in § 94.23(A);



      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form,
including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location
and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and
proposed facilities;



      (3)   Payment of money due the city for:



         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other
management costs;



         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage or expense suffered by
the city because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city;



         (d)   Franchise or user fees, if applicable.



      (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting
security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110%
of the amount owing.



      (5)   When an excavation permit is requested for purposes of
installing additional facilities, and the posting of a construction
performance bond for the additional facilities is insufficient, the posting
of an additional or larger construction performance bond for the additional
facilities may be required.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.27  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this
subchapter, the Director shall issue a permit.



   (B)   The Director may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.28  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The excavation permit fee shall be established by the city in
an amount consistent with Minnesota Public Utility Commission’s Rule
7919.1000.



   (B)   The obstruction permit fee shall be established by the
Director and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.



   (C)   (1)   No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be
issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees.



      (2)   The city may allow applicant to pay the fees within 30
days of billing.



   (D)   Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the Director has
revoked for a breach are not refundable.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.29  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing.  The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable.



   (B)   Patch and restoration.  The permittee shall patch its own
work.  The city, at its sole discretion, may choose either to have the
permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration.  If the city restores the
right-of-way, the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of
billing.  If, during the 36 months following the restoration, the pavement
settles due to permittee’s improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with having to
correct the defective work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration.  If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation
permit post a construction performance bond in an amount determined by the
Director to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoration and reasonable
directly related city costs, should the city have to complete the work due to
failure on the part of the permittee to do so.  If, within 36 months after
completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the Director determines
that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the
construction performance bond shall be released.



   (C)   Standards.



      (1)   Restoration must return the right-of way to the same
condition that existed before excavation.  Subject to this standard, plates
1 to 13, as included in parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950 of the Minnesota Public
Utilities Commission Rules, indicate maximum limits of restoration methods
and area requirements the city will impose when a right-of-way user excavates
in the public right-of-way.



      (2)   The right-of-way user is responsible for all of its work
done in the public right-of-way, whether by employees, agents or independent
contractors.



         (a)   All levels of restoration include compaction of
the materials placed in the excavation of the subgrade and aggregate base,
plus pavement replacement, in kind.  All work must be performed according to
the city’s specifications and drawings.



         (b)   If the landscaped portion of the right-of-way is
disturbed, the area must be immediately returned to the same condition prior
to the permittee’s work.



         (c)   A right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee in lieu of restoration.  However, the right-of-way user shall remain
responsible for replacing and compacting the subgrade and aggregate base
material in the excavation to the degree of a temporary patch, as defined
elsewhere in this chapter, and the degradation fee will not include any costs
required to bring the excavation to the point of permanent restoration.



   (D)   Guarantees.  By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself,
the permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 24 months
following its completion.  During this 24-month period it shall, upon
notification from the Director, correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the Director.  The work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the
Director, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonal.  But, the circumstances shall not constitute a basis for not
completing a temporary patch immediately upon completion of the excavation
work.



   (E)   Failure to restore.  If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the Director, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
Director, the Director at his or her option may do the work.  In that event
the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way.  If the permittee fails to pay as required, the
city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.



   (F)   Degradation cost in lieu of restoration.  In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee.  However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for replacing
and compacting the subgrade and aggregate base material in the excavation. 
The degradation fee will not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.  The degradation cost shall be determined by the Director.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.30  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or
obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.



   (B)   Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation
performed by the Director, whether or not it is a joint application by two or
more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee.



   (C)   Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or
excavation, which the Director does not perform, may share in the payment of
the obstruction or excavation permit fee.  Registrants must agree among
themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their
applications.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.31  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the
right-of-way specified in the permit.  No permittee may do any work outside
the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein.  Any permittee
which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must
be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area:



      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby; and



      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in
the permit.  No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date
or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.  If a
permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for
a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or
an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit.  This supplementary application must be done before the
permit end date.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.32  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of
its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and authority and to
pay all fees required by the city or other applicable rule, law or
regulation.  A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state
and federal laws, including M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (“One Call
Excavation Notice System”), as they may be amended from time to time.  A
permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and
established rules and regulations and is responsible for all work done in the
right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.



   (B)   Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the Director,
no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for the work.



   (C)   (1)   A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that
the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other
waterways shall be interfered with.



      (2)   Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way
may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in
conformance with city parking regulations.



      (3)   The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely
within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.33  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The Director may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this subchapter or if the Director determines that the denial
is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.34  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration and all other
work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with
engineering standards adopted by the PUC or other applicable local
requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the PUC Rules.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.35  INSPECTION.



   (A)   When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the
permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance PUC Rules.



   (B)   The permittee shall make the work-site available to the
Director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.



   (C)   (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any
work which does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions or codes.  The order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit.  Within
ten days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to
the Director that the violation has been corrected.  If the proof has not
been presented within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit.



   (D)   The Director may require the permittee to submit
“as-built” drawings or maps within six months of completing the work,
showing any deviations from the plan that are greater than plus or minus two
feet.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.36  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director
of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an
emergency.  The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary to respond to the emergency.  Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this subchapter
for the actions it took in response to the emergency.



      (2)   If the Director becomes aware of an emergency regarding
a registrant’s facilities, the Director will attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency.  In any event, the Director may take whatever action it deems
necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by
the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having
obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must
subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the normal fee for
the permit, pay double all the other fees required by the legislative code,
deposit with the Director the fees necessary to correct any damage to the
right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.37  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
Director of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.38  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any
right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach
of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or
any material condition of the permit.  A substantial breach by permittee
shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or



      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued by the Director.



   (B)   If the Director determines that the permittee has committed a
substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule,
regulation or any condition of the permit the Director shall make a written
demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation.  The demand shall state
that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit.  A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the Director, at his or her
discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.



   (C)   Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, the
permittee shall provide the Director with a plan, acceptable to the Director,
that will cure the breach.  The permittee’s failure to so contact the
Director, the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan or the
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit.  Further, the permittee’s
failure to so contact the Director, the permittee’s failure to submit an
acceptable plan or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one
full year.



   (D)   From time to time, the Director may establish a list of
conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to,
working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly
outside of the permit authorization.



   (E)   If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as
outlined above, the permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked and
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.



   (F)   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the
city for the city’s reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the
costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in connection
with the revocation.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.39  MAPPING DATA.



   (A)   Each right-of-way user shall provide mapping information in
digital format as required by the Director in accordance with PUC Rules Part
7819.4000, subpart 2, as follows:  location and approximate depth of
applicant’s mains, cables, conduits, switches and related equipment and
facilities, with the location based on:



      (1)   Offsets from property lines, distances from the
centerline of the public right-of-way and curb lines and ties to a coordinate
system as determined by the city;



      (2)   The type and size of the utility facility; and



      (3)   A description showing above ground appurtenances.



   (B)   (1)   Although not required by PUC rules to submit digital
data in a format required by the city.  The city shall bill the right-of-way
user a fee to include all costs to convert the data furnished by the
right-of-way user to a format currently in use by the city.



      (2)   The costs shall be considered part of the permit costs
and billed following determination of the costs.



   (C)   The right-of-way user shall provide the city with existing
data on its existing facilities when required by the Director.



   (D)   At the request of any registrant, any information requested by
the Director, which qualifies as a “trade-secret” under M.S. § 13.37(b),
as it may be amended from time to time, shall be treated as trade secret
information as detailed therein.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.40  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise permitted by an existing franchise or M.S. §
216D.34, as it may be amended from time to time, or unless existing above
ground facilities is repaired or replaced, new construction and the
installation of new facilities and replacement of old facilities shall be
done underground or contained within buildings or other structures in
conformity with applicable codes.



   (B)   (1)   The Director may assign specific corridors within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the Director
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way.  All excavation,
obstruction or other permits issued by the Director involving the
installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor
for the facilities at issue.



      (2)   Any right-of-way user who has facilities in the
right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the
Director shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or
excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move the facilities
to the assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is
waived by the Director for good cause shown, upon consideration of the
factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety,
customer service needs and hardship to the right-of-way user.



   (C)   One year after the establishment of a mapping system by the
Director, any facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been mapped
and submitted to the Director shall be deemed to be a nuisance.  The city
may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including,
but not limited to abating the nuisance or taking possession of the
facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable condition.



   (D)   To protect health, safety and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use, the Director shall have the
power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional Facilities
within the right-of-way.  In making the decisions, the Director shall strive
to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the
right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public
interest, the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.41  RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   A right-of-way user must promptly and at its own
expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove
and relocate its facilities in the right-of-way whenever the Director for
good cause requests the removal and relocation, and shall restore the
right-of-way to the same condition it was in prior to the removal or
relocation.



      (2)   The Director may make such request to prevent
interference by the company’s equipment or facilities with:



         (a)   A present or future city use of the right-of-way
for public project;



         (b)   When the public health, safety and welfare require
it; or



         (c)   When necessary to prevent interference with the
safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required
to remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way which has been
vacated in favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable
costs thereof are first paid to the person therefor.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.42  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   (A)   When the Director does work in the right-of-way and finds it
necessary to maintain, support or move a registrant’s facilities to protect
it, the Director shall notify the local representative as early as is
reasonably possible.  The costs associated therewith will be billed to that
registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.



   (B)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing
any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.  Each
registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
facilities of another registrant caused during the city’s response to an
emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.43  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   (A)   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the
facilities of a right-of-way user, and if the vacation does not require the
relocation of right-of-way user’s or permittee’s facilities, the city
shall, except when it would not be in the public interest, reserve to and for
itself and all right-of-way users having facilities in the vacated
right-of-way, the right to install, maintain and operate any facilities in
the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon the right-of-way at any time for
the purpose of reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same.



   (B)   If the vacation requires the relocation of right-of-way user
or permittee's facilities; if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the
right-of-way user or permittee, the right-of-way user or permittee must pay
the relocation costs; if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the city,
the right-of-way user or permittee must pay the relocation costs unless
otherwise agreed to by the city and the right-of-way user or permittee; or if
the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons other than the
right-of-way user or permittee, for a non-public project, such other person
or persons must pay the relocation costs.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.44  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By accepting a permit under this subchapter, a right-of-way user or
permittee agrees as follows.



   (A)   By reason of the acceptance of a registration or the grant of
a right-of-way permit, the city does not assume any liability:



      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of
service claims by parties other than the right-of-way user or the city; or



      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance or operation of facilities by a
right-of-way user or activities of right-of-way users.



   (B)   As a condition for issuing a permit for work on a public
right-of-way, the city requires the permittee to indemnify the city against
liability claims.  The city requires indemnification when a permit
authorizes a permittee to obstruct or excavate on or within a public
right-of-way to install, maintain or repair the permittee’s facilities.



      (1)   The city requires the permittee to defend, indemnify and
hold harmless the city from all liability or claims of liability for bodily
injury or death to persons, or for property damage, in which the claim:



         (a)   Alleges a negligent or otherwise wrongful act or
omission of the permittee or its employee, agent or independent contractor in
installing, maintaining or repairing the permittee’s facilities; and
alleges that the city is liable, without alleging any independent negligent,
or otherwise wrongful, act or omission on the part of the city; or



         (b)   Is based on the city’s negligent or otherwise
wrongful, act or omission in issuing the permit or in failing to properly or
adequately inspect or enforce compliance with a term, condition or purpose of
the permit granted to the permittee.



      (2)   A permittee is not required to indemnify the city for
losses or claims occasioned by the negligent or otherwise wrongful act or
omission of the city, except:



         (a)   To the extent authorized in division (B)(1)(b)
above regarding the issuance of a permit or the inspection or enforcement of
compliance with the permit; or



         (b)   When otherwise provided in an applicable franchise
agreement.



      (3)   A defense or indemnification of the city by a permittee
is deemed not to be a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available
to the city.



      (4)   A permittee, in defending any action on behalf of the
city, is entitled to assert every defense or immunity that the city could
assert in its own behalf.



      (5)   The city authorization to proceed with excavation or
obstruction in the right-of-way pursuant to notice system is deemed a permit
for the purpose of this part.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.45  COMPLETION CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   The Director may require as part of the permit process, a
person designated by the right-of-way user as a responsible employee shall
sign a completion certificate showing the completion date for the work
performed, identifying the installer and designer of record and certifying
that work was completed according to the requirements of the city.



   (B)   The Director may require as part of its permit process and if
necessary due to changes from the work as projected when the permit was
applied for, the permittee shall submit “as built” drawings or maps
within six months of completing the work, showing any deviations from the
plan that are greater than plus or minus two feet.



   (C)   The city shall respond within 30 days of receipt of the
completion certificate.  Failure to approve or disapprove the permitttee’s
performance within 30 days is deemed to be approval by the city.



   (D)   Construction triggers an obligation of the right-of-way user
that the right-of-way restoration be completed according to the conditions in
the permit and this ordinance.  The right-of-way user also assumes
responsibility for “as built” drawings and for repairing facilities or
structures, including right-of-way that was damaged during facility
installation.  The obligation is limited to one year for plantings and turf
establishment, but as established elsewhere in this subchapter for other
facilities.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.46  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.



   (A)   A right-of-way user who has determined to discontinue its
operations in the city must either:



      (1)   Provide information satisfactory to the Director that
the right-of way user’s obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way
under this subchapter have been lawfully assumed by another right-of-way
user; or



      (2)   Submit to the Director a proposal and instruments for
transferring ownership of its facilities to the city.  If a right-of-way
user proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option:



         (a)   Purchase the facilities; or



         (b)   Require the right-of-way user, at its own expense,
to remove it; or



         (c)   Require the right-of-way user to post a bond in an
amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to
be incurred in removing the facilities.



   (B)   A right-of-way user shall notify the local government unit
when facilities are to be abandoned.  A right-of-way user that has abandoned
facilities in a right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way during
the next scheduled city excavation if required in conjunction with other
right-of-way repair, excavation or construction, unless this requirement is
waived by the city.  However, if there is an over-riding public safety
concern, as determined by the Director, the right-of-way user may be required
to remove the abandoned facilities immediately.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



§ 94.47  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   The permittee’s or right-of-way user’s rights are subject to the
regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 732, passed 4-5-99)



CHAPTER 95:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Keeping and housing certain animals



   95.03   Cruel or inhumane treatment



   95.04   Restraint and confinement; trespassing prohibited



Specific Dog and Cat Regulations



   95.15   Running at large prohibited



   95.16   License required; application and fee



   95.17   Tag required



   95.18   Dog pound; release



   95.19   Rabies prevention



   95.20   Injured animals



   95.21   Barking dogs



   95.22   Establishment of pound; disposition of impounded animals



   95.23   Animal control responsibilities



   95.24   Violations



   95.25   Sanitation



   95.26   Permits required; exceptions



   95.27   Keeping of certain animals absolutely prohibited; exceptions



   95.28   Permit; application, procedures, term and fee



   95.29   Regulation of dangerous dogs



   95.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Health and Safety; Nuisances, see Ch. 91



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMALS.  Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies, ducks,
geese, turkeys, chickens, guinea hens and all other animals and feather fowl
except dogs and ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens, guinea hens and all other
animals and feather fowl except dogs and cats, unless the pets are
specifically included in particular sections hereof, and this definition
shall extend to this subchapter only.



(`86 Code, § 8.29)



   WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL.  Any mammal, amphibian, reptile or bird which
is of a species not usually domesticated, and of a species which, due to
size, wild nature or other characteristic, is dangerous to humans. The term
includes animals and birds the keeping of which is licensed by the state or
federal government, such as wolves, raptors and pheasants. By way of example
and not of limitation, the term includes: eagles, ocelots, jaguars, cougars,
weasels, ferrets,  badgers, monkeys, chimpanzees, deer and bison. The term
also includes: crossbreeds such as the cross between dogs and coyotes and
dogs and wolves; poisonous snakes such as rattlesnakes, coral snakes, water
moccasin, puff adder or cobra; and any other snake or reptile which by its
size, vicious nature or other characteristic is dangerous to human beings.



(Am. Ord. 860, passed 11-6-05)



§ 95.02  KEEPING AND HOUSING CERTAIN ANIMALS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal, not in
transit, in any part of the city not zoned for agricultural purposes.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to keep animals in any structure
infested by rodents, vermin, flies or insects.



(`86 Code, § 8.29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.03  CRUEL OR INHUMANE TREATMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to treat any animal or house pet in a
cruel or inhumane manner.  Any person found guilty of violation of this
section will have the license revoked without right of reissue for one year.



(`86 Code, § 8.29) (Am. Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.04  RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT; TRESPASSING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit animals to
run at large in the streets or public places, or to be herded or driven
thereon unless each animal is confined within a vehicle or restrained by
means of bridles, halters, ropes or other means of individual restraint.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to herd, ride or drive any
animal over and upon any grass, turf, boulevard, city park, cemetery, garden
or lot without specific permission therefor from the owner.



(`86 Code, § 8.29)



   (C)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building
or secure enclosure in such a manner that the female dog or cat cannot come
into contact with another animal except for planned breeding.



(Am. Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SPECIFIC DOG AND CAT REGULATIONS



§ 95.15  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors
or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large.  Any animal off the owner’s
premises and not leashed or under control shall be considered running at
large.  A person, who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat which runs at
large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Dogs or cats on a leash and
accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and under the control
and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by
command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless
the city has posted an area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”



(Am. Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.16  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner or other possessor of a dog or
cat to fail to obtain a proper city license therefore.



   (B)   Application for dog or cat licensing shall be upon the proper
forms obtained from the Police Department. 



   (C)   Except for any humane society, veterinary hospital, or a
non-resident who is boarding his/her dog(s) or cat(s) in the city for a
period not exceeding 30 days, no person(s) shall keep any dog or cat over six
months old within the city without securing a license from the Police
Department. The Police Department shall keep a record of all licenses issued
and shall issue a metal tag for each license.



   (D)   Licenses shall expire April 1 of each year and shall be
differentiated, for the purpose of calculating the license fee, between
renewal licenses and initial issue licenses. A license renewal shall be
defined as one for a dog or cat which has been previously licensed by the
City of Waseca even though such license may have expired. License fees for a
license issued at any time during the current license period shall not be
pro-rated.  Fees for license shall be established by the City Council.



   (E)   A penalty charge will be collected on all licenses issued for
dogs and cats impounded  by the city unless the dog or cat is less than six
months old, owned by a non-resident boarding his/her dog or cat in the city
less than 30 days, or the dog or cat has been  acquired not less than 15
days previously. A penalty charge will also be collected on all  licenses
issued for dogs or cats that have been issued a warning tag by the Police
Department for either no license or an expired license. The fee for penalty
charges shall be established by the City Council.



   (F)   No refunds shall be made on any license fee for any reason. No
dog or cat license shall be issued by the city unless the person requesting
the license produces proof that the dog or cat has current rabies vaccination
protection.



(`86 Code, § 8.21)  (Am. Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.17  TAG REQUIRED.



   (A)  All licensed dogs and cats shall wear a collar and have the
combined rabies/licensing tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing the license
for the current period.



   (B)   Upon the payment of the license fee, the Police Department
shall execute a receipt in duplicate. The Police Department shall provide the
original receipt to the person who pays the fee, retaining the duplicate and
shall also provide a numbered metal tag to the person paying the fee at such
time as the fee is paid.



   (C)   A duplicate license tag shall be issued by the Police
Department to replace one lost or destroyed upon presentation of the receipt
for the license fee for the current year and at an amount established by the
Council from time to time by resolution.



   (D)   No dog or cat tag, whether original or duplicate, shall be
transferable from one animal to another.



(`86 Code, § 8.21)  (Am. Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.18  DOG POUND; RELEASE.



   (A)   Any dog found in the city without a license, or running at
large, shall be placed in a dog pound, and an accurate record of the time of
the placement shall be kept on each dog.  All animals conveyed to the pound
shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their
comfort, at least five regular business days , unless the animal is a
dangerous animal as defined under M.S. §§ 347.50 to 347.54, as they may be
amended from time to time, in which case it shall be kept for seven days, and
except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal under M.S. §§ 343.20 to
343.235, as they may be amended from time to time, in which case it shall be
kept for ten days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as
provided by this section.  The owner shall pay the costs incurred in
confining, impounding and disposing of the animal.



   (B)   Dogs shall be released to their owners, or persons previously
in possession of them, as follows:



      (1)   If the dog is owned or possessed by a resident of the
city, after purchase of a license as aforesaid, and payment of an impounding
fee and daily maintenance cost for each day, or part thereof, that the dog
was in the pound, the fees shall be as set by Council.



      (2)   If the dog is owned or possessed by a person or a
resident of the city, after immunization for rabies and payment of an
impounding fee and daily maintenance cost for each day, or part thereof, that
the dog was in the pound, the fees shall be as set by Council.



   (C)   Impounded dogs or cats are considered property of the city
until claimed by their owners or persons acting on behalf of their owners.



(`86 Code, § 8.21)



§ 95.19  RABIES PREVENTION.



   (A)   Any dog or cat which has bitten any person and caused an
abrasion of the skin of the person shall be seized and impounded under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of not less than ten days
and immediately report the bite to the Police Department.



   (B)   If no signs of rabies are observed, the animal may be released
from confinement after payment of appropriate fees.



(`86 Code, § 8.21)



   (C)   During the quarantine period, said animal shall be securely
confined in a building or yard, enclosed by a fence so constructed that the
animal cannot get through or over, and which  will not permit other animals
or persons to enter and will prevent the animal from coming in  contact with
persons or other animals. Failure to comply with the quarantine requirements
herein shall subject the animal in violation to impoundment under the
authority of the Police Department at the owner's expense.



   (D)   At the end of the ten-day quarantine period, the impounded
animal may be released if a licensed veterinarian determines that it is not
rabid. If the animal is determined to be rabid, it shall be destroyed
humanely after completion of necessary medical procedures.



(Am. Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.20  INJURED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any dog or cat found injured without an owner or other person
in possession may be impounded and, after reasonable efforts have been made
to locate its owner or possessor, treated or humanely destroyed by a licensed
veterinarian.



(`86 Code, § 8.21)



   (B)   No person shall possess, harbor or allow to run at large any
diseased animal that is not under the treatment of a veterinarian.



   (C)   The term “diseased animal” includes conditions such as
rabies, distemper, panleucopenia, feline leukemia and other conditions or
diseases that are dangerous or communicable to humans or animals.



(Am. Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.21  BARKING DOGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks or cries.  Habitual barking shall be defined as barking for
repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one minute of
interruption.  The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.



§ 95.22  ESTABLISHMENT OF POUND; DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   The City Council may designate and establish by resolution a suitable
area to be an animal  pound. All dogs and cats shall be kept according to
state laws. Any person, owner or otherwise, claiming an animal must pay an
impound fee to the Police Department before an  "Authorization for Release"
form will be issued. The owner of any impounded animal shall  present the
"Authorization for Release" form to the animal pound authorizing said animal
to be  released. In addition, the owner shall likewise pay the animal pound
any impoundment fees, board fees, and cost of destruction if the animal is
destroyed without being reclaimed by such  owner.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.23  ANIMAL CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Police Department shall be charged with the responsibility for
animal control unless the Council, by resolution, should choose to contract
for such services.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.24  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and also the owner’s license may be revoked for a period not
exceeding one year. Violation of this chapter three times in a one-year
period by any dog or cat owner will cause automatic revocation of said animal
license. Said person will not be eligible for a dog or cat license for a
one-year period. Any person whose license is revoked shall transfer ownership
of the dog or cat and  provide for its removal from the premises within ten
days.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.25  SANITATION.



   (A)   Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog or cat shall have
the responsibility for keeping their property clean of all fecal matter
created by the animal. All animal  waste shall be removed periodically so as
to keep the surrounding area free from  obnoxious odors. For the purpose of
this section, “periodically” shall be defined as a period of time not to
exceed one week.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog
or cat to cause or permit the dog or cat to be on any property not owned or
possessed by this person without having a device or equipment for immediately
picking up and removing animal feces to a proper receptacle located upon
property owned or possessed by such person.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person who is in control of any dog or
cat, or who causes or permits any dog or cat to be on any property not owned
or possessed by such  person, to fail to remove feces left by such animal to
a proper receptacle located on  property owned or possessed by such person.



   (D)   This section does not apply to the ownership or use of seeing
eye dogs by blind persons, dogs used in police activities by the city, or
tracking dogs when used by or with the permission of the city.



   (E)   Violation of this section is a misdemeanor which is punishable
by a fine of up to $1,000 or up to 90 days in jail, or both.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.26  PERMITS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Hoofed animals.  No person shall stable, keep or permit any
hoofed animal to remain on any lot or premises within the city without a
permit.



   (B)   Small animals and birds of the orders Anseriforms and
Galliformes. No person shall  keep or permit more than one live rabbit, or
any chinchilla, mink, chicken, turkey, duck, goose, pigeon or similar small
animal or bird, in any dwelling or on the same lot or premises as a dwelling
or other such premise within the city without a permit.  This division does
not apply to any hamster, gerbil, white rat, mouse or guinea pig maintained
as a pet.



   (C)   Bees.  No person shall keep or allow to be kept any man-made
or manufactured hive or other facility for the housing of bees within the
city without a permit.



   (D)   Wild or exotic animals.  No person shall keep or allow to be
kept any wild or exotic animal within the city without a permit, whether or
not the keeping of such animal is licensed by the state or federal government.



   (E)   Maximum number of cats and dogs.  No person shall keep,
harbor or maintain more than three cats or dogs of more than three months of
age within any individual  dwelling units within the city without a permit.



   (F)   Exceptions.  This section does not apply to animals which are
temporarily brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any
circus or show, nor does it apply to any public zoo, or persons keeping
animals for a public zoo as volunteers, docents or otherwise, nor to be
bonafide research institution, or veterinary hospital, provided  protective
devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public
are provided.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.27  KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS ABSOLUTELY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall keep, maintain or harbor within the City of
Waseca any of the following animals:



      (1)   Any animal or species prohibited by federal or Minnesota
law;



      (2)   Any exotic animal or species when kept in such numbers
or in such a way as to promote the likelihood of harm to the animals
themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings, or which
constitutes a public nuisance;



      (3)   Any skunk, whether captured in the wild, domestically
raised, descented  or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not
vaccinated against rabies;



      (4)   Any large cat or members of the family Felidae, such as
lions, tigers,  jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx, bobcats, and ocelots,
except commonly domesticated cats;



      (5)   Any members of the family Canidae, such as wolves,
dingoes, coyotes and jackals, except domesticated dogs;



      (6)   Any crossbreed such as the crossbreed between dogs and
coyotes and dogs and wolves;



      (7)   Any raccoon; or



      (8)   Any red-eared turtle (Pseudemys scriptaelegans) with a
shell length of less than four inches.



   (B)   Exceptions: This section does not apply to animals which are
temporarily brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any
circus or show; nor does it apply to any public zoo, or persons keeping
animals for a public zoo as volunteers, docents or otherwise, nor to any
bonafide research  institution, or veterinary hospital, provided protective
devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the 
public are provided. Any person keeping an animal for a purpose other than a
bonafide research institution or veterinary hospital shall obtain a permit
from the Police Department and shall provide proof of sufficient
liability/casualty insurance.  The required limits of this coverage shall be
established by the Finance Department following consultation with the city's
insurance provider.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.28  PERMIT; APPLICATION, PROCEDURES, TERM AND FEE.



   (A)   Application.  Any person desiring a permit required under the
provisions of this chapter shall make written application to the Police
Department upon a form designated for this purpose. The application form will
include information such as,  but not limited to, the description of the
property where the animal is to be kept, the species and number of animals to
be kept and any special conditions which must be complied with by the keeper
of the animal.



   (B)   Consent. Upon submitting the designated application form, the
applicant shall also provide the written consent of 75% of the owners or
occupants of privately or publicly owned real estate within 150 feet of the
outer boundaries of the premises for which the permit is being required or,
in the alternative, proof that the applicant's property lines are 150 feet or
more from any structure. However, where a street separates the premises for
which  the permit is being requested from other neighboring property, no
consent is required  from the owners or occupants located on the opposite
side of the street. Where a  property within 150 feet consists of a multiple
dwelling, the  applicant need obtain only the written consent of the owner
or manager, or other person in charge of the building.



   (C)   Fees; term of permit. The City Council shall establish a fee
for the permit required in this chapter. The term of the permit shall be one
year from the date of issuance and shall require annual consideration for
renewal. A permit and fee shall be required for each individual animal.



   (D)   Investigation of application. The Police Department shall make
such investigation as necessary and may grant, deny or refuse to renew any
application for permit under this chapter.



   (E)   Permit; conditions. If granted, the permit issued by the
Police Department shall state  the conditions, if any, imposed upon the
permitee for the keeping of animals under the permit. The permit shall
specify the restrictions, limitations, conditions, and  prohibitions which
the Police Department deems reasonably necessary to protect any person or
neighboring use from unsanitary conditions, unreasonable noise or odors or
annoyance, or to protect the public health and safety. Such permit may be
modified from time to time or revoked by the Police Department for failure to
conform  to such restrictions, limitations or prohibitions. Such
modification or revocation shall  be effective from and after three days
following the mailing of written notices thereof by certified mail to the
person or persons keeping or maintaining such animals.



   (F)   Refusal to grant or renew a permit. The Police Department may
refuse a permit to keep or maintain hereunder for failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, if the facilities for the keeping of the animals
are or become inadequate for their purpose, if the conditions of the permit
are not met, if a nuisance condition is created, or if the public health and
safety would be unreasonably endangered by the granting of such permit.



   (G)   Numbers of animals; species; notice to Police Department. The
permit shall state the number of animals and type of animals which may be
maintained on the premises. The permitee shall immediately inform the Police
Department in writing when the number of animals maintained on the premises
exceeds the number allowed by the permit.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.29  REGULATION OF DANGEROUS DOGS.



   The city shall, by reference, adopt the provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50
through 347.55 with respect to the regulation of dangerous dogs. Where state
statute makes reference to "county" regulating authority it is the intention
of the City of Waseca to adopt a reference to "city" regulating authority.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 860, passed 11-16-04)



CHAPTER 96:  PUBLIC PARKS



Section



   96.01   Authority and adoption



   96.02   Definition



   96.03   Hours of operation; permitted activities



   96.04   Prohibited acts



   96.05   Maplewood Park regulations



   96.06   Exceptions



   96.07   Loon Lake regulations



   96.08   Oak Park Skate Board facility rules and regulations



Cross-reference:



   Park Advisory Board, see § 31.18



§ 96.01  AUTHORITY AND ADOPTION.



   (A)   The Park and Recreation Board is hereby authorized to propose
reasonable rules and regulations governing the operation and use of all city
parks.  The regulations may include, but shall not be limited to
restrictions on the use of property, hours of operation, safety regulations,
provisions for protection of property, swimming and boating regulations,
lifeguard duties, patrols and maintenance.



   (B)   Upon the recommendation of the Park and Recreation Board, or
upon its own motion, the Council may adopt and amend the rules and
regulations by ordinance and it shall thereafter be unlawful to violate any
rule of regulation.



(`86 Code, § 8.83)



§ 96.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK.  A park, playground, lake, trail, nature area or public open
space within the city.  It shall also mean any other property owned, leased,
used or controlled, wholly or in part, by the city for park and recreation
use.



(`86 Code, § 8.83)



§ 96.03  HOURS OF OPERATION; PERMITTED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   All public parks will be closed at 11:00 p.m. each day and
shall remain closed to the public until 5:00 a.m. on the next day.  No
person shall be in, remain in or enter any public park between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. and no person shall drive into or remain in a public
parking area within or immediately adjacent to a public park during the hours
when the park is closed, except as authorized in division (B) below or
exclusively for angling on Clear or Loon Lakes.



   (B)   (1)   The following activities may continue in parks after
the parks have been closed:



         (a)   City sponsored and supervised activities;



         (b)   Activities sponsored by any individual or group,
association or organization, which has applied for and received a permit for
the activity from the city; and



         (c)   Activities of custodial or maintenance personnel
in the course of their official duties.



      (2)   Application for the issuance of a permit to conduct
activities in a park after closing hours shall be submitted to the city, on
the forms provided, at least two weeks prior to the date of the activity.
Permits shall be issued if it appears the applicant can comply with current
regulations of the city governing parks.



(`86 Code, § 8.83)



§ 96.04  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   The following prohibitions and regulations shall apply to all
parks.



   (B)   They shall apply to all vehicles including snowmobiles, motor
bikes, all-terrain vehicles and all other vehicles.



      (1)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle in any
park except on roads, designated parking areas, bodies of water or in such
areas as the Park Superintendent shall determine, and no person shall operate
a motor vehicle within a park at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour.



      (2)   No person shall park any motor vehicle in any place in
the park except in designated areas.



      (3)   No fires shall be lighted or made in any park except in
places provided for such purposes.



      (4)   No person shall discharge any fireworks or firearms in a
park without the written permission of the city and without a permit in the
case of fireworks from the Fire Chief, in case of firearms from the Police
Chief.



      (5)   No person shall scatter about any materials, cans,
bottles, leaflets, etc., or litter a park with any form of waste material.



      (6)   No person shall throw stones, wood or rubbish of any
kind in any city lake or in any manner which will jeopardize patrons of the
park or its condition.



      (7)   No person shall paste, affix or inscribe any handbill or
poster on any structure or property on any place, or roadway surrounding the
park.



      (8)   No person shall remove any benches, picnic tables or
other movable park equipment outside the park boundaries without written
permission of the Park Superintendent.



      (9)   No person shall possess, display or consume intoxicating
liquors or 3.2 malt liquors on any beaches within city parks, and the
possession or consumption of intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor is allowed in
Maplewood Park only upon issuance of a permit by the city.



      (10)   No person shall disturb or interfere with any birds,
animals, animal habitat or nesting area in a park.  All animals brought
within a park must be leashed with a suitable device not exceeding eight feet
in length and are prohibited from beaches and lakeshore area in parks which
contain public swim areas.



      (11)   No person shall be permitted to sell any article of
food or beverage in a park without a permit, lease or concession granted by
the city.



      (12)   No person shall write upon or mark or deface in any
manner, or use any improper way any property or equipment contained within a
park.



      (13)   No person shall break, cut, mutilate, injure, remove or
carry away any tree, plant, flower, shrub, rock, soil, sand, fence, benches,
tables or any other city property located in a park.



      (14)   No person shall hit, drive, stroke or otherwise propel
a golf ball upon, in, over or across any park.



      (15)   The use of bows and arrows shall be prohibited in parks
except in designated areas.



      (16)   The use of any glass container or receptacle in which
any consumer beverage is enclosed for use in the delivery or display of that
beverage for retail purchases is prohibited in all parks.



(`86 Code, § 8.83)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.05  MAPLEWOOD PARK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Overnight camping shall be permitted at designated areas in
Maplewood Park provided a park reservation form is completed and returned to
the City Park Director at least 48 hours prior to the desired camping date,
and provided the City Park Director approves the request for overnight
camping. Park reservation forms are available at City Hall.



   (B)   The City Park Director shall not grant overnight camping
privileges to any individual or group other than an organized group
accompanied by adult leaders that request overnight camping privileges for
activities of an educational nature directly related to the park's
characteristics.



   (C)   Snowmobiles are prohibited in Maplewood Park.



   (D)   No fires shall be lighted or made in Maplewood Park except in
a fireplace or fire ring provided for that purpose.  Portable gas or liquid
fueled camp stoves or charcoal burners may be used within a camping area
provided such use does not create a hazardous or dangerous condition.



   (E)   Where refuse containers are provided they shall be used only
for refuse generated in the area.  In areas where refuse containers are not
provided, refuse must be removed by the person(s) generating the refuse.



(`86 Code, § 8.83)



   (F)   (1)   It is unlawful to consume or possess intoxicating
liquor or beer in an open container in any outside area zoned commercial
district or in Maplewood Park unless the consumption or possession is in
conjunction with a civic activity approved by the City Council.



      (2)   Permits for Maplewood Park may allow consumption or
possession of intoxicating liquor or beer at the discretion of the Police
Chief.



(`86 Code, § 8.60)



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Ch. 113



§ 96.06  EXCEPTIONS.



   The rules in this section shall not apply to any person lawfully
performing his or her duties in the development, maintenance and operation of
city parks provided permission for the activities is obtained in advance from
the City Park Director or the City Manager.



(`86 Code, § 8.83)



§ 96.07  LOON LAKE REGULATIONS.



   The use of motor boats, except those powered by electric motors not to
exceed two horsepower or 33 pounds of thrust, shall be prohibited on Loon
Lake at all times.  Authorized resource management, emergency and
enforcement personnel when acting in the performance of their duties are
exempt from this section.



(`86 Code, § 8.83)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.08  OAK PARK SKATE BOARD FACILITY RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Skate Park operating hours are from 9:00 a.m. to sunset.



   (B)   Only skateboards and in-line skates are allowed.  No bicycles
or motorized vehicles are allowed.



   (C)   No amplified music, boom boxes or similar devices are allowed.



   (D)   No food, beverages, glass containers, or use of tobacco
products are allowed on the facility within the fence line.



   (E)   No ramps, jumps, or other similar equipment other than that
installed by the Park Department are allowed on the facility.



   (F)   No profanity is allowed on the facility or Oak Park premises.



   (G)   The Park Board may establish other rules or regulations for
the use of the facility and such rules shall be posted at the facility.



(Ord. 881, passed 8-16-05)



CHAPTER 97: SPECIAL EVENTS



Section



   97.01   Purpose



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Permit required



   97.04   Permit not required



   97.05   Permit application



   97.06   Issuance of permit, conditions and posting



   97.07   Exceptions to the permit



   97.08   Permit denial



   97.09   Permit conditions



   97.10   Permit issuance



   97.11   Indemnification agreement



   97.12   Insurance requirements



   97.13   Minimum limits



   97.14   Cleanup deposit



§ 97.01  PURPOSE.



   The following section governs the time, place and manner of holding
certain special events on city streets, on state highways, on city property
and private property when an event's impact upon the health, fire, law
enforcement, transportation or other services exceeds those regularly
provided to that property. This section is enacted in order to promote the
health, safety and welfare of all residents and visitors of the city by
ensuring that special events do not create disturbances, become nuisances,
menace or threaten life, health and property, disrupt traffic, or threaten or
damage private or public property. It is not the intent of the City Council
by enacting this section to regulate in any manner the content of speech or
infringe upon the right to assemble, except for regulating the time, place
and manner of speech and assembly and this section should not be interpreted
or construed otherwise.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this section, the terms defined have the following
meanings given to them:



   SPECIAL EVENT. Any concert, parade, fair, show, festival, carnival,
rally, party, motorcade, run, street dance, bike-a-thon, race, walk, flea
markets, athletic event or other attended outdoor entertainment or
celebration that is to be held in whole or in part upon publicly owned
property or public right-of-way, or, if held wholly upon private property,
will nevertheless affect or impact the ordinary and normal use by the general
public of public property or public rights-of-way within the vicinity of the
event.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall hold, conduct or participate in a special event within
the city unless a permit has been issued for such event upon timely written
application made to the city.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.04  PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   A special event permit is not required for the following types of
events:



   Noncommercial events held on private properties.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.05  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Any person or organization desiring to sponsor a special event that is
not exempted by this section must apply to the city for a special event
permit. The special event permit application must be filed not less than 60
days in advance of the date on which the event is to occur if the special
event requires the closure of any street, any detouring of traffic or any
significant impact on city services. This permit application period shall not
begin until a complete application has been filed with the city. The
applicant shall pay all additional costs incurred by the city as a direct
result of the special event. Failure to provide a complete application is
sufficient reason to deny the special event permit. The City Manager may
waive the timeline at his or her discretion.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.06  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, CONDITIONS AND POSTING.



   Special event permits will be issued upon approval by the City Manager
or his or her designee. The City Manager or designee may attach reasonable
conditions to the permit as are deemed necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare. Special event applications include, but are not limited
to, the following information:



   (A)   Location and hours during which the event may be held;



   (B)   If applicable, parade route to be traveled, the starting point
and termination point;



   (C)   If the event is a parade, approximate number and type of
units, streets and assembly areas used, and other issues applicable to a
parade;



   (D)   Sanitation/availability of potable water;



   (E)   A plan for security/crowd management;



   (F)   A plan for parking and traffic flow;



   (G)   A plan for emergency and medical services;



   (H)   A plan for clean-up of premises and surrounding area/trash
disposal;



   (I)   Insurance.  A certificate of insurance must be submitted with
the application;



   (J)   Lighting/electrical service needs;



   (K)   Fire service/safety, including meeting all requirements of the
State Fire Code as it may be amended from time to time;



   (L)   Temporary construction, barricades/fencing;



   (M)   Placement and removal of advertising/promotional materials;



   (N)   Noise levels and possible impact on neighboring areas;



   (O)   Alcohol consumption; a separate license may be required;



   (P)   Notification of residents or businesses within a minimum of
100 feet of the location holding the event, or as determined by City Manager
or designee;



   (Q)   Signature of applicant; and



   (R)   Any other conditions which the City Manager or designee deems
necessary.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.07  EXCEPTIONS TO THE PERMIT.



   The permit requirements contained in this chapter do not apply to the
following:



   (A)   Special events managed by the city and approved by the City
Manager or designee;



   (B)   Funerals and funeral processions;



   (C)   The grounds of any school, playground, place of worship, hotel
conference center, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium or similar
place of assembly when used for regularly established assembly purposes; or



   (D)   City park, when in compliance with the requirements of the
city park reservation form.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.08  PERMIT DENIAL.



   (A)   The City Manager or designee may deny an application for a
special event permit if information provided by the applicant indicates that:



      (1)   The event would seriously endanger public safety;



      (2)   The event would unreasonably inconvenience the general
public;



      (3)   The event would conflict with another proximate event or
interfere with construction or maintenance work;



      (4)   There are not sufficient safety personnel or other
necessary staff to accommodate the event;



      (5)   The information contained in the application or
supplemental information requested from the applicant is false or nonexistent
in any material detail;



      (6)   The applicant fails to agree to abide by or comply with
all of the conditions and terms of the special event permit;



      (7)   The special event would create or constitute a public
nuisance and would be likely to cause significant damage to public property
or facilities;



      (8)   The special event would engage in or encourage
participants to engage in illegal acts; and



      (9)   Other issues in the public interest where identified by
the City Council.



   (B)   Denial of the permit may be appealed to City Council. If
appealed, the permit will be placed on the next scheduled City Council
meeting agenda.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.09  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   The City Manager or designee may impose reasonable conditions
concerning the time, place and manner of the event, if such conditions are
necessary to protect the safety of persons and property, and the control of
traffic; provided that such conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the
right of free speech. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:



   (A)   Alteration of the date(s), time(s), route or location of the
special event proposed;



   (B)   Elimination of an activity at the special event which cannot
be mitigated to a point as to ensure public safety and welfare, or which
causes undue liability to the city;



   (C)   Requirements concerning the accommodation of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a part of the
street or right-of-way;



   (D)   Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;



   (E)   Requirements for the use of city personnel and equipment;



   (F)   Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary
facilities at the special event;



   (G)   Requirements for the use of garbage containers and the cleanup
and restoration of any public property;



   (H)   Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with
noise ordinances, regulations and laws;



   (I)   Requirements to provide notice of the special event to
surrounding property owners; and



   (J)   Restrictions on the sale or consumption of food and alcohol.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.10  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   The City Manager shall issue the special event permit when the
application has been approved and the applicant has agreed to comply with the
terms and conditions of the permit as well as the requirements of this
section.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.11  INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.



   If the event, or any portion of the event, is to be held on city
property or right-of-way, prior to the issuance of a special event permit,
the permit applicant and/or authorizing officer of the sponsoring
organization, must sign an agreement to indemnify, defend and hold the city,
its officials, employees and agents harmless from any claim that arises in
whole or in part out of the special event.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.12  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Liability insurance required. The applicant or sponsor of a special
event must possess or obtain liability insurance to protect against loss from
liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury or property
damage arising from the special event. A certificate of insurance must be
filed with the city prior to issuance of the special event permit. The
certificate of insurance must name the city, its officials, employees and
agents as additional insured. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the
duration of the special event.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.13  MINIMUM LIMITS.



   Insurance coverage must be a commercial general liability policy. The
minimum limits must be at least $1,000,000. If alcoholic beverages are to be
sold or distributed at the special event, the policy must also include an
endorsement for liquor liability. The City Council may require additional
endorsements depending upon the type of special event and proposed activities.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



§ 97.14  CLEANUP DEPOSIT.



   It is the responsibility of the event organizer to clean up after the
event or activity. Failure to clean up may result in a fine, and/or may
jeopardize holding future events of that nature.



(Ord. 1056, passed 7-18-17)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



   110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



   111.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS



   112.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



   113.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



   114.   TAXICABS



   115.   RESERVED



   116.   RENTAL HOUSING



   117.   GAMBLING; GAMES OF CHANCE



   118.   GARBAGE HAULERS



   119.   PLUMBING



   120.   VENDING WAGONS



   121.   LODGING TAX



   122.   PAWN SHOPS



   123.   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICES



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   License required; applications



   110.03   Action on application; conditions



   110.04   Responsibility of licensee



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.



   APPLICATION.  A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in
and completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished
by the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of
the issuance of a license for a business.



   BUSINESS.  Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services or
transaction that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and
regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter.



   LICENSE.  A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him
or her to carry on and transact a business.



   LICENSE FEE.  The money paid to the city pursuant to an application
and prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business.



   LICENSEE.  An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds
a valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the city for carrying
on a business.



   SALE, SELL and SOLD.  All forms of barter and all manner or means of
furnishing merchandise to persons.



(`86 Code, § 4.01)



§ 110.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   All applications shall be made as follows:



      (1)   All applications shall be made at the Office of the
Records Administrative Secretary upon forms which have been approved by
motion of the Council.



      (2)   All applications must be subscribed, sworn to and
include, but not be limited to the following:



         (a)   Applicant's name, age and citizenship;



         (b)   Applicant's present address and length of time at
that address;



         (c)   Applicant's occupation and length of time so
engaged;



         (d)   Applicant's addresses and occupations for the
three years next preceding the date of application;



         (e)   Names and addresses of applicant's employers, if
any, for the three years next preceding the date of application;



         (f)   Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted
of a felony, or misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal ordinance but
excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and place of conviction and
the nature of the offense;



         (g)   Type of license and location of premises for which
application is made;



         (h)   At least four character references if applicant
has not resided in the city for two years next preceding the date of
application; and



         (i)   Other information as the Council shall deem
necessary considering the nature of the business for which license
application is made.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a
false statement or omission upon any application form.  Any false statement
in the application, or any willful omission to state any information called
for on the application form, shall, upon discovery of the falsehood work an
automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license
or permit issued pursuant thereto, void and of no effect to protect the
applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part thereof.



      (4)   The Records Administrative Secretary shall, upon receipt
of each application completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate
the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business
reputation of each applicant for license to the extent as the Records
Administrative Secretary deems necessary.  For the investigation, the
Records Administrative Secretary may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police. 
The Council shall not consider an application before the investigation has
been completed.



      (5)   Applications for renewal licenses may be made in the
abbreviated form as the Council may, by resolution, adopt.



(`86 Code, § 4.02)  (Am.  Ord. 676, passed 4-16-96)



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real
property owned or controlled by him or her to be used, without a license, for
any business for which a license is required by this chapter. 



(`86 Code, § 4.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  ACTION ON APPLICATION; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Council may grant any application for the period
of the remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing
license year.  All applications, including proposed license periods, must be
consistent with the chapter.



      (2)   If an application is granted, the City Manager and
Records Administrative Secretary shall forthwith issue a license pursuant
thereto in the form adopted by resolution of the Council and upon payment of
the license fee.  All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis unless
otherwise specified herein as to particular business.  Unless otherwise
herein specified, license fees shall be prorated on the basis of 1½ for each
calendar month, or part thereof remaining in the then current license year. 
Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein
described.  The license year for all city licenses shall be from January 1
to December 31, inclusive.



      (3)   No license shall be transferable between persons.  No
license shall be transferable to a different location without prior consent
of the Council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license.  It is
unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this section.



      (4)   Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.



      (5)   The Council may, in its sole discretion and for any
reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application, or revoke any license. 
No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or
business reputation.  Before revocation of any license, the Council shall
give notice to the licensee and grant the licensee opportunity to be heard. 
Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in the
resolution calling for the hearing.



      (6)   Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the
Records Administrative Secretary, without action by the Council, upon
licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a
fee for issuance of the duplicate, the amount of which shall be set by the
City Council.  All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked
“duplicate.”



(`86 Code, § 4.03)  (Am. Ord. 676, passed 4-16-96)



   (B)   All transient merchants, peddlers and solicitors shall at all
times when so engaged, carry their license on their person.  All other
licensees shall post their licenses in their places of business near the
licensed activity.  All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand
by any officer of citizen. 



(`86 Code, § 4.04)



§ 110.04  RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.



   The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or
permit is issued shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee himself or
herself.



(`86 Code, § 4.06)



CHAPTER 111:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   License required



   111.03   License restrictions



   111.04   Application and issuance



   111.05   License fee



   111.06   License questionnaire



   111.07   License shall be displayed



   111.08   Compliance checks



   111.09   Annual report



   111.10   Violations



   111.11   Appeal



   111.12   Selling or furnishing licensed products



Cross-Reference:



   Electronic delivery devices, see Ch. 123



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLUNT WRAPS. Rolling papers or similar tobacco related devices that are
manufactured or packaged for use as wraps or hollow tubes that are designed
or intended to be filled with loose tobacco, plant products, or other fillers
to create custom cigars or cigar-like products.



   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICES. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that
can be used by a person in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance
through inhalation of vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE
includes any component part of such a product, whether or not sold
separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE shall not include any product that has
been approved or otherwise certified by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for legal sales for use in tobacco-cessation treatment or
other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.



   LICENSED PRODUCTS. Collectively refers to any tobacco, tobacco-related
device, tobacco-related product, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or
lobelia delivery product.



   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT. Any product containing or
delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of
such a product, that is not tobacco or an electronic delivery device as
defined in this section. NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT does not
include any product that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal
sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco use
cessation or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purpose.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open display of tobacco related products
which are accessible to the public without the intervention of an employee.
Included are single packs, multiple packs, half cartons, full cartons,
individual or multiple bags of tobacco for rolling and individual or multiple
containers of tobacco for chewing, smoking, sniffing and other
tobacco-related activities.



   SMOKING. Inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated
cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product, or inhaling or exhaling vapor from an e-cigarette or any electronic
delivery device. SMOKING shall include carrying a lighted or heated
cigarette, cigar, or pipe or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product intended for inhalation, or carrying an electronic delivery device
that is turned on or otherwise activated.



   TOBACCO. Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component,
part, or accessory of a tobacco product, including but not limited to,
cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and
twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of
tobacco. TOBACCO excludes any tobacco product that has been approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation
product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and
is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.



   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICE. Cigarette papers or pipes for smoking or other
devices intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner that
enables the chewing, sniffing, smoking, or inhalation of vapors of tobacco or
tobacco products. TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES include components of
tobacco-related devices that may be marketed or sold separately.



   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic device,
appliance or any other medium or object designed or used for vending purposes
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 12-18-18)



§ 111.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



    No person shall directly or indirectly or by means of any device keep
for retail sale, sell at retail or otherwise dispense for profit or gain any
licensed products at any place in the city, unless a license therefor shall
first have been obtained as provided in this chapter.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 12-18-18) 



§ 111.03  LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.



   Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license include, but
are not limited to, the following.



   (A)   No license shall be issued to an applicant for sale of
licensed products at any place other than his or her establishment or place
of business.



   (B)   No license shall be issued for the sale of licensed products
at a moveable place of business; nor shall any license be issued for the sale
of licensed products at more than one place of business.



   (C)   No person shall sell or give away any licensed products to any
person below the age of 21 years.



   (D)   All sales must be made in such a manner that requires the
vendee to specifically ask a clerk for the licensed products. It is unlawful
for any person to offer for sale any licensed products by means of
self-service merchandising, including vending machines. All sales must be
handled with the intervention of a clerk. All other sales are unlawful.



   (E)   Any person selling any licensed products must require picture
identification, such as a driver’s license, passport or other legal
identification card as recognized by the state, to prove the age of any
customer who reasonably appears to be under the legal age.



   (F)   The holder of the license shall be responsible for the actions
of its employees and a violation by an employee shall constitute a violation
by the license holder, for the purposes of this section of the city code.



   (G)   License holders shall educate and train their clerks about the
law and maintain documentation to establish compliance.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 12-18-18)



§ 111.04  APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.



   Application for such license shall be made to the Records
Administrative Secretary on the form supplied by the city. The application
shall state the full name and address of the applicant, the location of the
building and the part intended to be used by the applicant under the license,
the kind of business conducted at the location and such other information as
shall be required by the application form. Upon the filing of the application
with the Secretary, it shall be presented to the City Council for its
consideration, and if granted by the Council, a license shall be issued by
the Secretary upon the payment of the required fee.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14)



§ 111.05  LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for every such license shall be as set by the City Council.
Every such license shall expire on December 31 next after its issuance.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 739, passed
11-16-99; Am. Ord. 1018, passed 3-18-14)



§ 111.06  LICENSE QUESTIONNAIRE.



    The applicant will also provide questionnaires pertaining to
age-of-sale laws to all clerks who will be selling licensed products and keep
them on file.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 12-18-18)



§ 111.07  LICENSE SHALL BE DISPLAYED.



   Every such license shall be kept conspicuously posted about the place
for which the license is issued and shall be exhibited to any person upon
request.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14)



§ 111.08  COMPLIANCE CHECKS.



    The license holder will be subjected to at least two compliance checks
per year. Law enforcement personnel or a person designated by law enforcement
officials will conduct random, unannounced inspections at each location where
licensed products are sold to test compliance with age-of-sale laws. These
inspections shall include, but not be limited to, surveillance, including
minors under the age of 18 who attempt to purchase licensed products. A
finding of non-compliance during the unannounced inspection shall constitute
a violation of this chapter. Additional compliance checks during the license
year shall be required following a violation by any licensed retail tobacco
or e-cigarettes outlet.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 12-18-18)



§ 111.09  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Secretary will provide an annual report to the City Council,
summarizing the results of all compliance checks before relicensing vendors
in December.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14)



§ 111.10  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to any criminal penalties which may be imposed by
a court of law, the City Council or City Manager may suspend or revoke a
license on a finding that the license holder or its employee has failed to
comply with this chapter.



   (B)   If a license holder violates any provision of this chapter
once within 12 months, the minimum penalty will be a fine or a suspension as
determined by the City Council.



   (C)   If a license holder violates any provision of this chapter
twice within 12 months, the minimum penalty will be a fine or a suspension as
determined by the City Council.



   (D)   If a license holder violates any provision of this chapter
three times within 12 months, the minimum penalty will be a fine or a
suspension as determined by the City Council.



   (E)   For a fourth violation within 12 months of the first
violation, the City Council shall revoke a license for a minimum period of
six months and a maximum period of 12 months.



   (F)    A license holder must have all self-service licensed products
relocated behind the service counter or locked doors by January 1,1996.
Non-compliance will result in license suspension until the licensed products
have been placed behind a counter or locked doors.



   (G)   Any correspondence concerning compliance with the city
ordinance will be sent to the licensee’s place of business by registered
mail. The licensee shall be sent a written notice at least ten days in
advance, informing the licensee of the specific ordinance or statutory
violation upon which any suspension or revocation would be based, and that
the licensee has the right to be represented by counsel and to present
evidence on its behalf.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 12-18-18)



§ 111.11  APPEAL.



   (A)   Any officer of the Waseca Police Department or any other
person employed by the city, authorized in writing by the City Manager and
having authority to enforce this code, shall, upon determining that there has
been a violation, notify the violator. The notice shall set forth the nature,
date and time of violation, the name of the official issuing the notice.



   (B)   Once the notice is given, the alleged violator may, within
seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, request a hearing in
writing, as is provided for hereafter. Failure to request a hearing in
writing within seven days will be deemed an admission of the violation.



   (C)   Any person contesting an alleged violation pursuant to this
chapter shall be entitled to a hearing by a hearing officer who shall
forthwith conduct an informal hearing to determine if a violation has
occurred. The hearing officer shall have authority to dismiss the violation
if sustained by the hearing office, the fee increase shall follow.



   (D)   A city employee designated in writing by the City Manager
shall be the hearing officer. The hearing officer is authorized to hear and
determine any controversy relating to administrative offenses provided for in
this chapter.



   (E)   All increased license fees or fines collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be paid to the City Treasurer and may be deposited in the
city's general fund.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14)



§ 111.12  SELLING OR FURNISHING LICENSED PRODUCTS.



   (A)   No person shall sell or give away any licensed products to any
person below the age of 21 years.



      (1)   Age verification.  Licensees must verify by means of
government-issued photographic identification that the purchaser is at least
21 years of age. Verification is not required for a person over the age of
30. That the person appeared to be 30 years of age or older does not
constitute a defense to a violation of this division.



      (2)   Signage.  Notice of the legal sales age and age
verification requirement must be posted at each location where licensed
products are offered for sale. The required signage, which will be provided
to the licensee by the city, must be posted in a manner that is clearly
visible to anyone who is or is considering making a purchase.



   (B)   Whoever sells or gives away any licensed products to any
person who is at least 18 years of age, but below the age of 21 years, is
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.



   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 609.685, Subd. 1a, whoever sells or gives
away any licensed products to any person below the age of 18 years is guilty
of a misdemeanor. Whoever violates this division a subsequent time within
five years of a previous conviction under this division is guilty of a gross
misdemeanor.



(`86 Code, § 4.34)  (Am. Ord. 669, passed 10-17-95; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
3-18-14; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 12-18-18)



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Exceptions to definitions



   112.03   Licensing; exemptions



   112.04   License ineligibility



   112.05   License suspension and revocation



   112.06   License transferability



   112.07   Registration



   112.08   Prohibited activities



   112.09   Exclusion by placard



   112.10   Exceptions



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose
of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to- street or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the
goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personnel property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting.  The term PEDDLER shall mean
the same as the term “hawker.”



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association.  As applied to groups, organizations,
corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include each
member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the City Hall is normally
open for the purpose of conducting public business.  Holidays, defined by
state law, shall not be counted as REGULAR BUSINESS DAYS.



   SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street- to-street or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a
catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur
at a later time.  The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a
person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's
activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.  The
term shall mean the same as the term “canvasser.”



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business out of
a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for
more than 14 consecutive days.



§ 112.02  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold
by the wholesaler.  The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes
initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying
to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable
food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to
any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the
customers on his or her established regular delivery route.



   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly
known as garage sales, rummage sales or estate sales, as well as those
persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market,
shall be exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS and TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed
auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. 
Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse
any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or
local ordinance.



§ 112.03  LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   County license required.  No person shall conduct business as
a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without
first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by
M.S. Ch. 329 as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   City license required.  Except as otherwise provided for by
this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a
transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. 
Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant
to § 112.07.



   (C)   Application.  Application for a city license to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular
business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. 
Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the Records Secretary.  All
applications shall be signed by the applicant.  All applications shall
include the following information:



      (1)   Applicant's full legal name;



      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts
business or to which applicant officially answers;



      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye
color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features and the like);



      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence;



      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence;



      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations
owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or agent;



      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business
(if any);



      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the
applicant;



      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license;



      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or
daily license;



      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of
days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14
consecutive days);



      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city, including
the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses;



      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the
applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;



      (15)   Proof of any requested county license;



      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the
property owner's agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;



      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided;



      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City
Council;



      (19)   The applicant's driver's license number or other
acceptable form of identification; and



      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and
vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with
the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.



   (D)   Fee.  All applications for a license under this chapter shall
be accompanied by the fee as established by the Council.



   (E)   Procedure.



      (1)   Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the Records Secretary, within two regular business days,
must determine if the application is complete.  An application is determined
to be complete only if all required information is provided.  If the Records
Secretary determines that the application is incomplete, the Records
Secretary must inform the applicant of the required necessary information
that is missing.  If the application is complete, the Records Secretary must
order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application.  Within ten regular business days
of receiving a complete application the Records Secretary must issue the
license unless there exist grounds for denying the license under § 112.04,
in which case the Records Secretary must deny the license.  If the Records
Secretary denies the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of
the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal
the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a
public hearing before the City Council.



      (2)   The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of
the date of the request.  The decision of the City Council following the
public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals
for a writ of certiorari.



   (F)   Duration.  An annual license granted under this chapter shall
be valid for one calendar year from the date of issue.  All other licenses
granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period
indicated on the license.



   (G)   License exemptions.



      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or
attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown,
produced, cultivated or raised on any farm.



      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from
house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street or other
type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising
that person's state or federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of
speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost
if the person's exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a
commercial activity.



      (3)   Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an
otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.04  LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.



   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:



   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of
having obtained any required county license.



   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at
the time of application.



   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years
from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state
statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on
the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being
sought in an honest and legal manner.  Those violations shall include, but
not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful
business practices and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against
another person.



   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant.



   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. 
Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to
the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant with the
Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other similar
business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months,
or three complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five
years.



§ 112.05  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Any license issued under this section may be
suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of
any of the following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the
application form;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during
the course of the licensed activity;



      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under § 112.04; and



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Multiple persons under one license.  The suspension or
revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple
persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of
the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized
person's authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on
behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Notice.  Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued
under this chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written
notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right
to a hearing on the alleged violation.  Notice shall be delivered in person
or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license
application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address
provided on the license application.



   (D)   Public hearing.



      (1)   Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public
hearing.  If no request for a hearing is received by the Records Secretary
within ten regular business days following the service of the notice, the
city may proceed with the suspension or revocation.  For the purpose of
mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the
notice is placed in the mail.



      (2)   If a public hearing is requested within the stated
timeframe, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the
request.



      (3)   Within three regular business days of the hearing, the
City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.



   (E)   Emergency.  If, in the discretion of the City Council,
imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the
actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the
City Council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice
of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division
(C) of this section.



   (F)   Appeals.  Any person whose license is suspended or revoked
under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.06  TRANSFERABILITY.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.07  REGISTRATION.



   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter under § 112.03, shall be required to register with the
city.  Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license
application.  Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the
Records Secretary shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration
as proof of the registration.  Certificates of registration shall be
non-transferable.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.08  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in
any of the following manners:



   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold
by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out or by
any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure;



   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way;



   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public;



   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;



   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of
another person;



   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement; and/or  (No
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement
of the city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate
of registration to that person.)



   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave,
or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.09  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.



   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by
the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the
purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant
when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long
and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No
Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors
and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement. No
person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or
otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.10  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to all sale under court order,
nor to any bona fide auction sale, nor to newsboys, nor to a sale at
wholesale to a retail dealer in the articles sold, nor to the sale of farm or
garden products by the person producing the same, nor sales of admissions by
local school students to a school function.  Nor shall this chapter apply to
solicitations for philanthropic, religious and educational charitable causes
if the following procedure has been accomplished:



      (1)   Sworn application has been made to the Records
Administrative Secretary showing name or organization, its purposes, its
officers and directors, period of solicitation and solicitors form of
remuneration; and



      (2)   The Secretary has investigated and found such statements
true and for charitable purpose and therefore issued a permit without charge.



   (B)   Any person or group issued a peddler’s license under this
section or any person or group addressed in division (A) above shall not
solicit at residential properties which have clearly posted a “No
Solicitation” sign at the main entrance to their building.



(`86 Code, § 4.36)  (Am. Ord. 559, passed 5-6-86)



CHAPTER 113:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   113.01   Adoption of state law by reference



   113.02   City law may be more restrictive than state law



   113.03   Definitions



   113.04   Consumption in public places



   113.05   Raffles, silent auctions and other fund-raising events for
charitable purposes with wine, beer or intoxicating liquors awarded as prizes



   113.06   Number of licenses that may be issued



   113.07   Term and expiration of licenses



   113.08   Types of liquor licenses



   113.09   License fees; pro rata



   113.10   Council’s discretion to grant or deny a license



   113.11   Application for license



   113.12   Description of premises



   113.13   Application for renewal



   113.14   Transfer of license



   113.15   License posting



   113.16   Investigation



   113.17   Restrictions on issuance



   113.18   Conditions of license



   113.19   Hours and days of sale



   113.20   Hours of operation; restrictions



   113.21   Minors on premises



   113.22   Restrictions on purchase and consumption



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by
reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full.  It is
the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A
are hereby adopted by reference, or referenced as if they had been in
existence at the time this chapter was adopted.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.02  CITY LAW MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.  Whenever there is an inconsistency between the
provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as amended, and the provisions of this chapter,
the more restrictive provision shall govern.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.03  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may
be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of
this chapter.



   LIQUOR.  As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or a “3.2% malt”, includes both intoxicating liquor
and 3.2% malt liquor.



   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control
of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises and served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum
seating capacity for guests as prescribed by the appropriate license-issuing
authority.



   To be a RESTAURANT as defined by this section, an establishment shall
have a license from the state as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be
amended from time to time, and meet the definition of either a “small
establishment”, “medium establishment” or “large establishment” as
defined in M.S. § 157.16, subd. 3(d), as it may be amended from time to
time.  An establishment serving prepackaged food that receives heat
treatment and is served in the package, or frozen pizza that is heated and
served, shall not be considered to be a RESTAURANT for purposes of this
chapter, unless it meets the definition of a “small establishment”,
“medium establishment” or “large establishment”.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.04  CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on any
public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other
than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter, in a
municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where the
consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.05  RAFFLES, SILENT AUCTIONS AND OTHER FUND-RAISING EVENTS FOR
CHARITABLE PURPOSES WITH WINE, BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS AWARDED AS PRIZES.



   No person shall conduct a silent auction, raffle of other fund-raising
event pursuant to M.S. § 340A.707, with prizes or awards of wine, beer or
intoxicating liquors, without notifying the City Clerk of the event at least
ten days prior to the occurrence of the event.  The event holder shall
provide the city with the following information: the person or organization
holding the event; the day, time and location of the event; the type of
fund-raising event (silent auction, raffle or otherwise); the type and amount
of wine, beer, intoxicating liquor to be awarded as prizes; and the
charitable purposes to which the event proceeds will be donated.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.06  NUMBER OF LICENSES THAT MAY BE ISSUED.



   (A)   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a
city may issue.  However, the number of licenses that may be granted under
this chapter is limited to the number of licenses issued as of the effective
date of this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are authorized by
law or election. 



      (1)   The Council, in its sound discretion, may provide by
ordinance that a larger number of licenses may be issued, up to the number of
licenses authorized by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time. 



      (2)   If a larger number of licenses in a particular category
has been authorized by a referendum held under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.413, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, but not all of
them have been issued, the larger number of licenses is not in effect until
the Council by ordinance determines that any or all of the licenses may be
issued. 



      (3)   The Council is not required to issue the full number of
licenses that it has available.



   (B)   No on-sale or off-sale license shall be effective beyond the
compact and contiguous space named therein for which the same was granted. 
A license is only effective for the licensed premises specified in the
approved license application.



   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 340A.413, not more than ten off-sale
licenses shall be granted at any one time, and not more than ten on-sale
licenses shall be granted at any one time.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.07  TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year.  All
licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year
unless another date is provided by ordinance.  All licenses shall expire on
the same date.  Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety,
and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of
each year.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.08  TYPES OF LIQUOR LICENSES.



   Except as provided in this chapter, no person may directly or
indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep for sale,
charge for possession, or otherwise dispose of alcoholic beverages as part of
a commercial transaction within the corporate city limits without first
having obtained the required license.  The Council is authorized to issue
the following licenses and permits.



   (A)   Three-point-two-percent malt liquor on-sale license. 
Three-point-two percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued
only to golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and
establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor, with the
incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.



   (B)   Three-point-two-percent malt liquor on-sale license.



   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor license. 



      (1)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses may be issued only
to a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.



      (2)   Upon application, the City Council may grant a license
for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor for a period not exceeding ten days.  The
license must be issued for a specific location identified on the application
to which the sale of 3.2% malt liquor by the licensee is restricted.



      (3)   Licenses issued under this section are subject to laws
and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor, except those
provisions specifically excepted or which by their nature are not
applicable.  Licenses under this section are not valid unless first approved
by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor license.  Off-sale intoxicating
liquor licenses may only be issued to exclusive liquor stores or drug stores
with an off-sale license that was first issued on or before May 1,1994.



   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor license.  On-sale intoxicating
liquor licenses may be issued to the following establishments as defined by
M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter: 
hotels, restaurants, bowling centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally
chartered veterans organizations, theaters and exclusive liquor stores. 
Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of the Commissioner of
Public Safety.



   (F)   Club on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any club to sell or keep or offer for
sale any liquor without a license therefor from the city.  Club licenses may
be issued only with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety.



      (2)   The annual club license fees shall be as set by the City
Council in accordance with state statutes regulating liquor licensing.



      (3)   (a)   No club shall sell liquor to persons other than
its bona fide organization members and guests of bona fide organization
members, except for a PRIVATE PARTIES (groups that reserves space in advance
in a designated area) limited to the portion of the building used for that
purpose.  For purposes of this section, MEMBERS are defined as fully
recognized and formally recognized organization MEMBERS or associate MEMBERS,
or auxiliary MEMBERS.  For purposes of this section, no member shall have
more than five defined guests who are not FAMILY MEMBERS (brothers, sisters,
spouse, children, parents) who shall actively be hosted at any point in
time.  Any guest who has not affixed their signature to the club guest book
shall not be sold liquor by the club.



         (b)   All liquor license restrictions, liquor sale
regulations and hours and days of liquor sales, as stated in this chapter and
relating to the on-sale of liquor, shall be binding upon all club licensees.



      (4)   The Council may, in its sound discretion, authorize a
retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed
premises at a community festival held within the city under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(b), as it may be amended from time to time.



      (5)   The Council may, in its sound discretion, authorize a
retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed
premises at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair
conducted on the premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned
by the city, under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(a), as it may
be amended from time to time.  However, the licensee is prohibited from
dispensing intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in an
amateur athletic event being held on the premises.



   (G)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (1)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be
issued only after authorization to do so by voter approval at a general or
special election as provided by M.S. § 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      (2)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be
issued only to a restaurant, as defined in § 113.03 of this chapter, club,
bowling center, or a hotel with a seating capacity of at least 30 persons,
which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor
only in conjunction with the service of food.



   (H)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor license. 
Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city has a
population less than 10,000.



   (I)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (1)   A municipality may issue temporary licenses in
accordance with M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 10, Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating
Liquor Licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety,
which may be issued only in connection with a social event sponsored by a
club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation that has existed
for at least three years; a political committee registered under state law;
or a state university.  No license shall be for longer than four consecutive
days.  No licensee shall be issued more than one temporary license in a
month.  The city shall issue no more than 12 days’ worth of temporary
licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.



      (2)   Sales shall be authorized at premises specified in the
application, but the premises need not be owned or permanently occupied by
the licensee.



      (3)   Licensees may contract for intoxicating liquor catering
services with the holder of a full-year, on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (4)   Licensees shall pay a license fee per event of an amount
as set by the City Council in accordance with state statutes regulating
liquor licensing.



      (5)   Licensees under this section may conduct wine tastings
as provided in M.S. § 340A.418, as amended.



      (6)   Temporary licenses may authorize Sunday sales.



   (J)   On-sale wine license.  With the approval of the Commissioner
of Public Safety, on-sale wine licenses may be issued to the following:



      (1)   Theaters, restaurants with facilities for seating at
least 25 guests at one time, meeting the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, subd.
5, as it may be amended from time to time, and meeting the definition of
restaurant in § 113.03;



      (2)   Licensed bed and breakfast facilities that meet the
criteria in M.S. § 340A.4011, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to
time, and to theaters that meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 1(b)
as it may be amended from time to time.  The holder of an on-sale wine
license who also holds an on-sale 3.2%  malt liquor license is authorized to
sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2% (strong beer) without an additional
license;



      (3)   A restaurant having facilities for seating at least 25
guests at one time. 



         (a)   A wine license permits the sale of wine of up to
24% alcohol by volume for consumption.



         (b)   A wine license authorizes the sale of wine on all
days of the week, unless the issuing authority restricts the license’s
authorization to the sale of wine on all days except Sundays.



         (c)   The governing body of a municipality may by
ordinance authorize a holder of an on-sale wine license issued pursuant to
this division (3), who is also licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquors at on-sale
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.411, to sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale
without an additional license;



      (4)   A licensed bed and breakfast facility.  A license under
this division authorizes a bed and breakfast facility to furnish wine only to
registered guests of the facility and, if the facility contains a licensed
commercial kitchen, also to guests attending private events at the facility.



   (K)   Consumption and display permit.



      (1)   No business establishment or club that does not hold an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license may directly or indirectly allow the
consumption and display of alcoholic beverages, or knowingly serve any liquid
for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor, without first having
obtained a permit from the Commissioner.  Rental of a public facility does
not make a subdivision or the facility a “business establishment” for the
purposes of this chapter.



      (2)   The Commissioner may issue a consumption and display
permit under division (K) only to:



         (a)   An applicant who has not, within five years prior
to the application, been convicted of a felony or of violating any provision
of this chapter or rule adopted under this chapter;



         (b)   A restaurant;



         (c)   A hotel;



         (d)   An establishment licensed for the sale of 3.2%
malt liquor;



         (e)   A resort as defined in M.S. § 157.15;



         (f)   A club as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 7, or
an unincorporated club otherwise meeting that definition; and



         (g)   A bed and breakfast facility as defined in M.S. §
340A.4011, subd. 1.



      (3)   The Commissioner may not issue a permit to a club
holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (4)   A permit issued under this division authorizes the
establishment to permit the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor on
the premises.  The permit does not authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor.



      (5)   All permits issued under this division expire on March
31 of each year.



      (6)   A permit issued under this division is not effective
until approved by the governing body of the city or county where the
establishment is located.



      (7)   The annual fee for issuance of a permit under this
division is $250 per M.S. § 340A.414. The governing body of a city or county
where the establishment is located may impose an additional fee of not more
than $300.



      (8)   An establishment holding a permit under this division is
open for inspection by the Commissioner, the Commissioner's representative,
and peace officers, who may enter and inspect during reasonable hours. 
Intoxicating liquor sold, served, or displayed in violation of law may be
seized and may be disposed of under M.S. § 297G.20.



      (9)   A club issued a permit under this section may allow
members to bring and keep a personal supply of intoxicating liquor in lockers
on the club's premises,  All bottles kept on the premises must have attached
to it a label signed by the member.  No person under 21 years of age may
keep a supply of intoxicating liquor on club premises.



   (L)   One day consumption and display permit.  With the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, a one day consumption and display permit
may be issued to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a social
activity in the city sponsored by the organization.  The fee for the permit
may not exceed $25.  A city may not issue more than ten permits under this
division in any one year.



   (M)   Culinary class limited on-sale license.  Culinary class
limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business establishment not
otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license that, as part
of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which payment is
made by each participant or advance reservation is required.  The license
authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class, at no
additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine or
12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for
consumption on the licensed premises only.



   (N)   Temporary off-sale wine license.  With the approval of the
Commission of Public Safety, temporary off-sale wine licenses may be issued
for the off-sale of wine at an auction.  A license issued under this
division authorizes the sale of only vintage wine of a brand and vintage that
is not commonly being offered for sale by any wholesaler in Minnesota.  The
license may authorize the off-sale of wine for not more than three
consecutive days, provided not more than 600 cases of wine are sold at any
auction.  The licenses are subject to the terms, including license fee,
imposed by § 113.09.



   (O)   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license.  With the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety,
brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses may
be issued to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture
and who meet the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.24, as it may be
amended from time to time.  Sales under this license at on-sale may not
exceed 3,500 barrels per year.  If a brew pub licensed under this division
possesses a license for off-sale under division (P) below, the brew pub’s
total combined retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500
barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.



   (P)   Brewer off-sale malt liquor license. 



      (1)   With the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety,
brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses may be issued to a brewer that is a
licensee under division (O) above and otherwise meets the criteria
established at M.S. § 340A.24, as it may be amended from time to time. 
Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at
exclusive liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off-sale must be
removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at
exclusive liquor stores.  All malt liquor sold under this license shall be
packaged in the manner required by M.S. § 340A.285, as it may be amended
from time to time.  Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per
year.  If a brewer licensed under this division possesses a license under
division (O) above, the brewer’s total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale
may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total
more than 750 barrels.



      (2)   With approval of the Commissioner, brewer off-sale malt
liquor licenses may also be issued to a holder of a brewer’s license under
M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (I) or (j), and meeting the criteria
established by M.S. § 340A.28, as may be amended from time to time.  The
amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed 750 barrels annually. 
Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at
exclusive liquor stores in the jurisdiction in which the brewer is located,
and the malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before
the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores.  Packaging
of malt liquor for off-sale under this license must comply with M.S. §
340A.285.



   (Q)   Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license.  With
the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, brewer temporary on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued to brewers, who manufacture fewer
than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, for the on-sale of intoxicating
liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by the brewer within the
municipality.



   (R)   Brewer taproom license.  A brewer taproom license may be
issued to the holder of a brewer’s license under M.S. § 340A.301 subd.
6(c), (i) or (j), as they may amended from time to time. A brewer's taproom
license authorizes on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for
consumption on the premises of, or adjacent to one brewery location owned by
the brewer.  A brewer may have only one taproom license, and may not have an
ownership interest in a brewery licensed under M.S. § 340A.301 subd. 6(d),
as it may be amended from time to time.  A brewer taproom license may not be
issued to a brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor
annually, or to a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of wine
annually.  Within ten days of issuing a brewer taproom license, the City
Clerk will inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of the licensee’s name,
address, trade name, and the effective date and expiration date of the
license. The City Clerk will inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of a
license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or revocation during the license
period.



   (S)   Cocktail room license.  A cocktail room license may be issued
to the holder of a state microdistillery license.  A microdistillery
cocktail room license authorizes on-sale of distilled liquor produced by the
distiller for consumption on the premises of, or adjacent to one distillery
location owned by the distiller.  The holder of a microdistillery cocktail
room license may also hold a license to operate a restaurant at the
distillery.  No more than one cocktail room license may be issued to any
distiller. A microdistillery cocktail room license may not be issued to any
person having an ownership interest in a distillery licensed under M.S. §
340A.301 subd. 6 (a).  No single entity may hold both a microdistillery
cocktail room and taproom license; a microdistillery cocktail room and
taproom license may not be co-located.  Within ten days of the issuance of a
microdistillery cocktail room license, the City Clerk shall inform the
Commissioner of Public Safety of the licensee’s name and address and trade
name, and the effective date and expiration date of the license.  The City
Clerk shall also inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of a
microdistillery cocktail room license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or
revocation during the license period.



   (T)   Microdistiller off-sale license.  A microdistiller off-sale
license may be issued to the holder of a state microdistillery license.  A
microdistiller off-sale license authorizes off-sale of one 375 milliliter
bottle per customer per day of product manufactured on-site, provided the
product is also available for distribution to wholesalers.



   (U)   Microdistiller temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor
license.  A microdistiller temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license may
be issued to the holder of a state microdistillery license.  A
microdistillery temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license authorizes
on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by
the microdistillery within the city.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.09  LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.



   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed
any limit established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time, for a liquor license.



   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time, in the ordinance
establishing fees and charges, the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue as well as any other provisions of this chapter.  The
license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the license and other costs
directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws and this chapter.  No
liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed notice of a
hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees at least 30 days
before the hearing.



   (C)   The fees for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted
after the commencement of the license year, shall be prorated on a monthly
basis, i.e., one-twelfth the annual license fee for each month, or portion
thereof, remaining until the license will expire.



   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time an
application is filed with the city.  If an application is denied, the
license fee shall be returned to the applicant.



   (E)   In the event an applicant for an initial or renewal of a
license granted under this chapter withdraws the initial or renewal
application prior to Council approval of that application, the license fee
shall be refunded to the applicant in an amount as set by the City Council.



   (F)   No license fee shall be refunded, in whole or in part, after
Council approval of the license application.



   (G)   The City Clerk shall, without City Council action, issue a
duplicate for any license issued pursuant to this chapter, upon the filing of
an affidavit of the licensee, stating that the original license was lost or
destroyed, and upon payment of a duplicate license fee of an amount as set by
the City Council.  The duplicate shall be dearly marked as a duplicate.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.10  COUNCIL’S DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.



   The Council, in its sound discretion, may either grant or deny the
application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. 
No applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.11  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form.  Every application for a license issued under this
chapter shall be on a form provided by the city.  Every application shall
state the name of the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to
the applicant’s character, with references as the Council may require, the
type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the
proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the
premises, whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business,
how long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other
information as the Council may require from time to time.  An application
for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by
the Commissioner of Public Safety, and shall also contain the information
required in this section.  The form shall be verified and filed with the
city.  No person shall make a false statement in an application.



   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license
under this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial
responsibility as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time
to time, with regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be
amended from time to time.  This proof will be filed with the city and the
Commissioner of Public Safety.  Any liability insurance policy filed as
proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. §
340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.  Operation of a business
required to be licensed by this chapter, without having on file with the city
at all times effective proof of financial responsibility, is a cause for
revocation of the license.  The liquor liability certificate must cover the
actual license period.



   (C)   Financial responsibility requirement for applicants for
on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses. All license applications and renewals for
applicants with on-sale 3.2% malt liquor sales of $25,000 or more per year
shall provide the city with an insurance certificate of liquor liability
coverage in at least the minimum amount required by state statutes.
Applicants with on-sale 3.2% malt liquor sales under $25,000 per year may
sign an affidavit certifying sales of less than $25,000, and a liquor
liability certificate will not be required.



   (D)   City Council’s discretion in refusing to grant liquor
license applications.  The City Council may, in its sole discretion and for
any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application for any license.  No
license shall be granted, or renewed, for operation on any premises, on which
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are
delinquent or unpaid.  In the event an action has been commenced pursuant to
the provisions of M.S. Ch. 278, as it may be amended from time to time,
questioning the amount or validity or taxes, the Council may, upon request of
the licensee, waive strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be
granted, however, for taxes, or any portion thereof, that remain.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.12  DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.



   (A)   The application shall specifically describe the compact and
contiguous premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed.  The
description may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.



   (B)   No license shall be issued for premises located within areas
restricted against commercial use through zoning ordinances or other
proceedings or legal processes regularly held for that purpose, except that
licenses may be issued for sale in restaurants in premises that have been
restricted against commercial uses since the establishment of the restaurants
therein; and no license shall be issued contrary to the provisions of any
charter, ordinance or any special law restricting areas within which
intoxicating liquor may be sold.  No license shall be issued for premises or
places in which the sale or use thereof has been prohibited by the
Intoxicating Liquor Act (M.S. Ch. 340A) or the city code.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.13  APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL.



   At feast 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city.  The
decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion
of the Council.  No licensee has a right to have its license renewed.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.14  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable by the
licensee to another person, firm or corporation.  No license shall be
transferable to a different location, except with the prior consent of the
City Council, and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license as provided
herein.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.15  LICENSE POSTING.



   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted on the
premises for which the license is issued.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.16  INVESTIGATION.



   Preliminary background and financial investigation.  On an initial
application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and,
in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to
do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant, or it
may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.17  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the
premises described in the application.



   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly
issued within the city to any one person.



   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.



   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business
ineligible for a license under state law.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.18  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the
license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the
condition is met.



   (A)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it.  The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter
and the law equally with the employee.



   (B)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer,
city employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct
compliance checks, and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises
of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the
time when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.



   (C)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public
during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.



   (D)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state
law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



§ 113.19  HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.



   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by
M.S. §340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City
Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours
than state law allows.



      (1)   No on-sale shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week.



      (2)   Off-sale liquor can be sold per M.S. § 340A.504, as it
may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, no
person shall, directly or indirectly, sell or serve intoxicating liquors on
Sunday, without having first obtained a special license from the city
therefor.



      (2)   A special Sunday on-sale license may be issued by the
City Council for a period of one year.



      (3)   Sunday on-sale licenses may only be issued to bona fide
hotels or restaurants, as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subds. 13 and 25, and
§ 113.01, respectively, as they may be amended from time to time.



      (4)   No licensee shall sell or serve liquor on Sunday unless
in conjunction with the serving of food as provided in M.S. § 340A.504,
subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.



         (a)   The hours of Sunday operation shall be between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. Sunday and 1:00 a.m. Monday.



         (b)   Food service must be provided and maintained from
the time of opening until no less than three hours before closing,



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.20  HOURS OF OPERATION; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall consume, nor shall any on-sale licensee permit
any consumption of, intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale
licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally
occur.



   (B)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other
container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon
any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than
30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.



   (C)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall
remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time
when a sale can legally occur.



   (D)   Any violation of any condition of this chapter may be grounds
for penalty, revocation or suspension of the license, or any combination
thereof.



   (E)   No open container with an alcoholic beverage shall be allowed
in an on-sale establishment between 15 minutes after the hour of termination
of sale and the hour when sale of alcoholic beverages may commence under
state law.  For purposes of this section, an OPEN CONTAINER shall mean a
bottle, can, glass, cup or mug designed or used for individual consumption of
beverages and/or a pitcher, and shall not refer to a large container not
delivered for use by the retail consumer or a container kept in a bar area
accessed only by employees of the establishment.



   (F)   All off-sale stock located on premises for which both an
on-sale and an off-sale license have been issued shall be maintained apart
from on-sale liquor stock, and shall be closed off and secured against access
for any retail business purpose except during those hours when off-sale
transactions are permitted.



   (G)   Off-sale purchases must be removed from the premises during
the off-sale hours.  This applies to all off-sale license holders, including
combination on-off-sale licenses. For the purpose of allowing refrigeration
of 3.2% malt liquor kegs, arrangements may be made with the Police Department
for removal of kegs between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the days during which
sales are not allowed if the sale is confirmed during business hours.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.21  MINORS ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any
rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt
liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18
may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host
or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or
other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating
liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.



   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed
establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a
restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.22  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.



   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public
place of business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from
the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414,
as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the
Council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The City Council may suspend for a period of time, to be
determined by the Council, not to exceed 60 days, issue a fine not to exceed
$2,000 for each violation, or revoke any liquor license, or impose any
combination of these sanctions, upon finding that the licensee has failed to
comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter
relating to liquor.  In the event of a violation of state and/or local
liquor laws, the City Council may act as the hearing body and follow
guidelines as outlined in City Policy Chapter 1.06, Liquor Violation
Policy.  No suspension or revocation takes effect until the license or
permit holder has been given an opportunity for a hearing under sections
14.57 to 14.69 of the Administrative Procedure Act (M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69).



   (B)   In addition to the process contained in this section for civil
license violations, violation of this chapter is also a criminal offense. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated under that chapter
as they may be amended from time to time, is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law.



   (C)   Non-payment of a fine is grounds for suspension or revocation
of a liquor license.



(Ord. 1060, passed 12-5-17)



CHAPTER 114:  TAXICABS



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   License required; fees; display and number



   114.03   Insurance required



   114.04   Rates



   114.05   Mechanical condition



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVER.  The person driving and having physical control over a taxicab
whether he or she be the licensee or in the employ of the licensed operator.



   OPERATOR.  A licensee owning or otherwise having control of one or
more taxicabs.



   TAXICAB.  Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or traversing
a scheduled route for public use or hire upon payment of a fare or at regular
fare rates, but not including such as are designed for mass transportation as
buses, trains or streetcars.



(`86 Code, § 4.37)



§ 114.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES; DISPLAY AND NUMBER.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab
without a license therefor from the city.



   (B)   (1)   The annual license fee for the operator's first
conveyance and each additional conveyance operated under the license shall be
set by the City Council.



      (2)   If a licensed vehicle is disabled through mechanical
failure or for needed repairs.



      (3)   The license may be temporarily transferred to another
conveyance for a seven-day period upon approval by the city.



   (C)   All licenses shall be issued for specific conveyances, except
as otherwise herein provided. License tags, including number and year for
which issued, shall be plainly visible from the front of the conveyance. 
Both sides of every licensed taxicab, when in use, shall be plainly and
permanently marked as such with a painted sign or appurtenances showing the
full or abbreviated name of the licensed operator.



   (D)   The number of licensed conveyances operated within the city
shall be limited to 15 until the population exceeds 15,000.  One conveyance
may be licensed for each 2,000 persons in excess of 15,000.  Numbers of
licensed conveyances shall be based upon federal census figures or an
official intermediate count of the residents of the city.



(`86 Code, § 4.37)  (Am. Ord. 739, passed 11-16-99)



§ 114.03  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Before a taxicab license is issued by the Council, and at all times
effective during the licensed period, the licensee shall have and maintain
public liability and bodily injury insurance in the amount established by the
City Council.  The insurance shall cover all passengers carried by the
insured licensee and shall be for public taxicab purposes.  All policies
shall contain a clause providing for a ten-day written notice to the Records
Administrative Secretary before cancellation and a memorandum of the
insurance shall be furnished to the city before a license is issued.



(`86 Code, § 4.37)



§ 114.04  RATES.



   (A)   Each applicant shall file with the Records Administrative
Secretary, before a taxicab license is issued or renewed, a schedule of
proposed maximum rates to be charged by him or her during the license period
for which the application is made.  The schedule of proposed maximum rates,
or a compromise schedule thereof, shall be approved by the Council before
granting the license.



   (B)   The schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
taxicab in full view of passengers riding therein.  Nothing herein shall
prevent a taxicab licensee from petitioning the Council for review of the
rates during the license period, and the Council may likewise consider the
petition and make new rates effective at any time.  No taxicab licensee
shall charge rates in excess of maximum rates approved by the Council.



(`86 Code, § 4.37)



§ 114.05  MECHANICAL CONDITION.



   (A)   Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present
to the Council a certificate signed by a competent and experienced mechanic
showing that the taxicab conveyance is in good mechanical condition, that it
is thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers and that it is in neat
and clean condition.



   (B)   The similar certificate may be required from time to time
during the licensed period.  In lieu of the certificate the Council may
accept the report of the Chief of Police relative thereto.



(`86 Code, § 4.37)



CHAPTER 115:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 116:  RENTAL HOUSING



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Inspection and licensing



   116.03   Application procedure



   116.04   License terms and conditions; violations



   116.05   Schedule of fees



   116.06   Conduct on licensed premises



   116.07   Reserved



   116.08   Crime free multi-housing program



   



   116.99   Violation



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRUG RELATED ACTIVITY.  The illegal manufacture, sale, distribution,
purchase, use or possession with the intent to manufacture, sell, distribute,
or use a controlled substance as defined by law.



   RENTAL HOUSING UNIT.  Any building or structure, or portion thereof,
which is designed, built, remodeled, rented, leased, let or hired out to be
occupied, or which is occupied as a home or residence of a person or persons
other than the owner or purchaser of record.  This definition does not apply
to dormitories owned and/or controlled by an established educational
institution nor motel or hotel rooms customarily rented on a daily basis.



(`86 Code, § 4.93)  (Am. Ord. 705, passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. 803, passed
8-20-02; Am. Ord. 907, passed 8-2-06)



§ 116.02  INSPECTION AND LICENSING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate or cause to
be operated either as owner, lessee, agent or in any other capacity within
the city any rental housing, as defined in § 116.01, without having first
obtained a license to do so as hereafter provided.  It shall be unlawful for
an owner, designated agent or operator, after notice has been sent by first
class mail, to continue operation of a rental dwelling unit without
submitting an application for a license under this chapter, along with the
necessary fee.  Inspection of a rental dwelling shall be done prior to
issuance of an initial rental housing license, prior to rental housing
license renewal, and upon a rental housing tenant's filing of a complaint
with the city of rental housing conditions that are subject to the standards
herein.



(`86 Code, § 4.93)  (Am. Ord. 705, passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. 803, passed
8-20-02; Am. Ord. 937, passed 11-20-07)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.03  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   (1)   Owners of rental property must conduct a criminal
history of every prospective tenant through the Waseca Police Department. 
The applicant shall pay an investigation fee as established by the City
Council.



      (2)   Failure to conduct a criminal history of a prospective
tenant as provided in this chapter shall be considered a violation of this
chapter.  The owner of the rental housing unit shall be subject to
suspension or loss of rental license as determined by the City Council after
hearing.  The suspension or revocation may be for all units in a given
building or complex of buildings.  Notice of the intent to suspend a rental
license shall be given by the city to the owner of the rental housing unit a
minimum of ten days prior to a hearing to be held before the City Council.



   (B)   The owner of each rental housing unit shall make written
application to the city for a license on a form to be supplied by the city
and containing information as necessary to administer and enforce the
provisions of and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
and the minimum standards of the Uniform Housing Code.  The legal owner of
record of the rental housing unit shall make written application to the city
for a license as herein provided prior to any initial occupancy, and, prior
to license renewal.  Every applicant for a license shall assist the city in
making the inspection of the premises.  This includes notifying the
occupants of the building of the time when the inspection will be conducted
and requesting their cooperation in the inspection.



(`86 Code, § 4.93)  (Am. Ord. 705, passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. 803, passed
8-20-02; Am. Ord. 907, passed 8-2-06) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.04  LICENSE TERMS AND CONDITIONS; VIOLATION.



   (A)   (1)   If upon completion of the inspection of the building
and habitable portions thereof, it is found that the minimum requirements of
the Uniform Housing Code have been met, and the property as a whole is in
compliance with this code, a license shall be issued.  If the Housing
Inspector finds code deficiencies, he or she shall list the deficiencies,
note necessary corrections and give these findings to the building owner and
no license shall be issued until the deficiencies are corrected.  Upon
reinspection of licensed premises, if the Inspector finds violations of the
applicable codes, the owner shall be notified of the violations and ordered
to correct them within a reasonable time.  Failure to correct the violations
as ordered may be grounds for revocation of the license.



      (2)   The Inspector may suspend the license if the Inspector
determines that a violation constitutes an immediate hazard to the public
health or safety, or the health or safety of the tenant.  Upon suspension of
the license, a public hearing shall be scheduled within 15 days, before the
City Council which may revoke the license, rescind the suspension or set
other conditions as may be deemed reasonable.  The units within a structure
which are in compliance with the Uniform Housing Code minimal requirements
may continue on condition that units in other portions of the structure in
noncompliance do not create an immediate hazard to the health and safety to
the persons in the occupied units.  The extended occupancy may continue
until final action of the City Council.



      (3)   The suspended license may be revalidated upon meeting
the requirements of the code with payment of 50% of the applicable license
and inspection fee.  Issuance of a new license after revocation shall be
subject to a payment of the full amount of the applicable license and
inspection fee.



   (B)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a period
of three years.  The license period shall begin on January 1 and shall
expire on December 31.  The issuance of a temporary certificate preceding
the actual issuance of a license shall not extend the expiration date of the
license.



   (C)   (1)   A license issued hereunder is transferable, for a fee
in an amount determined by the City Council, to any person who has acquired
ownership of a licensed building for the unexpired portions of the three-year
term for which it was issued or reissued, provided that the application to
transfer the license is filed with the city for change of ownership and the
licensed building and dwelling units are in compliance with the Uniform
Housing Code.  The license shall terminate upon failure to apply for its
transfer within 30 days of the date of sale or transfer of ownership of the
building.



      (2)   The suspended license may be revalidated upon meeting
the requirements of the code with payment of 50% of the applicable license
and inspection fee.  Issuance of a new license after revocation shall be
subject to a payment of the full amount of the applicable license and
inspection fee.



   (D)   Licenses issued under this section shall be prominently and
publicly displayed on the premises of the structure, wherever feasible, or
produced on demand by a tenant or prospective tenant, and shall be available
at reasonable times for inspection by an authorized inspector of the city.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any lessor to rent a housing unit to
a tenant in violation of this section, whether the occupancy is for a tenancy
at will or by written lease.



(`86 Code, § 4.93)  (Am. Ord. 705, passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. 739, passed
11-16-99; Am. Ord. 803, passed 8-20-02)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.05  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   (A)   At the time of application for the license or for license
renewal required by this section, the Housing Inspector shall collect the
appropriate license fee and inspection fee in accordance with the annual fee
schedule.



   (B)   The license and inspection fees shall be paid upon application
on or before date of initial license issuance or license renewal.  The
license fee shall be subject to a 10% penalty per month, or any portion
thereof, beyond the date due and payable.  Except as provided for the
transfer of license, no refund of license and inspection fees shall be made
to those discontinuing operation or who sell, transfer, give away or
otherwise dispose of a licensed building to another person.  In the event it
is determined by the City Manager that an application must be denied due to
legal restrictions that prohibit the issuance of the license, the applicant's
tendered fees will be returned.  The City Manager shall review the fee
schedule annually and recommend changes as the Manager deems appropriate to
the City Council.  If the application is made after July 1, the fee shall be
50% of the fee otherwise due.



(`86 Code, § 4.93)  (Am. Ord. 705, passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. 803, passed
8-20-02)



§ 116.06  CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   The license holder shall be responsible to prevent repeat
instances of disorderly conduct by tenants, members of a tenant's household
and guests.  For the purposes of this section, “disorderly conduct”
means the following:



      (1)   Violations of the city code;



      (2)   M.S. § 609.72, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (3)   Gambling or gambling-related activity committed within
the building;



      (4)   Keeping or permitting a disorderly house within the
building;



      (5)   The resident, any member of the resident’s household
or guest or other person under the resident’s control shall not engage in
illegal activity, including drug-related illegal activity, on or near the
said premises;



      (6)   The resident, any member of the resident’s household
or guest or other person under the resident’s control shall not engage in
any act intended to facilitate illegal activity, including drug-related
illegal activity on or near the said premises;



      (7)   The resident or members of the household will not permit
the dwelling to be used for or be used to facilitate illegal activity,
including drug-related illegal activity, regardless of whether the individual
engaging in such activity is a member of the household;



      (8)   The resident or members of the household will not engage
in the manufacture, sale or distribution of illegal drugs at any location
whether on or near the dwelling or premises or otherwise;



      (9)   Unlawful sales or gifts of alcoholic beverages by an
unlicensed person committed within the building in violation of M.S. §
340A.503(2), as it may be amended from time to time;



      (10)   Unlawful use or possession of a firearm in violation of
M.S. §§ 609.66(1)(A), 609.67 or 624.713, as they maybe amended from time to
time, committed within the building;



      (11)   The resident, any member of the resident’s household
or guest or other person under the resident’s control shall not engage in
acts of violence or threats of violence, including, but not limited to: the
unlawful discharge of a firearm, prostitution, criminal street gang activity,
intimidation or any other conduct that jeopardizes the health, safety or
welfare of the landlord, his agents or tenants.



   (B)   (1)   Upon determination by the Police Department, Housing
Inspector or Health Inspector that the licensed premises were used in a
disorderly manner, the city shall notify the license holder by mail of the
violation and direct the license holder to provide a written plan of
corrective action to address the violations to the City Manager.



      (2)   If a building contains more than one rental unit, two or
more incidents of disorderly conduct must consist of conduct:



         (a)   Anywhere in the building by the same tenant or
lessee, or persons acting in conjunction with or under the control of the
same tenant or lessee; or



         (b)   By any persons within the same rental unit while
occupied by the same tenant or lessee or within two or more rental units
while occupied by the same tenant or lessee.



   (C)   If another instance of disorderly use of the premises occurs
within 12 months of an incident for which notice provided in division (A)
above was given, the license holder shall be notified of the instance of
disorderly use and shall also be required to submit a written report of
actions taken by the landlord to eliminate future disorderly use of the
premises.  This written report shall be submitted to the city within five
days of the notice of disorderly use of the premises and shall detail all
actions taken by the license holder in response to all notices of disorderly
use of the premises within the preceding 12 months.



   (D)   (1)   If another instance of disorderly use of the premises
occurs within 12 months after receipt of notices as pursuant to divisions (A)
and (B) above, the rental housing unit license may be revoked or suspended by
the City Council for the dwelling unit.  The suspension or revocation may be
for all units in a given building or complex of buildings.  In lieu of
suspension or revocation the City Council may fine the owner of the rental
unit(s).  The fine amount is applied to each dwelling unit listed on the
owner’s rental license.  The fine will be established by the City Council.



      (2)   After suspension or revocation, the City Council may
reissue the license if substantial improvements are made to correct problems
causing the suspension or revocation and a license holder shall pay to the
city a reinstatement fee as outlined in § 116.04(A).  A suspension may be
stayed by the City Council subject to payment of the applicable reinstatement
fees and no further violations of this section for a period of 12 months.



   (E)   No suspension or revocation shall be imposed where the
instance of disorderly use of the premises occurred during the pendency of
eviction proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within 30 days of notice given by
the license holder to a tenant to vacate the premises where the disorderly
use was related to and occurring in the unit for which eviction proceedings
were undertaken or notice to vacate was given.  Eviction proceedings shall
not be a bar to sanctions however unless they are diligently pursued by the
license holder.



(`86 Code, § 4.93)  (Am. Ord. 705, passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. 803, passed
8-20-02; Am. Ord. 907, passed 8-2-06) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.07  RESERVED.



§ 116.08  CRIME FREE MULTI-HOUSING PROGRAM.



   (A)   The program. Crime free multi-housing program is a three-phase
certification program for rental properties of all sizes, including single
family rental homes.  The program is available to owners and property
managers of rental properties located within the city.  Crime free
multi-housing is known to be effective in reducing criminal activity in
rental properties.  The program is a partnership between local law
enforcement, rental property owners, managers, and tenants to reduce crime,
drugs, and gang activity.



   (B)   Certification.  To obtain and maintain certification from the
Waseca Police Department as member of the crime free multi-housing program a
rental property owner or property manager must:



      (1)   Successfully complete and implement all of the
components of the crime free multi-housing program within two years from the
date of application to the program.  Components of the program are:



         (a)   Attendance at and successful completion of the
management training component which shall be shown by demonstrating and
understanding each of the following:



            1.   Crime free multi-housing program and
ordinance;



            2.   Rental applications and housing
discrimination;



            3.   Screening and background checks;



            4.   Lease and lease addendums;



            5.   Unlawful detainer and eviction;



            6.   Manager/owner policies and roles;



            7.   Data privacy;



            8.   Narcotics and gangs;



            9.   Section 8 housing; and



            10.   Rental licensing.



         (b)   Compliance with environmental crime prevention
requirements by owners for the rental properties that are located within the
city, or in the case of a property manager, for all rental properties located
within the city that are managed by that property manager.  Compliance shall
be indicated by completion of the following requirements:



            1.   Single cylinder deadbolt locks installed in
each entry door for the dwelling unit.  All egress doors shall be readily
openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the use of a
key or special knowledge or effort.



            2.   High security strike plate with 3-inch screws
installed on each entry door for the dwelling unit.



            3.   A 180 degree door viewer installed in primary
entry door for each dwelling unit.



            4.   Anti-lift/slide (Charlie bar) device
installed on sliding glass doors and adequate locks on all windows.



            5.   At least one wall-switch-controlled lighting
outlet shall be installed to provide illumination on the exterior side of
each outdoor egress door having grade level access.



            6.   Landscaping in a manner that provides for
visual sight lines to the outside.



            7.   Premises identification.  Approved numbers
or addresses shall be provided for all new and existing buildings in such a
position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road
fronting the property.



            8.   Compliance with all Fire and Building Code
requirements.



         (c)   The Inspector for the city may review to verify
and ensure compliance with environmental crime prevention requirements.  The
Inspector may conduct these compliance checks as part of the rental housing
ordinance.



         (d)   At least once every 12 months make available, in
cooperation with the Police Department training for tenants in respect to the
following subject areas:



            1.   Crime free multi-housing program together
with the concept of partnerships and sharing responsibility.



            2.   Crime concerns and prevention awareness
techniques.



         (e)   Include, implement and enforce, as part of all
written leases, the lease addendum for crime free-drug free housing provided
by Police Department.



      (2)   Following successful completion of the program
components described in § 116.08(B)(1) above, attend annual
retraining/recertification sessions and maintain compliance with all program
components.



      (3)   Rental property owners or rental property managers who
acquire additional rental properties following the successful completion of
the program described in § 116.08(A) above must bring those properties into
compliance within one year from the date of acquisition or within one year of
the date of assumption of management responsibilities.  The Inspector for
the city may inspect the property for compliance during the issuance of an
initial rental housing license described in the rental housing ordinance.



      (4)   Rental property owners and managers must comply with all
Rental Housing Regulations as specified in §§ 116.01 through 116.07.



   (C)   Decertification.



      (1)   Rental property owners or property managers, who do not
maintain compliance with the certification requirements as set forth above,
will lose their certification.  Violations of rental housing regulations as
set forth in §§ 116.01 through 116.07, resulting in suspension/revocation
will result in decertification.



      (2)   An owner or property manager who is decertified shall
not be eligible to reapply for crime free multi-housing certification for a
period of one year following decertification.



(Ord. 906, passed 8-2-06) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.99  VIOLATION.



   Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor. 
Punishment shall be $1,000 fine/90 days in jail.  In addition to bringing
criminal charges for violation of this chapter, the city may seek a civil
injunction against any licensee or occupant who violates any terms of this
chapter.



(Ord. 803, passed 8-20-02; Am. Ord. 907, passed 8-2-06; Am. Ord 957, passed
11-20-07)



CHAPTER 117:  GAMBLING; GAMES OF CHANCE



Section



General Provisions



   117.01   Purpose



   117.02   State law adopted



   117.03   License requirement; application procedure



   117.04   License regulation and control



   117.05   Conditions



   117.06   Reports required; violations



Bingo



   117.20   State law adopted



   117.21   License required; application procedure



   117.22   Regulation and control



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 117.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to closely regulate and control the
conduct of gambling.



(`86 Code, § 4.63)



§ 117.02  STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   Except as may conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, and rules
adopted by the State Charitable Gambling Control Board governing and
licensing lawful gambling are adopted by reference.



(`86 Code, § 4.63)  (Am. Ord. 686, passed 8-6-96)



§ 117.03  LICENSE REQUIREMENT; APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   No person shall directly or indirectly operate a gambling
device or conduct a raffle without a valid license issued by the State
Gambling Control Board unless license request is exempted under state rules.



   (B)   (1)   Application shall be made to the State Gambling
Control Board.



      (2)   The city shall receive notice and copy of the
application and reserves the right to deny issuance of a state gambling
license in the city through the Gambling Control Board.



(`86 Code, § 4.63)



§ 117.04  LICENSE REGULATION AND CONTROL.



   Regulation and control of licensing provisions shall be under the State
Gambling Control Board jurisdiction, except as provided under § 117.03 (B).



(`86 Code, § 4.63)



§ 117.05  CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The conduct of lawful gambling under license issued by the
Minnesota Gambling Control Board shall be subject to the following conditions
in the city:



      (1)   Each organization authorized to conduct lawful gambling
within the city must, on an annual basis, expend at least 70% of its lawful
purpose expenditures on activities conducted or located within the trade area
of the city.



      (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, the city's trade area
shall be defined as Waseca County.



      (3)   Each organization conducting lawful gambling within the
city shall report annually to the City Manager's office of the city not later
than 30 days after each annual anniversary of the date on which the
organization became licensed, its expenditures for lawful purposes, which
information shall include the name and address of the organization, a general
description of how the expenditures for lawful gambling were spent and a
showing that the required percentage was, in fact, expended for lawful
purposes conducted or located within the city's trade area as defined above.



   (B)   The City Manager's office may prepare a form for use in
reporting the information required by this section.



(`86 Code, § 4.63)  (Am. Ord. 716, passed 4-7-98)



§ 117.06  REPORTS REQUIRED; VIOLATIONS.



   Failure to make timely reports and/or failure to expend the required
percentage of expenditures for lawful purposes on lawful purposes conducted
or located within the city's, trade area, shall be grounds for revocation or
refusal to renew the gambling license of the organization which is in
violation.



(`86 Code, § 4.63)  (Am. Ord. 686, passed 8-6-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



BINGO



§ 117.20  STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as they may be amended from time to
time, and rules adopted and amended by the State Gambling Control Board
governing and licensing bingo are hereby adopted by reference.



(`86 Code, § 4.92)



§ 117.21  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person or organization shall conduct bingo without a valid
license issued by the State Gambling Control Board unless license request is
exempt under State Gambling Board rules governing bingo.



   (B)   Application shall be made to the State Gambling Control
Board.  The city shall receive notice and copy of the application and
reserves the right to deny issuance of a state issued bingo license in the
city through the Gambling Control Board.



(`86 Code, § 4.92)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.22  REGULATION AND CONTROL.



   Regulations and control of bingo operations shall be under the State
Gambling Control Board jurisdiction.



(`86 Code, § 4.92)



CHAPTER 118:  GARBAGE HAULERS



Section



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   License required; fees



   118.03   Exceptions



   118.04   Licensee requirements



   118.05   Hauler requirements



Cross-reference:



   Solid Waste, see Ch. 54



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  All putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses
of dead animals, but excluding human excreta, sewage and other water-carried
wastes.



   OTHER REFUSE.  Ashes, glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags and
similar wastes but excluding sand, earth, brick, stone, concrete, trees, tree
branches and wood.



(`86 Code, § 4.38)



§ 118.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage or other refuse
for hire without a license therefor from the city, or to haul garbage or
other refuse from his or her own residence or business property other than as
herein excepted.



   (B)   The annual fee for a garbage and refuse hauler's license shall
be as set by the City Council.



(`86 Code, § 4.38)  (Am. Ord. 739, passed 11-16-99)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this section shall prevent persons from hauling garbage or
other refuse from their own residences or business properties provided the
following rules are observed:



   (A)   All garbage is hauled in containers that are water-tight on
all sides and the bottom and with tight-fitting covers on top;



   (B)   All other refuse is hauled in vehicles with leak-proof bodies
and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other means or material so as
to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of cargo; and



   (C)   All garbage and other refuse shall be dumped or unloaded only
at the designated city dump or sanitary landfill.



(`86 Code, § 4.38)



§ 118.04  LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.



   Hauler licenses shall be granted only upon the condition that the
licensee have tight packer-type vehicles in good condition to prevent loss in
transit of liquid or solid cargo, and that the same be dumped or unloaded
only at the designated city dump or sanitary landfill.



(`86 Code, § 4.38)



§ 118.05  HAULER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Licensed haulers are required to follow all city ordinances
and traffic laws in the course of providing services.



   (B)   All haulers, including their employees or contractors, who
fail to meet these requirements will be subject to the following disciplinary
action.



      (1)   A verbal warning will be issued to the hauler after the
first violation.  A written warning will be issued to the hauler after the
first violation.



      (2)   A written warning will be issued to the hauler and a
fine of $250 will be imposed.  Failure to pay a fine may result in the
revocation of a license by the City Council.



      (3)   At the time of a third violation, the hauler's license
will be recommended for revocation by the City Council.



   (C)   Violations of city ordinances or traffic laws by haulers while
providing hauling services may be grounds for denial of a hauler’s license.



(Ord. 1062, passed 12-19-17)



CHAPTER 119:  PLUMBING



Section



   119.01   Definition



   119.02   License required



   119.03   Insurance required



   119.04   City employees and contractors



Cross-reference:



   Public Works, see Title V



§ 119.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PLUMBING.  Engaging in either or both of the following:



      (1)   The work or business of making any connections
whatsoever with the water pipes, water mains, branch, sewers, storm sewers,
drains or other service pipes of the city, or making any repairs, additions
or alterations of any pipe, tap, stop cock, water closet or any other fixture
connected with or designed to be connected with the water works or sewerage
system of the city; and/or



      (2)   The work or business of making any connections
whatsoever for gas stoves, heaters, furnaces or other gas appliances of any
kind in homes or other buildings or premises in the city, or of making any
repairs, additions or alterations of any gas appliances or pipes or other
fixtures connected with the gas system in the city.



(`86 Code, § 4.60)



§ 119.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any plumbing conducted in the city shall be the control and supervision
of a licensed master plumber valid in the State of Minnesota.



(`86 Code, § 4.60)



§ 119.03  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   The plumber shall provide the city with a copy of the bond and
certificate of insurance required by the state.



§ 119.04  CITY EMPLOYEES AND CONTRACTORS.



   No city employee engaged in city work on either maintenance, repair or
extension of the city water or sewerage systems shall be required to be
licensed.



(`86 Code, § 4.60)



CHAPTER 120:  VENDING WAGONS



Section



   120.01   Definition



   120.02   License required; fee



   120.03   Consideration



§ 120.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   VENDING WAGON.  Any vehicle or structure temporarily or permanently
placed upon any street for the purpose of selling or vending peanuts, popcorn
or other confectionery.



(`86 Code, § 4.90)  (Am. Ord. 739, passed 11-16-99)



§ 120.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vending wagon
without first having obtained a license therefor from the city.



   (B)   The annual license fee for each vending wagon shall be set by
the City Council.  The Council may, in its discretion, waive the license fee
for non-profit organizations.



(`86 Code, § 4.90)  (Am. Ord. 739, passed 11-16-99)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 120.03  CONSIDERATION.



   In addition to all other considerations, the Council shall consider
traffic location and public convenience in determining whether or not to
issue the license.



(`86 Code, § 4.90)  (Am. Ord. 739, passed 11-16-99)



CHAPTER 121:  LODGING TAX



Section



   121.01   Recitals



   121.02   Definitions



   121.03   Imposition of tax



   121.04   Collections



   121.05   Exemptions



   121.06   Advertising no tax



   121.07   Payment and returns



   121.08   Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands



   121.09   Refunds



   121.10   Failure to return a file



   121.11   Administration of tax



   121.12   Examine records



   121.13   Violations



   121.14   Use of proceeds



   121.15   Appeals



   121.99   Penalty



§ 121.01  RECITALS.



   The Minnesota Legislature through M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended
from time to time, has authorized the imposition of a tax upon lodging at a
hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or other use of space by a
transient.  The Waseca City Council finds that the imposition of such a tax
would provide funding for a Tourism and Visitor Bureau to promote the city as
a tourist destination.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Waseca.



   LODGER.  The person obtaining lodging from an operator.



   LODGING.  The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel,
motel, campgrounds or rooming house, except where the lodging shall be for
continuous period of 30 days or more to the same lodger(s).  The furnishing
of rooms by religious, educational or non-profit organizations shall not
constitute LODGING for the purposes of this chapter.



   OPERATOR.  A person who provides lodging to others or any officer,
agent or employee of the person.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
estate, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or
any other combination of individuals.  Whenever the term PERSON is used in
any provision of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as
applied to a corporation, association or partnership, shall mean the officers
or partners thereof, as the case may be.



   RENT.  The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging
whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for
services rendered connection with furnishing lodging other than the room
charge itself.



   TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The person or entity selected by the City Council
to perform tax administrator duties.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator
for providing lodging to any person after the adoption of this chapter.  The
tax shall be stated and charged separately and shall be collected by the
operator from lodger.  The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt
owed by the operator to the municipality.  In no case shall the tax imposed
by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator
is authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a lodger.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.04  COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at
the time the rent is paid.



   (B)   The tax collections shall be deemed to held in trust by the
operator for the municipality.



   (C)   The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent
charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a
receipt of payment from the operator.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose
occupancy it is beyond the power of the municipality to tax.  No exemptions
shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is
collected and such a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of
perjury on forms provided by the Tax Administrator.  All such claims shall
be forwarded to the Tax Administrator when the returns and collections are
submitted as required by this chapter.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.06  ADVERTISING NO TAX.



   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state
to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any
part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not
be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be
refunded.  In computing the tax to be collected, amounts for less than $0.01
shall be considered an additional cent.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.07  PAYMENT AND RETURNS.



   (A)   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the
operator to the Tax Administrator monthly not later than 15 days after the
end of the month in which the taxes were collected.  At the time of payment,
the operator shall submit a return upon the forms and containing such
information as the Tax Administrator may require.



   (B)   The return shall contain the following minimum information:



      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during
the period covered by the return;



      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for
the period;



      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of
his or her agent duly authorized in writing;



      (4)   The period covered by the return; and



      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to
the lodging tax.



   (C)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect
to any reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this chapter
previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for which
became uncollectible during the reporting period, but only in proportion to
the portion of the consideration which became uncollectible.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.08  EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.



   The Tax Administrator shall, after return is filed, examine the same
and make any investigation or examination of records and accounts of the
person making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. 
The tax computed on the basis of the examination shall be the tax to be
paid.  If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, the excess
shall be paid to the Tax Administrator ten days after receipt of a notice
thereof given either personally or sent by registered mail to the address
shown on the return.  If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be
due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the Tax
Administrator ten days after determination of the refund.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.09  REFUNDS.



   Any person may apply to the Tax Administrator for a refund of taxes
paid for a prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that
period, provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless
filed within one year after the tax was paid, or within one year from the
finding of the return, whichever period is the longer.  The Tax
Administrator shall examine the claim and make and file written findings
thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a
notice thereof by registered mail to the period to the address stated upon
the return.  If the claim is allowed in whole or in part, the Tax
Administrator shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due
under this chapter from the claimant and the balance of the allowance, if
any, shall be paid by the Tax Administrator to this.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.10  FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.



   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return
shall fail to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or
otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon
written notice and demand, file the return or correction return within five
days of receipt of the written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax
due on the basis thereof.  If the person shall fail to file the return or
corrected return, the Tax Administrator shall make a return or corrected
return, for the person from the knowledge and information as the Tax
Administrator can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax
(less any payments therefore made on account of the tax for the taxable
period covered by the return) shall be paid upon within five days of the
receipt of written notice and demand for the payment.  Any such return or
assessment made by the Tax Administrator shall be prima facie correct and
valid and the person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness
or invalidity in any action of proceeding in respect thereto.



   (B)   If any portion of tax imposed by this chapter, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be
paid, the prosecuting attorney for the city may institute the legal action as
may be necessary to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, the
costs and disbursements of any action.



   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may grant
an operator one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return and
make payment of taxes as required by this chapter provided that interest
during the period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of
10% per annum.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.11  ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.



   The Tax Administrator shall administer and enforce the assessment and
collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter.  The Tax Administrator
shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents
required by this chapter and shall distribute the same throughout the city
and furnish them on applications, but failure to receive or secure them shall
not relieve any person from any obligation required of him or her under this
chapter.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.12  EXAMINE RECORDS.



   The Tax Administrator and those persons acting on behalf of the Tax
Administrator authorized in writing by the Tax Administrator of the city may
examine the books, paper and records of any operator in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made.  Every operator is directed and required to
give to the person authorized to examine the books, papers and records, the
means, facilities and opportunity for the examinations and investigation.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.13  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time
herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be
added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.



   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the
time prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that the failure is not
due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition to the
10% specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the figure is for
not more than 30 days with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or
fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the
aggregate.



   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any
payment required by this chapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent
return or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such a tax
or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal
to 50% of any tax (less any amount paid on the basis of the false or
fraudulent return) found due for the period to which the return related.



   (D)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties,
next to interest and then to the tax due.



   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty
provided by this section, shall bear interest at the maximum rate per annum
as prescribed by M.S. § 270.75, as it may be amended from time to time, from
the time the tax should have been paid until paid.  Any interest and penalty
shall be added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.14  USE OF PROCEEDS.



   Five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes
pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the Tax Administrator for costs of
collections.  Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the
collection of taxes pursuant to this chapter shall be used in accordance with
M.S. § 469.190, as the same may be amended from time to time, to provide
funding to Tourism and Visitors Bureau, or such other tourist or convention
center as selected by the City Council.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.15  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination
made by the Tax Administrator under this chapter may file a petition for
review of the notice, order or determination.  The petition shall contain
the name of the petitioner, the petitioner’s address and the location of
the lodging subject to the order, notice or determination.



   (B)   The petition shall be filed with the Tax Administrator within
ten days after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought
has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition the Tax Administrator shall set a
date and time for a meeting with the petitioner and shall give the petitioner
at least five days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the
meeting.



   (D)   At the meeting, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity
to show cause why the notice, order or determination shall be modified or
withdrawn.  If the meeting does not result in the matter being resolved to
the satisfaction of the petitioner, the petitioner may appeal to the City
Council.



   (E)   A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision to the City Council
must file a written notice of appeal with the City Council, in care of the
Records Administrative Secretary, within ten days after the Tax
Administrator’s decision following the division (D) above meeting has been
mailed to the petitioner.  The matter will thereupon be placed on the
Council agenda as soon as is practical.  At least five days prior to the
hearing before the City Council, the Tax Administrator shall prepare and
serve on the petitioner a memorandum of proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law.  A copy of the memorandum shall be presented to the City
Council at the time of the appeal hearing.  The Council shall then review
the proposed findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they are
correct.  Upon a determination by the Council that findings and conclusions
are incorrect, the Council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the
Tax Administrator based upon an application of the section of this chapter
and the evidence presented.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)



§ 121.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
chapter; or who shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for the
payment duly authorized agents or employees to examine the books, records and
papers under his or her control, or who shall willfully make any incomplete,
false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 788, passed 2-19-02)  Penalty, see § 121.99



CHAPTER 122:  PAWN SHOPS



Section



General Provisions



   122.01   Purpose



   122.02   Definitions



Licensing Regulations



   122.15   License required



   122.16   Restrictions on license transfer



   122.17   License and investigation fees



   122.18   Billable transaction fee



   122.19   Expiration of license



   122.20   Application regulations



   122.21   Investigation



   122.22   Issuance of license



   122.23   Conditions for approval



   122.24   Renewal



   122.25   Bond required



   122.26   Licensee requirements



   122.27   Denial, suspension or revocation



Conditions



   122.40   Records required



   122.41   Daily reports to police



   122.42   Receipt required



   122.43   Redemption period



   122.44   Holding period



   122.45   Police order to hold property



   122.46   Inspection of items



   122.47   Label required



   122.48   Prohibited acts



   122.49   Off-site storage



 



   122.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 122.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council finds that the use of services
provided by pawnbrokers provides an opportunity for the commission of crimes
and their concealment because pawn businesses have the ability to easily and
quickly receive and transfer property stolen by others.



      (2)   The City Council also finds that consumer protection
regulation is warranted in transactions involving pawnbrokers.



      (3)   The City Council further finds that the pawn industry
has outgrown the city’s current ability to effectively or efficiently
identify criminal activity related to pawn shops.



   (B)   (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent pawn
businesses from being used as facilities for the commission of crimes and to
assure that the businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards,
thereby protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the city.



      (2)   To assist the Police Department in better regulating
current and future pawn businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated
with the regulation of the pawn industry, and increase identification of
criminal activities in the pawn industry through the timely collection and
sharing of pawn transaction information, this chapter also implements and
establishes the required use of the automated pawn system (APS) as defined in
M.S. § 325J.05, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLABLE TRANSACTION.  Each reportable transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker except renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on
items previously reported and continuously in the licensee’s possession.



   ISSUING AUTHORITY.  The City of Waseca.



   MINOR.  Any natural person under the age of 18 years.



   PAWNSHOP.  Any business establishment operated by a pawnbroker.



   PAWNBROKER.  A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property or other valuable thing; who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling that same back again
at a stipulated price or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage or on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged.  To the extent that a pawnbroker business includes buying
personal property previously used, rented or leased, or selling property on
consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.  Any bank,
savings and loan association, or credit union shall not be deemed a
pawnbroker for purposes of this chapter.



   PERSON.  One or more natural persons; a partnership, including a
limited partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic or
non-profit corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the state; or any
other business organization.



   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION.  Each transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in
which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade,
or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed is reportable except:



      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used
merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established
permanent place of business, and the retail sale of said merchandise,
provided, the pawnbroker must maintain a record of the purchase or
consignment that describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner
which relates to that transaction record; or



      (2)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally
received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or
redemption periods have expired.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



LICENSING REGULATIONS



§ 122.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker at any location
without a pawnbroker license for that location.  The issuance of a license
under this chapter shall not relieve the licensee from obtaining any other
licenses or permits required to conduct the business at the same or any other
locations.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.16  RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE TRANSFER.



   (A)   Each license issued under this chapter shall be issued to the
applicant only and shall not be transferable to any other person.  No
licensee shall loan, sell, give or assign a license to another person.



   (B)   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred to a
different location than the one identified in the license application.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.17  LICENSE AND INVESTIGATION FEES.



   Annual license fees for a pawnbroker license and the investigation fee
for an applicant for a pawnbroker license shall be established from time to
time by the City Council.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.18  BILLABLE TRANSACTION FEE.



   The billable transaction fee shall be established from time to time by
the City Council and shall be classified according to the medium by which
daily reports required by § 122.41 are submitted to the Police Department. 
The billable transaction fee shall reflect the cost of processing
transactions from the respective classifications and other related regulatory
expenses.  The billable transaction fee for modem transactions shall not
exceed the billable transaction fee for manual transactions.  Billable
transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within 30
days.  Failure to timely pay the billable transaction fee shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.19  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   Al licenses issued under this chapter shall expire as of midnight on
December 31 of the year of issuance.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.20  APPLICATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to any information that may be required by the
County of Waseca pursuant to M.S. § 471.924, as it may be amended from time
to time, every application for a license under this chapter shall be made on
a form supplied by the issuing authority and shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   If the applicant is a natural person:



         (a)   The name, place and date of birth, street
residence address and telephone number of the applicant;



         (b)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United
States or a resident alien;



         (c)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been
known by a name or names used and information concerning dates and places
where used;



         (d)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted
under a designation, name or style other than the name of the applicant and a
copy of the certificate as required by M.S. § 333.01, as it may be amended
from time to time;



         (e)   The street addresses at which the applicant has
lived during the preceding five years;



         (f)   The type, name and location of every business or
occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five
years and the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years;



         (g)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, crime or violation of any statute or ordinance other than a minor
traffic offense; (If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the
time, place and offense for which convictions were had.)



         (h)   The applicant’s current financial statement and
true copies of the applicant’s federal and state income tax returns for the
two years prior to application.



         (i)   If the applicant does not manage the business, the
name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all
other information concerning each of them required in divisions (A)(1)(a)
through (A)(1)(g) above; and



         (j)   If the applicant is married:



            1.   The name, date of birth and residence address
of the applicant’s current spouse;



            2.   The type, name and location of every business
or occupation in which the applicant’s current spouse has been engaged
during the five preceding years;



            3.   The names and addresses of the employers or
partners of the applicant’s current spouse for the preceding five years; and



            4.   Whether the applicant’s current spouse has
ever been convicted of any felony, crime or violation of any statute or
ordinance other than a minor traffic offense.  If so, the applicant shall
furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions
were had.



      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership:



         (a)   The name(s), address(es) and dates of birth of all
general and limited partners and all information concerning each general
partner required in division (A)(1) above;



         (b)   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the
interest of each partner in the pawnbroker business;



         (c)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be
submitted with the application; (If the partnership is required to file a
certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as it may be
amended from time to time, a certified copy of such certificate shall be
attached to the application.)



         (d)   A true copy of the federal and state income tax
returns for the partnership for the two years prior to application; and



         (e)   If the applicant does not manage the business, the
name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all
information concerning each of them required in division (A)(1)(a) through
(A)(1)(g) above.



      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:



         (a)   The name of the corporation or business firm and
if incorporated, the state of incorporation;



         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws shall be
attached to the application;  (If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority, as required by M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended
from time to time, shall be attached.)



         (c)   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s) or other
agent(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each
manager, proprietor or agent required in division (A)(1) above; and



         (d)   A list of all persons who control or own an
interest in excess of 5% in the organization or business form, or who are
officers of the corporation or business form, and all information concerning
the persons required in division (A)(1) above.  This provision shall not
apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange and
is applying for a license to be owned and operated by it.



      (4)   For all applicants:



         (a)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker,
precious metal dealer or secondhand dealer license from any other
governmental unit. Identify such governmental unit(s);



         (b)   Whether the applicant has previously held a
pawnbroker, precious metal dealer or secondhand dealer license from any other
governmental unit;  (Identify the governmental unit(s).)



         (c)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied ,
or had revoked or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer or
secondhand dealer license from any other governmental unit;  (Identify the
governmental unit(s).)



         (d)   The location of the business premises;



         (e)   If the applicant does not own the business
premises, a true and complete copy of the executed lease;



         (f)   The legal description of the premises to be
licensed;



         (g)   Whether all real estate and personal property
taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been
paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;



         (h)   Whenever the application is for premises either
planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the
application must be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the
design of the proposed premises to be licensed; and  (If the plans or design
are on file with the city’s Inspections Department, no plans need to be
submitted with the application.)



         (i)   Other information as the issuing authority may
require.



   (B)   All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
signed and sworn to.  If the application is that of a natural person, it
shall be signed and sworn to by the person; if that of a corporation, by an
officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners;
and if that of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing
officer thereof.  Any falsification on a license application shall result in
the denial of the license.



   (C)   When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or
if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the
licensee must complete and submit the appropriate application on forms
provided by the issuing authority within 14 days.  The application must
include all appropriate information required in division (A) above.  The
investigation fee for a new manager shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.



   (D)   An application for a license pursuant to this chapter shall be
submitted to the Records Administrative Secretary on forms provided by the
city.  The Secretary shall refer the applications to the Police Department
and such other appropriate city departments for review, investigation and
recommendation.  The Secretary shall submit the application for a pawnbroker
license to the City Council within 60 days of receipt of the application.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.21  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The Police Department shall investigate into the truthfulness
of the statement set forth in the application and shall endorse the findings
thereon.



   (B)   The applicant must furnish the Police Department such evidence
as the Department may reasonably require in support of the statement set
forth in the application.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.22  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Within 60 days of submission, the City Council shall grant or deny a
license application for a pawnbroker license.  Failure of the Council to act
within 60 days of submission shall constitute approval of the license.  Any
falsification of, or material omission from, a license application shall
constitute good and sufficient cause to deny the application.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.23  CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL.



   (A)   No license shall be issued under this chapter if the
applicant, any general partner or managing partner of a partnership, or any
manager, proprietor or agent in charge of a corporation or other organization:



      (1)   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;



      (2)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03,(3), as it may be amended from time to time;



      (3)   Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien;



      (4)   Is not of good moral character or repute; and



      (5)   Holds an intoxicating liquor license under this code.



   (B)   The following locations shall be ineligible for a license
under this chapter:



      (1)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on
any property on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the
state, county, school district or city are due, delinquent, or unpaid.  In
the event a suit has been commenced under M.S. §§ 278.01 through 278.03, as
they may be amended from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of
taxes, the City Council may, on request, waive strict compliance with this
provision.  However, no waiver may be granted for taxes or any portion
thereof which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming
due.



      (2)   No license shall be granted or renewed if the property
on which the business is to be conducted is owned by a person who is
ineligible for a license under any of the requirements of this code, except
that a property owner who is a minor or who has been convicted of a crime,
other than a crime involving theft or falsehood, shall not make the premises
ineligible under this division.



      (3)   Pawnbroker operations may be located only as allowed
under Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   A proprietor or manager of the establishment shall be
authorized to accept service of process, civil or criminal, on behalf of the
licensee.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.24  RENEWAL.



   An application for the renewal of an existing license shall be made to
the Records Administrative Secretary at least 30, but no more than 60, days
prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made on such forms
as the issuing authority requires.  Applications for renewal of a pawnbroker
license shall be submitted by the Secretary to the City Council in the same
manner as for a new license.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.25  BOND REQUIRED.



   Before a license will be issued, or renewed, every applicant must
submit a $5,000 bond on forms acceptable to the issuing authority.  All
bonds must be conditioned that the principal will observe all laws in
relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and
that the principal will account for and deliver to any person legally
entitled to any goods which have come into the principal’s hand through the
principal’s business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof will pay the
reasonable value in money to the person.  The bond shall contain a provision
that no bond may be canceled except upon 30 days written notice to the city,
which shall be served upon the Records Administrative Secretary.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.26  LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No licensee shall keep the establishment open for the
transaction of business on any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after
10:00 p.m.



   (B)   (1)   A license issued under this chapter must be posted in
a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is issued.



      (2)   The license issued is only effective for the compact and
contiguous space specified in the approved license application.



   (C)   A licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the
conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain conditions of order.



   (D)   (1)   No licensee under this chapter may keep, possess or
operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed
premises of dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punch boards, black jack
tables or pin ball machines which return coins or slugs, chips or tokens of
any kind, which are redeemable in merchandise or cash.



      (2)   No gambling equipment authorized under M.S. §§ 349.11
through 349.60, as they may be amended from time to time, may be kept or
operated and no raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises and/or
adjoining rooms.



      (3)   The purchase of lottery tickets may take place on the
licensed premises as authorized by the Director of the Lottery pursuant to
M.S. §§ 349.01 through 349.15, as they may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.27  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalties that may be lawfully imposed, any
license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for one or
more of the following reasons:



   (A)   The proposed use does not comply with Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances;



   (B)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance or other provisions of state or local laws or ordinances;



   (C)   The applicant or licensee has violated any state statute
regulating pawnbrokers;



   (D)   The applicant or licensee has violated any state or local law
relating to moral character and repute;



   (E)   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or
more provisions of this chapter;



   (F)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a
background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of
information;



   (G)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a
license;



   (H)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the
application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant’s
business;



   (I)   The applicant or licensee has within the preceding five years,
violated any law relating to theft, damage to property or trespass, sale of a
controlled substance or operation of a business; and



   (J)   The owner of the premises licensed or proposed to be licensed
would not qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



CONDITIONS



§ 122.40  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   At any time of any reportable transaction other than renewals,
extensions or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in the
English language the following information by using ink or other indelible
medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the Police Department:



   (A)   A complete and accurate description of each item including,
but not limited to any trademark, identification number, serial number, model
number, brand name or other identifying mark on the item;



   (B)   The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged
therefore;



   (C)   The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due,
including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges;



   (D)   Date, time and place the item of property was received by the
licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that
distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee’s records; 
(The identifiers shall be consecutively numbered and for the purpose of the
reporting requirements under § 122.41 shall include any identifiers that may
have been voided for any reason.)



   (E)   Full name, residence address, residence telephone number and
date of birth of the person from whom the item of property was received;



   (F)   The identification number and state of issue for any of the
following forms of identification of the seller:



      (1)   Current valid drivers license;



      (2)   Current valid Minnesota identification card; and



      (3)   Current valid photo identification card issued by
another state.



   (G)   The signature of the person identified in the transaction;



   (H)   A color photograph or color video recording of:



      (1)   Each customer involved in a billable transaction;



      (2)   Each item pawned or sold that does not have a unique
serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed;



      (3)   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches
in length by two inches in width and must be maintained in a manner that the
photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of
the transaction so that they relate; (The photographs must be available to
the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, upon request.  The major
portion of the photograph must include and identifiable front facial closeup
of the person who pawned or sold the item.  Items photographed must be
accurately depicted.  The licensee must inform the person that he or she is
being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous
place in the premises.)



      (4)   If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must
zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an
identifiable close up of that person’s face; and  (Items photographed by
video must be accurately depicted.  Video photographs must be electronically
referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated
with all other records of the transaction to which they relate.  The
licensee must inform the person that he or she is being video taped orally
and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the
premises.  The licensee must keep the exposed video tape for three months
unless requested by the Police Department to keep the tape longer.)



      (5)   Within 60 days after notification by the Police
Department, the color photograph requirements under this division shall be
fulfilled by submitting the photographs as digital images, in a format
specified by the Police Department, electronically cross referenced to the
reportable transaction they associated with notwithstanding the digital
images may be captured from required video recordings. This provision does
not alter or amend the requirements hereof.



   (I)   Renewals, extensions and redemptions; and  (For renewals,
extensions and redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original
transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction and the type of
transaction.)



   (J)   The record required hereunder must at all reasonable times be
open to inspection by the Police Department.  Data entries shall be retained
for at least three years from the date of transaction.  Entries of required
digital images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.41  DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.



   (A)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Police Department,
licensees must provide to the Police Department the information required in
§ 122.40 by transferring that information from their computer to the Police
Department via modem.  All required records must be transmitted completely
and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with
standards and procedures established by the issuing authority using a dial
callback protocol or other procedures that address security concerns of the
licensees and the issuing authority.  The licensee must display a sign of
sufficient size, in a conspicuous place on the premises, which informs all
patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department daily.



   (B)   Licensees will be charged monthly for billable transactions at
the current rate established by the City Council.



   (C)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required
reports by modem, the licensee must provide the Police Department printed
copies of all reportable transactions along with the video tape(s) for that
date by 12:00 noon the next business day.  If the problem is determined to
be in the licensee’s system and is not corrected by the close of the first
business day following the failure, the licensee must continue to provide the
required reports as provided for herein, but may be charged an additional fee
as established by the City Council for each transaction submitted in this
manner after the close of the first business day following the date of
failure.  If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee’s
system, the licensee must continue to provide the information as provided for
herein, but shall not be subject to an additional charge.



   (D)   If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the
photographs required in this division the licensee must immediately take all
required photographs with a still camera, immediately develop the pictures
cross reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and deliver them
to the Police Department by 12:00 noon the next business day.  Licensees may
be subject to an additional charge for each photograph submitted in this
manner after the close of the first business day following the failure.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, the Police Chief,
or the Chief’s designee, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances,
may extend the period before any additional charges are imposed for the
manual reporting of billable transactions.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.42  RECEIPT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified
in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt
for three years.



   (B)   The receipt must include at least the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the licensed
business;



      (2)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee;



      (3)   Whether the item was pawned, consigned or sold, or the
nature of the transaction;



      (4)   An accurate description of each item received,
including, but not limited to any trademark, identification number, serial
number, model number, brand name or other identifying mark on such an item;



      (5)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or
employee that conducted the transaction;



      (6)   The amount advanced or paid;



      (7)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all
pawn fees and charges;



      (8)   The last regular day of business by which the item must
be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;



      (9)   Full name, residence address, residence telephone number
and date of birth of the pledger or seller;



      (10)   The identification number and state of issue from any
of the following forms of identification of the pledger or seller:



         (a)   Current valid Minnesota drivers license;



         (b)   Current valid Minnesota identification card; and



         (c)   Current valid photo drivers license or
identification card issued by another state.



      (11)   The signature of the pledger or seller; and



      (12)   All printed statements as required by M.S. § 325J.04
(2), as it may be amended from time to time, or any other applicable statutes.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.43  REDEMPTION PERIOD.



   Any person pledging, pawning, or depositing an item for security must
have a minimum of 90 days from the day of that transaction or any renewal or
extension, to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold.  During
the 90-day holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed
location, except as provided in § 122.49.  Licensees are prohibited from
redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was
issued, or to any person identified in a written and notarized authorization
to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified
in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial transaction and signed
by the pledger, or with approval of the Police Department.  Written
authorization for release of property to persons other than the original
pledger must be maintained along with original transaction record in
accordance with § 122.40.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.44  HOLDING PERIOD.



   (A)   Any item purchased by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise
transferred for 30 days from the date of the transaction.



   (B)   An individual may redeem an item 72 hours after the item was
received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.45  POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.



   (A)   Investigative hold.



      (1)   Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency
notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed
from the premises.



      (2)   The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing by
the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days
from the date of the initial notification, or until the investigative order
is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to
divisions (B) and (C) below whichever comes first.



   (B)   Order to hold.  Whenever the Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee, notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold
or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the
Chief or the Chief’s designee.  The order to hold shall expire 90 days
from the date it is placed unless the Chief or the Chief’s designee
determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.



   (C)   Order to confiscate.



      (1)   If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a
criminal case, the Chief or the Chief’s designee may:



         (a)   Physically confiscate and remove the item from the
shop, pursuant to a written order from the Chief or the Chief’s designee, or



         (b)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as
provided in division (B) above and leave the item in the shop.



      (2)   When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall
provide identification upon request of the licensee and shall provide the
licensee the name and telephone number of the confiscating agency and
investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation.  When an
order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the Chief of Police, or the
Chief’s designee, shall so notify the licensee.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.46  INSPECTION OF ITEMS.



   At all times during the term of the license, the licensee must allow
the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee(s), to enter without notice
the premises where the licensed business is located, including all off-site
storage facilities as authorized in § 122.49, during normal business hours,
except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and
inspecting the items, ware and merchandise, and records therein to verify
compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.47  LABEL REQUIRED.



   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. 
Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies
the transaction in the pawn shop’s records, the transaction date, the name
of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item as
reported to the Police Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the
item is out of pawn and can be sold, if applicable.  Labels shall not be
reused.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.48  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may pawn, consign or sell
or attempt to pawn, consign or sell goods with any licensee nor may any
licensee receive any goods from a person under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   No licensee shall receive any goods from a person of unsound
mind or an intoxicated person.



   (C)   No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller or
depositor presents identification in the form of a valid Minnesota drivers
license, a valid State of Minnesota identification card, or a current valid
photo driver license or identification card issued by the state of residency
of the person from whom the item was received.



   (D)   No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an
altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification number or
any item of property that has had its serial number removed.



   (E)   No licensee shall lend money on a pledge at a rate of interest
above that allowed by law.



   (F)   No licensee shall knowingly possess stolen goods.



   (G)   No licensee shall sell pledged goods before the time to redeem
has expired.



   (H)   No licensee shall engage in any transaction involving a motor
vehicle as defined in M.S. § 168.011, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.49  OFF-SITE STORAGE.



   A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its
business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. 
However, upon written request, the Police Department may approve an off-site
locked and secured storage facility.  The licensee shall permit inspection
of the facility in accordance with § 122.46.  All provisions of this
chapter regarding record keeping and reporting apply to the facility and its
contents.  Property shall be stored in compliance with all provisions of the
city code.  The licensee must either own the building in which the business
is conducted or any approve off-site storage facility, or have a lease of the
premises which extends for more than six months.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



§ 122.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to sanctions that may be imposed against a licensee under
this chapter, any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 781, passed 12-4-01)



CHAPTER 123:  ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE



Section



   123.01   Purpose and intent



   123.02   Definitions



   123.03   Prohibition



   123.04   Other applicable laws



 



   123.99   Penalty



Cross-Reference:



   Tobacco regulations, see Ch. 111



§ 123.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Unregulated electronic delivery devices, commonly referred to
as electronic cigarettes, or e- cigarettes, closely resemble and purposefully
mimic the act of smoking by having users inhale vaporized liquid nicotine or
other substances created by heat through an electronic ignition system. After
testing a number of e-cigarettes from two leading manufacturers, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) determined that various samples tested contained
not only nicotine but also detectable levels of known carcinogens and toxic
chemicals, including tobacco-specific nitrosamines and diethylene glycol, a
toxic chemical used in antifreeze. The FDA’s testing also suggested that
quality control processes used to manufacture these products are inconsistent
or non-existent. (“Summary of results: Laboratory analysis of electronic
cigarettes conducted by FDA,” Food and Drug Administration (FDA), July 22,
2009.)



   (B)   E-cigarettes produce a vapor of undetermined and potentially
harmful substances, which may appear similar to smoke emitted by traditional
tobacco products. Their use in workplaces and public places where smoking of
traditional tobacco products is prohibited creates concern and confusion and
leads to difficulties in enforcing the smoking prohibitions.



(Ord. 1019, passed 3-18-14)



§ 123.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of
this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that
can be used by a person to stimulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or
any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE shall include any component part of such a product, whether
or not sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE shall not include any
product that has been approved or otherwise certified by the United States
Food and Drug Administration for legal sales for use in tobacco cessation
treatment or other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose.



   USE. The inhaling or exhaling of vapor from any electronic delivery
device. USE shall also mean carrying an electronic delivery device that is
turned on or otherwise activated.



(Ord. 1019, passed 3-18-14)



§ 123.03  PROHIBITION.



   The use of any electronic delivery device is prohibited anywhere
smoking is prohibited by the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act.



(Ord. 1019, passed 3-18-14)



§ 123.04  OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.



   This chapter is intended to complement the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air
Act, M.S. §§ 144.411 to 144.417, as amended from time to time. Nothing in
this chapter authorizes smoking in any location where smoking is restricted
by other applicable laws.



(Ord. 1019, passed 3-18-14)



§ 123.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Use where prohibited. It is a violation of this chapter for
any person to smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter,
or to smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited by a private policy
established by the proprietor or other person in charge of the area.



   (B)   Proprietors. It is a violation of this ordinance for the
proprietor, person, or entity that owns, leases, manages, operates, or
otherwise controls the use of an area in which smoking is prohibited under
this chapter to knowingly fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Penalties. A person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Each day of violation constitutes a
separate offense.



(Ord. 1019, passed 3-18-14)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



   130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



   131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



   132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



   133.   DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES



   134.   SOCIAL HOST



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   130.01   Dust emissions



   130.02   Fertilizers containing phosphorous prohibited



§ 130.01  DUST EMISSIONS.



   (A)   The term “dust” means any solid substances or any particle
of any solid substance of any shape or size whether mineral or vegetable or a
combination thereof which may be transported from one location to another
through the air by winds or air currents of a velocity of 25 miles per hour
or less.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity or
operate any device which will result in the emission of dust within the city
in quantities sufficient to injure the property or business of others or in
quantities sufficient to be a detriment to or endanger the health, comfort
and safety of the general public.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity or
operate any device which will result in the emission of dust within the city
without first taking all reasonable precautions to insure that the emission
of the dust is reduced to a minimum.



   (D)   The emission of dust in violation of this section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.  Any nuisance may be abated by the City
Manager with the aid of the Police Department.



(`86 Code, § 8.82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  FERTILIZERS CONTAINING PHOSPHOROUS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The city finds and determines that data indicate that water
quality of lakes, ponds, rivers and streams and other waters may be
maintained or improved where the city regulates the amount of lawn fertilizer
and other chemicals entering such waters as a result of storm water runoff or
other causes.  The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations which
will restrict the amount of fertilizers containing phosphorous which may be
applied within the city.



   (B)   No person, firm, corporation, franchise, or a commercial or
non-commercial applicator, including a homeowner and renter, shall apply any
lawn fertilizer, liquid or granular, within the city which contains any
amount of phosphorous or other compound containing phosphorous, such as
phosphate, except:



      (1)   The naturally occurring phosphorous in unadulterated
natural or organic fertilizing products such as yard waste compost; or



      (2)   As otherwise provided in division (C) below.



   (C)   (1)   The prohibition against the use of phosphorous shall
not apply to:



         (a)   Newly established or developed turf and lawn areas
during first growing season;



         (b)   Turf and lawn areas which soil tests confirm are
below phosphorous levels established by the University of Minnesota Extension
Services; or  (The lawn fertilizer application shall not contain an amount
of phosphorous exceeding the amount of phosphorous and the appropriate
application rate recommended in the soil test evaluation.)



         (c)   Heavy use sports turf areas.



      (2)   Phosphorous applied as lawn fertilizer pursuant to the
aforementioned exemptions shall be watered into the soil where it is
immobilized and generally protected from the loss of runoff.



   (D)   No person, firm, corporation, franchise or commercial
establishment shall sell or display for sale any lawn fertilizer, liquid or
granular, within the city that contains greater than 3% phosphorous or other
compound containing phosphorous, such as phosphate, and in no event, unless:



      (1)   Phosphorous-free fertilizer is also available for sale;



      (2)   Phosphorous-free fertilizer and fertilizer with
phosphorous are separately displayed with each display being clearly marked
as to whether or not the fertilizer contains phosphorous; and/or



      (3)   A sign or brochure is on prominent display next to any
fertilizer display containing the city’s regulations concerning the use of
fertilizer with phosphorous.



(Ord. 798, passed 7-30-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



Section



   131.01   Private docks



   131.02   Ice fishing houses



   131.03   Fleeing a police officer



§ 131.01  PRIVATE DOCKS.



   It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any dock, boat lift,
mooring, boat, raft or similar equipment or structures to be attached to city
land or to be placed in a lake within 100 feet, as measured at right angles
to the city shoreline.



(`86 Code, § 8.70)  (Am. Ord. 616, passed 2-18-92)



§ 131.02  ICE FISHING HOUSES.



   (A)   It is unlawful to place an ice fishing structure on a city
lake with unattached non-buoyant material used to support or raise the
structure from the ice.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to place or use an ice fishing
structure on a city lake without a receptacle designed for, and capable of
containing trash inside the structure or within a distance of five feet.



(`86 Code, § 8.86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.03  FLEEING A POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the term “peace
officer” shall be that set forth in M.S. § 609.487, Subd. 2.  For the
purposes of this section, the term “flee” means to elude or attempt to
elude a peace officer by means other than a motor vehicle following a request
to stop given by a peace officer.



   (B)   Penalty.  Whoever, by the means other than a motor vehicle,
flees or attempts to flee a peace officer who is acting in the lawful
discharge of an official duty, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 



(Ord. 861, passed 11-16-04)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



   132.01   Curfew



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  CURFEW.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURFEW HOURS.  12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m. on Friday and
Saturday nights. 11:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. of the following morning Sunday
through Thursday.



      EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action.  The term includes, but is
not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to
any place of amusement or entertainment.



      GUARDIAN.



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor; or



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.



      MINOR.  Any person under 16 years of age.



      OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation operating, managing or conducting an establishment.  The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
offices of a corporation.



      PARENT.  A person who is:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent
of another person; or



         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to streets,
highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities and shops.



      REMAIN.



         (a)   Linger or stay; or



         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by
a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   (B)   Restrictions.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a
minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
city during curfew hours.  The term “knowingly” includes knowledge which
a parent or guardian should reasonably be expected to have concerning the
whereabouts of a minor in the legal custody of that parent or guardian.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee
of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.



   (C)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
in the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business trade, profession or
occupation and the minor's residence;  (Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor's presence at work.)



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution or
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew;



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly or freedom of religion;



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider about the
minor’s presence; and/or



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (D)   Enforcement.  Before taking any enforcement action under this
section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason
for being in the public place.  The officer shall not issue a citation or
make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that
an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in division (C) above. Any lawfully designated
police officer is authorized to arrest without or with warrant any person or
persons under the age of 18 years violating the provisions of this section
and shall make every attempt to notify, as soon as reasonably possible, the
parents, guardian or person having lawful custody of any minor so arrested.



   (E)   Curfew established.  No person under the age of 18 years
shall be on or present in any public street, avenue, alley, park or other
public place, or any playground or place open to the public, or place of
amusement and entertainment or vacant lot, or any private premises other than
those upon which his or her usual place of residence is located, without the
knowledge, consent and approval of the owner or person in charge of, or
responsible for, the private property between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
5:00 a.m. of the following day on Friday and Saturday nights, and on every
other night, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following
morning, official city time. Persons under the age of 16 shall be similarly
restricted from the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. of the following day
each day of the week.



   (F)   Parental responsibility.  No parent, guardian or other person
having the lawful care, custody or control of any person under the age of 18
years shall allow or permit such person or persons to violate the provisions
of this section.



   (G)   Proprietor responsibility.



      (1)   This section shall not be construed as permitting the
presence at any time of any person under the age of 18 years in any place
where his or her presence is now prohibited by any existing law or ordinance.



      (2)   Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of
any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business
shall find persons under the age of 18 years loitering, loafing or idling in
such place of business, in violation of any ordinance of this municipality,
he or she shall immediately order such person to leave and if such person
refuses to leave the place of business, the operator shall immediately notify
the Police Department and inform them of the violation.



   (H)   Evidence.  The fact of minors under the age of 18 not
accompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of the
minor and not meeting the exclusion of this section, being found upon any
street, alley or public place or any other place as hereinafter set forth,
during hours established in § 132.01, shall be prima facie evidence that the
minor is there unlawfully and that no reasonable necessity or lawful excuse
exists therefore.



(`86 Code, § 8.30)  (Am. Ord. 655, passed 8-2-94; Am. Ord. 741, passed
1-18-00; Am. Ord. 854, passed 9-7-04)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who violates a provision of § 132.01 is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted.



   (B)   Any minor who is convicted of a violation of this ordinance
after the case has been referred for prosecution in the trial court under
M.S. § 260.15, as it may be amended from time to time, and any adult person
having the care and custody of the minor, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.



   (C)   (1)   Any adult person having the care and custody of a
minor violating this section shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty
in an amount established by the City Council.  A peace officer, upon
determining that a child is in violation of § 132.01, shall issue a notice
of violation to the adult requiring payment of the penalty within ten days.



      (2)   This notice of violation shall state that the person may
appeal the penalty in writing by filing a written notice of appeal with the
City Manager within ten days.  The City Manager, or designee, shall provide
the appellant an opportunity for an informal hearing, and shall render a
decision in writing.



(`86 Code, § 8.30)  (Am. Ord. 655, passed 8-2-94; Am. Ord. 741, passed
1-18-00)



CHAPTER 133:  DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES



Section



   133.01   Definitions



   133.02   Acts prohibited



   133.03   Discharge of firearms and explosives



   133.04   Exception



   133.05   Possession and sale of fireworks



§ 133.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BB GUN. A device that fires or ejects a shot measuring .18 of an inch
or less in diameter.



   FIREARM. A device designed to be used as a weapon, from which is
expelled a projectile by force of any explosion or force of combustion.



(Ord. 916, passed 11-21-06)



§ 133.02  ACTS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Recklessly handle or use a firearm or other dangerous weapon
or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;



   (B)   Intentionally point a firearm of any kind, capable of injuring
or killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;



   (C)   Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known
as a sling-shot or sand club;



   (D)   Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switch
blade knife opening automatically;



   (E)   Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the
purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another;



   (F)   Sell or have in his possession any device designed to silence
or muffle the discharge of a firearm;



   (G)   Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, air gun,
ammunition, or explosive without the written consent of his parent or
guardian or of the Police Department; or



   (H)   Transport firearms or other weaponry which are uncased.



(Ord. 916, passed 11-21-06)



§ 133.03  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.



   It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge within the limits of
the city any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm, firecracker, rocket or
other fireworks, air gun, air rifle, or other similar device commonly
referred to as a BB gun. This does not include fireworks approved by
Minnesota State Statute.



(Ord. 916, passed 11-21-06)



§ 133.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Nothing in § 133.02 shall prohibit the possession of the
articles therein mentioned if the purpose of such possession is for public
exhibition by museums or collectors of art.



   (B)   Nothing in § 133.03 shall apply to a display of fireworks by
an organization or group of organizations authorized in writing by the
Council, or to a peace officer in the discharge of his duty, or to a person
in the lawful defense of his person or family, or to the discharge of air
guns, air rifles, or other similar devices commonly referred to as BB guns by
participants in educational or training activities conducted by organizations
approved by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 916, passed 11-21-06)



§ 133.05  POSSESSION AND SALE OF FIREWORKS.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell, or have in possession, for any
purpose other than as allowed in § 133.04(B), any firecrackers, rockets or
other fireworks, unless approved by Minnesota State Statutes.



(Ord. 916, passed 11-21-06)



CHAPTER 134:  SOCIAL HOST



Section



   134.01   Purposes and findings



   134.02   Authority



   134.03   Definitions



   134.04   Prohibited acts



   134.05   Exceptions



   134.06   Enforcement



   134.99   Penalty



§ 134.01  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   This chapter prohibits, and establishes penalties for, any person
hosting an event or gathering where alcohol is present and being possessed or
consumed by persons under 21 years of age.  The City Council intends to
discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done
within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons
criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under 21
years of age possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person
hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol.  The City Council finds
that:



   (A)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 are harmful
to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring
prevention or abatement.



   (B)   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage
persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol
consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions.



   (C)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly,
could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are
affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.



   (D)   Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents.  However, there are times
when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity, and in some
circumstances provide the alcohol.



   (E)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person
is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and this chapter is necessary to help
further combat underage consumption.



   (F)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person
criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage
possession or consumption occurs.



   (G)   There are times when a legal adult or responsible party is
under 21 and is/are present, and condone the activity and in some
circumstances provide the alcohol.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-3-08)



§ 134.02  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to M.S. § 145A.05, Subd. 1.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-3-08)



§ 134.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:



   ALCOHOL.  Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.



   EVENT or GATHERING.  Any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



   HOST.  To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control, or permit a gathering or event.



   PARENT.  Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:



      (1)   As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;



      (2)   As a legal guardian; or



      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or
any association of one or more individuals.



   RESIDENCE or PREMISES.  Any home, yard, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.



   UNDERAGE PERSON.  Any individual under 21 years of age.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-3-08)



§ 134.04  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to:



      (1)   Host or allow an event or gathering;



      (2)   At any residence, premises, or on any other private or
public property;



      (3)   Where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;



      (4)   When the person knows or reasonably should know that an
underage person will or does



         (a)   Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or



         (b)   Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the
intent to consume it; and



         (c)   The person fails to take reasonable steps to
prevent possession or consumption by the underage person(s).



   (B)   A person is criminally responsible for violating division (A)
of this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels,
or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.



   (C)   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be
present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-3-08)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.05  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an
underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent's
household.



   (B)   This chapter does not apply to legally protected religious
observances.



   (C)   This chapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or
3.2% malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit
holders who are regulated by M.S. § 340A.503, Subd. 1(a)(1).



   (D)   This chapter does not apply to situations where underage
persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during
the course and scope of employment.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-3-08)



§ 134.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   This chapter can be enforced by any licensed police officer in the
county.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-3-08)



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of § 134.04 is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-3-08)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



   150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



   151.   SUBDIVISIONS



   152.   SIGN REGULATIONS



   153.   AIRPORT ZONING



   154.   ZONING



   155.   HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Building Code



   150.01   Application; administration and enforcement



   150.02   Permits and fees



   150.03   Adoption of state provisions



   150.04   Organization



Hazardous Buildings



   150.15   Definitions



   150.16   Declaration



   150.17   Abatement



   150.18   Removal by city; consent and costs



   150.19   Inspection and investigation



   150.20   Council findings and orders



   150.21   Enforcement of judgement; personal property or fixtures



   150.22   Excavations of hazardous structures



   150.23   Emergency abatement



   150.24   Adoption of state provisions



   150.25   Interference prohibited



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.01  APPLICATION; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code,
as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to M.S. Chapter
16B.59 to 16B.75, including all the amendments, rules and regulations
established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards
Division is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional
chapters, unless specifically adopted by ordinance. The Minnesota State
Building Code is hereby incorporated in this subchapter as if fully set out
herein.



   (B)   The application, administration and enforcement of the code
shall be in accordance with Minn. Rule Part 1300.2100 and as modified by
Minn. Rules Ch. 1305.  The code shall be enforced within a two-mile
contiguous extraterritorial limit to the existing corporate limit of the city
to the same extent as if the property were situated within the corporate
limits of the city, as permitted by M.S. § 16B.62 (1), as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (C)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
Building Code Department of the city.



   (D)   The Minnesota certified Building Official must be appointed by
the city to administer the code.



(`86 Code, § 11.01)  (Am. Ord. 746, passed 5-2-00; Am. Ord. 816, passed
5-20-03)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to appoint Building Official, M.S. § 168.65



§ 150.02  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 16B.62 (1), as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   (1)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by
this code in accordance with the following:



         (a)   Residential property: 65% of the 1997 State Fee
Schedule;



            1.   Plumbing: $70;



            2.   Mechanical: $70;



            3.   Furnace replacement: $0;



            4.   Plumbing remodeling: $35.



         (b)   Commercial property: 75% of the 1997 State Fee
Schedule;



         (c)   Water heater: $0;



         (d)   Water softener: $0;



         (e)   Roofing permit: $15 to maximum of $95 (pending
value).



      (2)   In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all
permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. §
16B.70, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   All work under a building permit shall be completed within the
following time frame or a new permit, including the required fee shall be
required for the entire project:



      (1)   All work requiring a fee of up to $250 shall be
completed within three months of the day of issue.



      (2)   All work requiring a fee of from $250.01 and not
exceeding $500 shall be completed within six months of the day of issue.



      (3)   All work requiring a fee of from $500.01 and not
exceeding $1,000 shall be completed within eight months of the day of issue.



      (4)   All work requiring a fee of from $1,000.01 and not
exceeding $2,000 shall be completed within 12 months of the day of issue.



      (5)   All work requiring a fee of from $2,000.01 and not
exceeding $5,000 shall be completed within 24 months of the day of issue.



      (6)   All work requiring a fee exceeding $5,000 shall be
evaluated individually by the Building Official for the time limit.



(`86 Code, § 11.01)  (Ord. 816, passed 5-20-03; Am. Ord. 853, passed
9-7-04; Am. Ord. 946, passed 10-21-08)



§ 150.03  ADOPTION OF STATE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Building Code optional chapters. The Minnesota State Building
Code, established pursuant to M.S. 16B.59 to 16B.75 allows the municipality
to adopt by reference certain optional chapters of the most current edition
of the Minnesota State Building Code.



   (B)   The following optional provisions identified in the most
current edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and
incorporated as part of the building code for the city:  Chapter 1306:
Special Fire Protection Systems.



(`86 Code, § 11.01)  (Am. Ord. 734, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 816, passed
5-20-03)



§ 150.04  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   Chapter 7510—Minnesota Fire Code is applicable to buildings
and activities in the city pursuant to state law.



   (B)   The Building Inspection Services Department shall be the
Building Code Department of the city. The administrative authority shall be
the state certified Building Official.



   (C)   The City Council shall designate the Building Official for the
jurisdiction of the city and the extraterritorial limits.



   (D)   (1)   Hereafter, no person shall construct, alter, wreck or
move any kind of structure or building or part thereof without first securing
a building permit therefore; provided no permit shall be necessary for the
construction, reconstruction or alteration of a building where the building
is less than 120 square feet in size.  In the shoreland overlay zoning
district, a building permit shall be required for the construction or
installation of any building or structure, regardless of size, for the
installation of sewage treatment systems, and for those grading and filling
activities not exempted by §§ 154.045 through 154.060.  Application for a
building permit shall be made to the Building Official or his or her designee
on the forms provided by the city.  The application shall include sufficient
use and that, in cases where municipal sewer does not yet serve a site, a
compliant sewage treatment system will be provided. Permits shall stipulate
that any identified nonconforming sewage treatment system, as defined by §
154.058, shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions
contained therein.



      (2)   Applications for building permits shall be accompanied
by the following exhibits unless waived by the City Council.



         (a)   A legal description and a drawing or sketch of an
area including the property in question and 100 feet beyond its outer
boundaries showing existing utilities, plat boundaries and dimensions,
buildings, easements, foliage and topography and waterway if pertinent. 
Soil tests may be required if pertinent.



         (b)   Preliminary building and site development plans
showing building's location, dimensional parking and loading arrangement,
vehicular and pedestrian access and egress, surface drainage plan,
landscaping, utility plan, screening, size and location of all signs,
building floor plans of all floors, elevations of all sides of buildings,
sections and outline material specifications as appropriate.



   (E)   (1)   Persons requesting a building permit shall fill out a
building permit form available from the Building Official.



      (2)   Completed building permit forms and a fee as may be
established by resolution by the City Council shall be submitted to the
Building Official.  If the proposed development conforms in all respects to
Ch. 154 of this code and the Building Code as adopted by the City Council, a
building permit shall be issued by the Building Official within a period of
15 days unless additional information is required to determine compliance of
the plans with applicable laws in which case the time period shall be
extended by the amount of time required by the applicant to provide the
information.



      (3)   If the proposed development involves a zoning amendment,
variance or conditional use permit, the application shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for review and appropriate action according to the
procedures set forth in §§ 154.171 through 154.173 of this code.  If the
application is approved, a copy of the approval shall be included with the
building permit application and the building permit may be issued.



   (F)   No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no buildings
hereafter erected, significantly altered or moved shall be occupied until the
city has issued a certificate of occupancy.  The certificate shall show that
the building or premises or part thereof and the use thereof are in
conformity with the provisions of this code.  The certificate shall be
issued only when the building or premises and the use thereof conform to all
the requirements of this code.  The certificate shall be issued only when an
affidavit signed by the permit holder has been provided to the City Building
Official indicating that the property is graded in  accordance with the
approved drainage plan on record with the city by the subdivision  developer
or submitted by the permit holder in the case where there is not
subdivision  grading plan on record with the city.



(`86 Code, § 11.02)  (Am. Ord. 734, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 737, passed
9-21-99; Am. Ord. 816, passed 5-20-03; Am. Ord. 896, passed 2-7-06; Am. Ord.
1045, passed 6-7-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS



§ 150.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  Any structure or part of a structure.



   HAZARDOUS BUILDING or HAZARDOUS PROPERTY.  Any building or property
which, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage,
unsanitary condition or abandonment, constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to
public safety or health.



   OWNER, OWNER OF RECORD and LIEN HOLDER OF RECORD.  A person having a
right or interest in property in accordance with M.S. § 463.15, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(`86 Code, § 8.02)



§ 150.16  DECLARATION.



   Any building which, because of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation,
physical damage, unsanitary condition or abandonment, whenever found within
the city, is declared to be a hazardous building.



(`86 Code, § 8.02)



§ 150.17  ABATEMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person, owner, owner of record and any firm or
corporation, to permit a hazardous building as herein defined to remain on
any premises owned, leased, occupied or controlled by him or her.  The
hazardous building shall be repaired or removed in the manner prescribed by
this subchapter.



(`86 Code, § 8.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.18  REMOVAL BY CITY; CONSENT AND COSTS.



   The city may remove or raze any hazardous building upon obtaining the
consent in writing of all owners of record, occupying tenants and all lien
holders of record; the cost of the removal or razing shall be levied and
collected as a special assessment in the manner provided for under law,
except that the city may provide that the costs so assessed may be paid in
not to exceed five equal installments with interest thereon, at 8% per annum,
in accordance with M.S. § 463.151, as it may be amended from time to time.



(`86 Code, § 8.02)



§ 150.19  INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The Building Inspector, Fire Chief or other designated officer
or their respective agents or employees shall inspect all premises and places
within the city as often as a practicable to determine if any new conditions
described herein exist thereon.  They shall investigate and report incidents
of hazardous buildings to the Council.



   (B)   The Building Inspector, Fire Chief or other designated officer
or their respective agents or employees may enter upon private premises at
any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties
assigned to them hereunder.



   (C)   The Building Inspector, Fire Chief or other designated officer
or their respective agents or employees upon finding a hazardous building,
shall immediately report their findings to the Council.



(`86 Code, § 8.02)



§ 150.20  COUNCIL FINDINGS AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Whenever the Council finds, with reasonable certainty, that a
hazardous building exists within the city, as defined in this subchapter, the
Council shall order the owner of any hazardous building within the city to
correct the hazardous condition of the building or to raze or remove the same
as regulated by § 150.04.



   (B)   (1)   Contents.  The order shall be in writing; recite the
grounds therefor; specify the necessary repairs, if any, and provide a
reasonable time for compliance; and shall state that a motion for summary
enforcement of the order will be made to the District Court of the county
unless corrective action is taken, or unless an answer is filed within 20
days of the date of service.



      (2)   Service.  The order shall be served upon the owner of
record, or his or her agent, if an agent is in charge of the building, and
upon the occupying tenant, if there is one, and upon all lien holders of
record, in the manner provided for service of summons in a civil action.  If
the owner cannot be found, the order shall be served upon him or her by
posting it at the main entrance to the building and by four weeks publication
in the official newspaper of the city.



      (3)   Filing.  A copy of the order with proof of service
shall be filed with the Clerk of District Court not less than five days prior
to the filing of a motion for enforcement of the order.  At the time of
filing the order, the city shall file for record with the County Recorder, a
notice of the pendency of the proceeding, describing with reasonable
certainty the lands affected and the nature of the order.  If the proceeding
be abandoned, the city shall within ten days thereafter file with the County
Recorder a notice to that effect.



      (4)   Answer.  Within 20 days from date of service, any
person upon whom the order is served may serve an answer in the manner
provided for the service of an answer in a civil action; specifically denying
the facts in the order as are in dispute.



      (5)   Default.  If no answer is served, the city may move the
court for the enforcement of the order.



(`86 Code, § 8.02)



§ 150.21  ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT; PERSONAL PROPERTY OR FIXTURES.



   (A)   If a judgement is not complied with in the time prescribed,
the city may cause the building to be repaired, razed or removed or the
hazardous condition to be removed or corrected as set forth in the judgement,
or acquire the building, if any, and real estate on which the building or
hazardous condition is located by eminent domain.  The cost of repairs,
razing, correction or removal may be a lien against the real estate on which
the building is located or the hazardous condition exists, or recovered by
obtaining a judgement against the owner of the real estate on which the
building is located or the hazardous condition exists.  A lien may be levied
and collected only as a special assessment in the manner provided by M.S. Ch.
429, as it may be amended from time to time, but the assessment is payable in
a single installment.  When the building is razed or removed by the
municipality, the city may sell the salvage and valuable materials at public
auction upon a three-day posted notice.



   (B)   If any building ordered razed, removed or made safe and
sanitary by repairs, contains personal property or fixtures which will
unreasonably interfere with the razing, removal or repair of the building, or
if the razing or removal of the building makes necessary the removal of the
personal property or fixtures, the original order of the Council may direct
the removal of the personal property or fixtures within a reasonable time. 
If the property or fixtures are not removed by the time specified, and the
city decides to enforce a judgment under this section, the city may sell the
same at public auction as provided in division (A) above or, if without
appreciable value, the city may destroy the same.



(`86 Code, § 8.02)



§ 150.22  EXCAVATIONS OF HAZARDOUS STRUCTURES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave an excavation for
building purposes open for more than 30 days without proceeding with the
erection of a building thereon, whether or not completed or to fail to fill
to grade or otherwise protect after a building is destroyed, demolished or
removed, any excavation or basement.



   (B)   If within the city, an excavation for building purposes is
left open for more than 30 days without the erection of a building thereon,
whether or not completed, or if any excavation or basement is to be graded or
otherwise protected after a building is destroyed, demolished or removed, the
Council may order the excavation to be filled or protected or in the
alternative that erection of a building begin forthwith if the excavation is
for building purposes.  The order shall be served upon the owner or his or
her agent in the manner provided in this section.  If the owner of the land
fails to comply with the order within 15 days after the order is served upon
him or her, the Council shall cause the excavation to be filled or to grade
or protected and the cost shall be levied and collected only as a special
assessment in the manner provided for in state law.



(`86 Code, § 8.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.23  EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.



   Any hazardous building or any hazardous excavation may be removed,
repaired or razed immediately and summarily pursuant to an emergency
ordinance enacted in the manner provided for in the City Charter.



(`86 Code, § 8.04)



§ 150.24  ADOPTION OF STATE PROVISIONS.



   It is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of regulating the
repair, remodeling, demolitions or removal of hazardous and substandard
buildings within the city and for the purpose of filing for protection of
hazardous building excavations, M.S. §§ 463.152 through 463.26, as they may
be amended from time to time, save and except the portions as are herein
modified or amended.  The M.S. §§ 163.152 through 463.26, as it may be
amended from time to time, are deemed to be supplementary to this subchapter
and City Charter provisions and are deemed to not limit the authority of the
city and act and enforce this section or any amendments or additions hereto.



(`86 Code, § 8.05)



§ 150.25  INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Building Inspector, Fire Chief or other designated officer or their
respective agents or employees while they are engaged in the performance of
duties imposed by this subchapter.



(`86 Code, § 8.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 151:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   151.001   Title



   151.002   Purpose



   151.003   Scope



   151.004   Amendments



   151.005   Filing and recording conveyances



   151.006   Land suitability



   151.007   Rules



   151.008   Definitions



Subdivision Application Procedure



   151.020   Governing procedure



   151.021   Preapplication review



   151.022   Preliminary plat submittal



   151.023   Final plat



   151.024   Required findings for plat approval



   151.025   Effect of approval



   151.026   Disclosure by seller



Preliminary Plat Requirements; Design Standards



   151.040   Conformance with comprehensive plan



   151.041   Identification, description and orientation



   151.042   Existing conditions on proposed tract



   151.043   Blocks



   151.044   Lots



   151.045   Streets



   151.046   Public easements



   151.047   Sidewalks



   151.048   Pedestrian walkways and trails



   151.049   Parks, open space and public use



   151.050   Agricultural buffers



   151.051   Conservation of trees and natural features



   151.052   Grading and drainage plans



   151.053   Soil erosion and sediment control



   151.054   Other information for preliminary plat



   151.055   Solar lots



Final Plat Requirements



   151.070   Final preparation



   151.071   Identification and description



   151.072   Certifications



Required Improvements



   151.085   Improvements performed by city



   151.086   Improvements required for all subdivisions



   151.087   Specifications and inspections



   151.088   Agreement for improvements



   151.089   Financial guarantee



Administration and Enforcement



   151.100   Minor subdivisions



   151.101   Modifications, exceptions and variances



   151.102   Rural service district



   151.103   Building permits



   151.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City Subdivision
Chapter.”



(`86 Code, § 10.01)



§ 151.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The process of dividing land into separate parcels for other
uses including residential, industrial, commercial sites, is one of the most
important factors in the growth of any community.  Once the land has been
subdivided and the streets, homes and other structures have been constructed,
the basic character of this permanent addition to the community has become
firmly established.  It is, therefore, to the interest of the general
public, the developer and the future landowners that subdivisions be
conceived, designed and developed in accordance with the highest possible
standards of excellence.



   (B)   All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval
shall fully comply, in all respects, with the regulations set forth herein. 
It is the purpose of these regulations to:



      (1)   Encourage well-planned, efficient and attractive
subdivisions by establishing adequate standards for design and construction;



      (2)   Promote consistency with comprehensive plan policies and
objectives for the future growth and development of the city;



      (3)   Promote orderly layout and use of land and ensure proper
legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land;



      (4)   Provide for the health, safety and general welfare of
residents and property owners by requiring adequate and efficient
transportation, sewage, water service, electrical service and drainage
facilities;



      (5)   Ensure that public facilities and services are available
concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the
proposed subdivision, assessing the development its fair share of public
improvement costs or obligations based on the capital facilities needs
generated by the development;



      (6)   Preserve and protect the community's natural resources
and environmentally sensitive areas, securing the rights of the public with
respect to public lands and waters; and



      (7)   Preserve energy by allowing solar and earth-sheltered
structures.



(`86 Code, § 10.02)



§ 151.003  SCOPE.



   (A)   This chapter governs plats and subdivision of lands subject to
its provisions.



   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, cause this chapter to
apply to a specified portion of the unincorporated area lying within two
miles of the city borders, as provided for by M.S. § 462.358, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (C)   (1)   Any unplatted property shall be platted in accordance
with the provisions and standards of this chapter before it is developed. For
the purposes of this chapter, the term DEVELOPED is defined as any
construction activity requiring the installation of public improvements or
any construction activity requiring a building permit with the exception of
permits for:



         (a)   Decks;



         (b)   Driveways;



         (c)   Fences;



         (d)   Accessory structures, under 700 square feet;



         (e)   Residential additions, under 1,500 square feet; and



         (f)   Commercial and industrial expansions, under 10,000
square feet.



      (2)   No expansion or addition to a structure that changes the
use, or is intended to change the use of a property, shall be allowed.



   (D)   Except in the case of resubdivision, this chapter shall not
apply to any lot or lots forcing a part of a subdivision recorded in the
Office of the Waseca County Recorder prior to the effective date of this
chapter, nor is it intended by this chapter to repeal, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances
except those specifically repealed by, or in conflict with this chapter.



   (E)   (1)   Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon
the land than is imposed or required by the existing laws or ordinances, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.  If a proposed subdivision or
planned unit developments (PUDs) is located in the shoreland overlay
district, then the shoreland zoning regulations contained in Ch. 154 of this
code shall also apply.



      (2)   Where there are differing requirements of the same
zoning control, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.



(`86 Code, § 10.03)  (Ord. 818, passed 7-15-03)



§ 151.004  AMENDMENTS.



   The provisions of this chapter may be amended by the City Council.



(`86 Code, § 10.04)



§ 151.005  FILING AND RECORDING CONVEYANCES.



   (A)   No conveyance of land described by metes and bounds, by
reference to an unapproved registered land survey, or to an unapproved plat
made after the effective date of this chapter, shall be made or recorded
unless the parcel described in the conveyance:



      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record at the date of adoption
of subdivision regulations or of any amendments thereto;



      (2)   Was the subject of written agreement to convey entered
into prior to the time;



      (3)   Was a separate parcel of not less than 2½ acres in area
and 150 feet in width as of January 1, 1966; or



      (4)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in
area and 300 feet in width prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 352,
effective February 10, 1966.



   (B)   (1)   If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under
the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the lot area and width
requirements of the shoreland zoning regulations, § 154.050 the lot shall
not be considered a separate parcel for sale or development.



      (2)   The lot shall be combined with the one or more
contiguous lots so that they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting
the requirements of the shoreland zoning regulations.



   (C)   If compliance with the foregoing restrictions will create an
unnecessary hardship, and failure to comply does not interfere with the
purpose of this subchapter, then the City Council may consider a variance
under § 151.101.  Any landowner or agent who conveys a lot or parcel in
violation of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.  The city may institute civil action to enjoin the conveyance,
or seek other relief in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to any parcels which are taken from
existing parcels of record by metes and bounds description.  The city shall
deny any building permit application, except as provided in § 151.003(C),
for any parcels so divided, pending compliance with this chapter.



(`86 Code, § 10.06) (Ord. 818, passed 7-15-03)



§ 151.006  LAND SUITABILITY.



   In the shoreland overlay zoning district, no land shall be subdivided
which is held unsuitable by the city for the proposed use because of
flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe
limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable
topography, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities, or any
other feature likely to be harmful to health, safety or welfare of future
residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.  Land must be
suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration.



(`86 Code, § 10.07)



§ 151.007  RULES.



   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the past and future
tense; the singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular; the word “shall” is mandatory and the words “should” and
“may” are permissive.



   (B)   In the event of conflicting provisions in the test of these
regulations, the more restrictive shall apply.



(`86 Code, § 10.08)



§ 151.008  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES.  Facilities determined to be capable of
supporting and servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the
proposed subdivision as determined in accordance with the standards of this
chapter, including specific levels of service, and according to all other
applicable laws and regulations.



   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way usually less than 30 feet in width which
normally affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of
properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.



   ATTORNEY.  The attorney employed by the city unless otherwise stated.



   BLOCK.  The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property
lines or boundaries of the subdivision.



   BOATHOUSE.  A structure used solely for the storage of boats or
boating equipment on riparian lots in the shoreland overlay zoning district.



   BOULEVARD.  The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb
line and the property line.



   BUTT LOT.  A lot at the end of a block and located between two corner
lots.



   CITY or COMMUNITY.  The City of Waseca, Minnesota.



   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.  A subdivision development planned and
constructed so as to group housing units into patterns while providing a
unified network of open space and wooded areas, and meeting the overall
density regulations of this chapter and Ch. 154 of this code.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A plan prepared by the city including a
compilation of policy statements, goals, standards and maps indicating the
general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use
and for the general physical development of the community and includes any
plan or parts thereof.



   CONCEPT PLAN or SKETCH PLAN.  A generalized plan of a proposed
subdivision indicating lot layouts, streets, park areas and water and sewer
systems presented to the city officials at the pre-application meeting.



   CONCURRENCY.  Requirement that development applications demonstrate
that adequate public facilities will be available at prescribed levels of
service (LOS) concurrent with the impact or occupancy of development units. 
Public facilities and services needed to maintain level of service standards
adopted in the comprehensive plan are expected to be available simultaneous
to, or within a reasonable period of time after, development approval or
construction.



   CONTOUR MAP.  A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown
by lines connecting points of equal elevations.  “Contour interval” is
the vertical height between contour lines.



   COPY.  A print or reproduction made from a tracing.



   CORNER LOT.  A lot bordered on at least the front and side by streets.



   COUNTY.  Waseca County, Minnesota.



   DEVELOPMENT.  The act of building structures or installing site
improvements.



   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.  Lots which have a front line abutting on one
street and a back or rear line abutting on another street.



   DRAINAGE COURSE.  A natural or artificial water course for the
drainage of surface water.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons
other than the owner.



   ENGINEER.  A registered engineer.



   FINAL PLAT.  The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's
plan of subdivision is presented to the City Council for approval and which,
if approved, will be submitted to the County Recorder.



   FRONTAGE.  The distance between the side lot lines measured along the
right-of-way designated to serve the lot.



   HOLD DOWN ELEVATION.  The graded elevation of a house pad so designed
to allow a reasonable amount of basement excavation to be spoiled and graded
within the lot boundary.



   HOUSE PAD.   A buildable area of a residential lot graded to the hold
down elevation.  If the lowest floor of the structure is placed on fill, the
HOUSE PAD shall be constructed with engineered fill.



   KEY MAP.  A map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitely
shows the area proposed to be platted and the areas surrounding it to a given
distance.



   LOT.  A platted lot or a parcel separated from other parcels by
registered land survey description.



   METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION.  A description of real property which is
not described by reference to a lot or block of a recorded plat, but is
described by starting at a known point and describing the bearing and
distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineates a
fractional portion of a section, lot or area by describing lines or portions
thereof.



   MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.  The specifications of this
chapter and other applicable laws and regulations.



   NATURAL WATERWAY.  A natural passage in the surface of the earth so
situated and having such a topographical nature that surface or percolating
water flows through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL.   The boundary of public waters and
wetlands shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has
been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.  For watercourses, the
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel.  For reservoirs and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the
operation elevation of the normal summer pool.



   OWNER.  An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public right-of-way across or within a block
intended to be used by pedestrians.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the city.



   PLAT.  The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of
record pursuant to M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time, and
containing all elements and requirements set forth in applicable state,
county and local regulations.



   PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.  Official action taken by a municipality on an
application to create a subdivision which establishes the rights and
obligations set forth in applicable state, county and local requirements. 
In accordance with M.S. § 462.358, as it may be amended from time to time,
and unless otherwise specified in the applicable subdivision regulation,
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL may be granted only following the review and approval of
a preliminary plat or other map or drawing establishing without limitation
the number, layout and location of lots, tracts, blocks and parcels to be
created, location of streets, roads, utilities and facilities, park and
drainage facilities, and lands to be dedicated for public use.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating
the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning
Commission and City Council for their consideration, and which meets all the
requirements of this chapter.



   PRIVATE STREET.  A street serving as vehicular access to one or more
parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public as right-of-way.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS.  Contracts entered into between private parties
and constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values.



   PUBLIC WATERS.  Any waters, as defined in M.S. § 103G.005 (15)(a), as
it may be amended from time to time.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Land dedicated and used for public purposes, such as a
street, alley or crosswalk.



   STREETS.  A public way dedicated on a plat or otherwise existing and
carrying with it all of the rights granted to the public by common law or
statute, without limitation, the right to install public utilities, unless
the context otherwise indicates.



      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET.  A street or highway with access
restrictions designed to move through-traffic to and from major attractors,
such as the central business district, community shopping centers, major
industrial areas, major institutional and educational uses and similar
traffic generators within the city; and to carry large volumes of traffic, as
a route between communities.



      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET.  A street which carries traffic from
local streets to arterials.



      (3)   CUL-DE-SAC.  A short, local street having only one
outlet and a vehicular turn-around area.



         (a)   PERMANENT CUL-DE-SAC.  A cul-de-sac that, due to
physical limitations, will not extend beyond the subdivision.



         (b)   TEMPORARY CUL-DE-SAC.  A cul-de-sac that is
intended to accommodate a future extension of the street to adjacent property.



      (4)   FRONTAGE ROAD.  A street located on the side of an
arterial street for service to abutting property and for control of access.



      (5)   LOCAL STREET.  A street of limited continuity used
primarily for access to the abutting properties and the local need of a
neighborhood.



      (6)   SERVICE STREET.  A street parallel and adjacent to an
arterial street and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.



   STREET WIDTH.  For the purpose of this chapter, the shortest distance
between the lines delineating the right-of-way.



   SUBDIVIDER.  The owner of land proposed for subdivision or his or her
authorized agent who commences proceedings under this chapter to effect a
subdivision of land.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   The described tract of land which is to be or has been
divided into two or more parcels. 



      (2)   The term includes resubdivision and, where appropriate
to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the land
subdivided.



         (a)   MAJOR SUBDIVISION.  Any subdivision not
classified as minor subdivision.



         (b)   MINOR SUBDIVISION.  Any subdivision creating not
more than three lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new
street or alley, or the extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of
public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of
the comprehensive plan, Ch. 154 of this code or these regulations.



   TRAIL.  A right-of-way designed for movement of non-motorized traffic.



   ZONING CHAPTER.  Ch. 154 of this code controlling the use of land as
adopted by the city.



(`86 Code, § 10.09)  (Am. Ord. 1006, passed 10-1-13)



SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE



§ 151.020  GOVERNING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   §§ 151.021 through 151.026 shall govern procedure and
process for major subdivisions.  § 151.100 shall govern procedure for minor
subdivisions.



   (B)   A subdivider may submit a proposed final plat, concurrent with
submittal of a preliminary plat; however, if the proposed final plat is to be
approved, approval shall first be given to the preliminary plat.



(`86 Code, § 10.17)



§ 151.021  PREAPPLICATION REVIEW.



   (A)   (1)   Prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat, the
subdividers shall meet with the Zoning Administrator, City EngineerDirector
of Engineering and other appropriate officials to learn what ordinances,
regulations and plans apply to the area to be subdivided.  The subdivider
may submit a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision.  The sketch plan
should show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing
community facilities that would serve it, to neighboring subdivisions and
developments, and to the natural resources and topography of the site.  City
staff shall provide the subdivides with requirements for a complete
preliminary plat and final plat submittal.



      (2)   The subdivider is urged to avail himself or herself of
the advice and assistance of city staff at this point in order to save time
and effort, and to facilitate the approval of the preliminary plat, but the
subdivider is charged with knowledge of this chapter, Ch. 154 of this code,
the comprehensive plan and all other state and federal laws and rules
governing the development of the land.  No representations made by city
staff shall be grounds for an estoppel against the city in enforcing laws,
nor create any liability to the subdivides or third parties on the part of
the city or city staff, including professional consultants to the city.



   (B)   (1)   A public information meeting may be held on the
proposed subdivision if requested by the subdivider or if staff determines
that a preapplication information meeting is needed to receive public input
on the proposed subdivision layout and its relationship to surrounding lands
in advance of preliminary plat submittal.



      (2)   Notification of an information meeting shall be sent, at
least seven days prior to the meeting, to city property owners within 350
feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question and to township
property owners within ¼-mile of the outer boundaries of the property.



(`86 Code, § 10.18)



§ 151.022  PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMITTAL.



   (A)   After the preapplication meeting, submittals and review, the
subdivider may proceed with a preliminary plat submittal.  The subdivider
shall submit five copies of the preliminary plat to the Zoning Administrator
and shall pay, at the time of application, a filing fee of $200, plus $25 per
lot for each lot in excess of ten lots.  The required exhibits shall be as
specified for preliminary plat documents in this chapter.  The preliminary
plat shall be signed by a registered land surveyor or engineer.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the application, the Zoning Administrator and
Director of Engineering shall determine if the preliminary plat, including
required exhibits, is complete.  If the application submittal is found to be
incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall, within ten business days of
receipt of the preliminary plat, notify the applicant what information is
missing.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a complete preliminary plat submittal, the
Zoning Administrator shall set the date for the public hearing, and shall
have notice of the hearing published in the official newspaper at least once,
not less than ten days and not more than 20 days prior to the hearing.  The
Zoning Administrator shall send hearing notice, at least seven days prior to
the meeting, to city property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries
of the property in question and to township property owners within ¼-mile of
the outer boundaries of the property.



   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall submit copies of the
preliminary plat to the Planning Commission, the Director of Engineering and
any other appropriate city officials, as well as to officials of any other
jurisdiction affected by the proposed subdivision.  One copy shall be
submitted other the County Engineer if the plat abuts a county road and one
copy to the State Department of Transportation if the plat abuts a State
Highway for review and comment.



   (E)   The Director of Engineering and Zoning Administrator and other
appropriate city officials shall review the preliminary plat and shall
transmit a report of their findings and recommendations together with any
supporting material to the Planning Commission prior to the meeting at which
the plat is to considered



   (F)   The subdivider or a duly authorized representative shall
attend both the Planning Commission meeting and City Council meeting at which
the preliminary plat is scheduled for consideration.  Failure of the
subdivider or a duly authorized representative to be present at the Planning
Commission and Council meetings shall be grounds to defer action on the
proposed preliminary plat, and shall toll any applicable time limits for the
approval or disapproval of a preliminary plat, until the next meeting for
which proper notice has been given.



   (G)   The City Manager may authorize retention of qualified
professional advisors on the preliminary plat's suitability regarding general
planning; conformity with plans of other private and public organizations and
agencies; adequacy of proposed water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and
flood control, special assessment procedures and other features.  Before
engaging the services, the city shall first have the subdivider's written
consent and agreement to pay the cost of the services.



   (H)   Any preliminary plat of land included in the shoreland overlay
district shall be reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) prior
to its submission to the Planning Commission.  All plats which are
inconsistent with the shoreland overlay district provisions shall be reviewed
by DNR before approval by the city.  The Zoning Administrator or Director of
Engineering shall submit all preliminary plats to the DNR, for receipt by the
DNR Commissioner no later than ten days before the public hearing on the plat.



   (I)   Within 30 days after the preliminary plat has been filed and
after reports and certifications have been received as requested, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat. This
shall constitute the public hearing on the plat required by state law.  If
expert review is required under division (G) above, or if DNR Review is
required under division (H) above, then the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing within 30 days after the review is completed.



   (J)   Within 30 days of the public hearing date, the Planning
Commission shall report to the City Council the Commission's statement of
findings and recommendation for approval, conditional approval or denial.



   (K)   The City Council shall act to approve, conditionally approve
or deny the preliminary plat within 120 days from the date the completed
application for a preliminary plat is accepted as provided by M.S. § 462.358
(3)(b), as it may be amended from time to time, unless the subdivider agrees
to an extension of the review period.  If the City Council fails to approve,
conditionally approve or deny a preliminary plat within the period designated
in this section for review, public hearing and City Council action, then the
preliminary plat shall be deemed approved, and upon demand, the city shall
execute a certificate to that effect.  If the City Council denies the
preliminary plat, the grounds for any denial shall be set forth in the
minutes of the City Council meeting and reported to the owners and
subdividers.  If the City Council approves or conditionally approves the
preliminary plat, it shall do so by resolution. Upon approval, the subdivider
may prepare a final plat complying with the approved terms and conditions of
the preliminary plat, and complying, with standards of this chapter.



   (L)   The subdivider may request amendment in the approval or
conditional approval of the preliminary plat before submission of a final
plat.  The Director of Engineering and Zoning Administrator shall review the
proposed amendment to determine if it is minor or major in nature, in
accordance with the following criteria:



      (1)   (a)   A proposed amendment may be deemed minor if:



            1.   No change or shift is made in the placement
of any street, right-of-way or easement;



            2.   Lot line adjustments are made on no more than
10% of the platted lots;



            3.   No decrease is made to the minimum area to be
dedicated for parkland, trail or open space per § 151.054; and



            4.   The proposed amendment would increase density
by no more than 10%.



         (b)   If a proposed amendment is deemed to be minor, the
subdivider may proceed to final plat submittal.



      (2)   If a proposed amendment is deemed to be major, the
amended preliminary plat and related documents shall be resubmitted for
preliminary plat review including public hearing, subject to all requirements
set forth in § 151.022.



      (3)   The subdivider shall submit an amended grading and
drainage plan for either a major or minor amendment, or shall certify that
there is no change from the preliminary plat.



   (M)    During the intervening time between approval of the
preliminary plat and the signing of the final plat, the subdivider must
submit acceptable engineering plans for all required improvements to and
coordinate all work with the Director of Engineering.



(`86 Code, § 10.19)



§ 151.023  FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Final plat preparation.  The subdivider shall engage a
registered land surveyor or engineer to prepare a final plat of the
preliminary plat portion which the subdivider proposes to record and develop
at the time.



   (B)   Final plat submittal.



      (1)   The subdivider shall submit five copies of the final
plat to the Zoning Administrator at least 21 days before the Planning
Commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered.



      (2)   The final plat shall incorporate all changes required by
the city, the County Engineer regarding county roads, and the State
Department of Transportation regarding state highways.  In all other
respects it shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, or it will be
sent back to the Planning Commission and City Council for preliminary review.



      (3)   When the subdivider submits the final plat, he or she
shall also submit to the city a title opinion or other evidence that the City
Attorney may require showing that the plat and deeds to the public are
properly executed.



      (4)   For one year following approval of the preliminary plat,
no amendment of this chapter, Ch. 154 of this code or the comprehensive plan
shall apply to or affect the preliminary plat, unless the City Council, for
good cause, extends this time after receiving a written request for extension.



      (5)   If the preliminary plat is not entirely platted in final
form within three years of approval, the preliminary plat shall be considered
null and void.



   (C)   Final plat distribution; city staff review.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit one copy of the
final plat and any supporting documentation to the Director of Engineering,
City Attorney and other appropriate city officials.



      (2)   The city staff shall review the final plat and transmit
their recommendations to the Planning Commission prior to the meeting when
the plat will be considered.



   (D)   Final plat review by Planning Commission.  The Planning
Commission shall study the final plat, considering the reports of the
Director of Engineering, City Attorney and other municipal departments and/or
employees, and then shall transmit its recommendations to the Council within
30 days of the Planning Commission's final plat review meeting.



   (E)   Subdivider duty to attend meetings.  The subdivider or a duly
authorized representative shall attend both the Planning Commission meeting
and City Council meeting at which the final plat  scheduled for
consideration.  Failure of the subdivider or a duly authorized
representative to be present at the Planning Commission and Council meetings
shall be grounds to defer action on the proposed final plat, and shall toll
any applicable time limits for the approval or disapproval of a final plat.



   (F)   City Council action on final plat.



      (1)   The City Council shall act upon the final plat within 30
days of receiving the recommendations of the Planning Commission, whereupon
the Records Administrative Secretary shall notify the subdivider of the
Council's action.  If the City Council approves the final plat, then it
shall do so by resolution.



      (2)   Upon subdivider request for final approval, the city
shall certify final approval within 60 days if the applicant has complied
with all chapter requirements and all the preliminary approval conditions,
either through performance or agreements assuring performance.  If the city
fails to certify final approval within the time frame, and if the subdivider
has complied with all conditions or requirements, the final plat shall be
deemed approved and upon demand, the city shall execute a certificate to that
effect.



   (G)   Final plat recording.



      (1)   Upon final plat approval by the City Council, the
subdivider shall record the final plat with the County Recorder, within 6
months after approval; otherwise the approval shall become null and void.



      (2)   The subdivider shall, within 30 days of recording
furnish the Director of Engineering with the following formats and copies of
the final plat showing evidence of the recording.



         (a)   Reproducible mylar original;



         (b)   Two paper copies; and



         (c)   Copy on disk in an AutoCAD release version
specified by the Director of Engineering.



      (3)   The subdivider shall provide all formats and copies
required for recording with the Waseca County Recorder, as well as for filing
with the city.



   (H)   DNR final plat copy; plats in shoreland areas.  Copies of all
plats that include shoreland areas (shoreland overlay districts) shall be
submitted to Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR) within ten days
of final approval by the city.



(`86 Code, § 10.20)  (Am. Ord. 903, passed 4-4-06)



§ 151.024  FINDINGS REQUIRED FOR PLAT APPROVAL.



   In the case of all subdivisions, the findings necessary for City
Council approval of the preliminary plat and the final plat shall be as
follows:



   (A)   The proposed subdivision, including the design, shall be
consistent with all applicable general and specialized city, county and
regional plans, including, but not limited to the city's comprehensive plan,
level of service (LOS) standards which may be established in the
comprehensive plan for streets and other public facilities and with Ch. 154
of this code.



   (B)   The physical characteristics of this site, including, but not
limited to topography, soils, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and
siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage, drainage and retention,
are such that the site is suitable for the type of development and uses
contemplated.



   (C)   The proposed subdivision shall adequately provide for water
supply, storm water drainage and control, wastewater transportation, erosion
control and all other services, facilities and improvements otherwise
required herein.



   (D)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements
shall not adversely impact public health, safety and welfare, nor shall the
proposed subdivision have an adverse impact on the reasonable development of
the neighboring land.



   (E)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
not conflict with easements of record or with easements established by
judgment of a court.



(`86 Code, § 10.21)



§ 151.025  EFFECT OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   For one year following preliminary approval and for two years
following final approval, unless the subdivider and the municipality agree
otherwise, no amendment to a comprehensive plan or official control shall
apply to or affect the use, development, density, lot size, lot layout or
dedication or platting required or permitted by the approved application.



   (B)   Thereafter, pursuant to its regulations, the city may extend
the period by agreement with the subdivider and subject to all applicable
performance conditions and requirements, or it may require submission of a
new application unless substantial physical activity and investment have
occurred in reasonable reliance on the approved application and the
subdivider will suffer substantial financial damage as a consequence of a
requirement to submit a new application.  If a subdivision involves planned
and staged development, the City Council may, by resolution or agreement,
grant the rights referred to herein for a time longer than two years, as it
determines to be reasonable and appropriate.



(`86 Code, § 10.22)



§ 151.026  DISCLOSURE BY SELLER.



   A person conveying a new parcel of land which, or the plat for which,
has not previously been filed or recorded, and which is part of or would
constitute a subdivision to which this chapter applies, shall attach to the
instrument of conveyance either:



   (A)   Recordable certification by the Records Administrative
Secretary that this chapter does not apply, or that the subdivision has been
approved by the City Council, or that the filing and recording have been
waived by resolution of the City Council because compliance will create an
unnecessary hardship and failure to comply will not interfere with the
purpose of this chapter; or



   (B)   A statement which names and identifies the location of the
appropriate city officials and advises the grantee that subdivision and
zoning regulations may restrict the use or prohibit development of the
parcel, or construction on it, and that the division of taxes and the filing
or recording of the conveyance may be prohibited without prior recordable
certification of approval, nonapplicability or waiver from the city.



(`86 Code, § 10.23)



PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS; DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 151.040  CONFORMANCE WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan
adopted by the city.



(`86 Code, § 10.30)



§ 151.041  IDENTIFICATION, DESCRIPTION AND ORIENTATION.



   The preliminary plat shall contain the following:



   (A)   The proposed subdivision name, not duplicating or being
similar in pronunciation or spelling to the name of any plat heretofore
recorded in the county;



   (B)   New streets, numbered streets or avenues;  (An exception to
street or avenue numbering may be granted by the City Council upon reviewing
a written statement of the subdivider explaining what extraordinary
circumstances may exist to warrant a name given to a street/avenue rather
than a number.)



   (C)   Location of all monuments;



   (D)   Location by section, township, range and by legal description;



   (E)   Names and addresses of the record owner, subdivides, any agent
having control of the land, land surveyor, engineer and designer of the plan;



   (F)   When the subdivider submits the preliminary plat documents, he
or she shall also submit a current abstract of title or a registered property
certificate along with any unrecorded documents and an opinion of title by
the subdivider's attorney;



   (G)   Graphic scale not smaller than one inch to 100 feet;



   (H)   North indicator;



   (I)   Key map showing locations of the subdivision and the area
within one mile radius of the plat; and



   (J)   Date of preparation.



(`86 Code, § 10.31)



§ 151.042  EXISTING CONDITIONS IN PROPOSED TRACT.



   The following information shall be shown on the preliminary plat or
accompanying documents.



   (A)   Boundaries and land uses.



      (1)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision;



      (2)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided
land, lying within 150 feet of the proposed plat, identified by name and
ownership, including all contiguous land owned or controlled by the
subdivides;



      (3)   Existing land use and zoning of land within the proposed
subdivision and in the area within 150 feet of the boundaries of the tract,
including floodplain and shoreland districts, if applicable; and



      (4)   Proposed use of all parcels, and if zoning change is
contemplated, proposed zoning amendment.



   (B)   Existing features.



      (1)   Location, right-of-way width and names of existing or
platted streets, alleys, pedestrian ways or other public ways; parks, trails
and other public lands; permanent buildings and structures; easements;
utilities; and section and corporate tines within the proposed plat and
within a distance of 150 feet beyond its boundaries;  (This information will
help determine drainage patterns in and around the affected parcel.)



      (2)   Utilities within the proposed plat and within 150 feet
of the boundaries of the proposed plat, including:  location, size, and
invert elevation of existing sanitary and storm sewers; water mains; location
of gas mains, fire hydrants, catch basins, manholes, electric and telephone
poles and lines, street lights and street pavement widths and types; culverts
or other underground facilities within the preliminary plat area;  (Existing
grades shall also be shown.)



      (3)   An analysis of the soils by representatives of the
Waseca County Soil and Water Conservation District, including delineation of
any wetlands on the proposed plat;  (Groundwater elevations shall be
determined from known information on the site or from field investigation. 
Soil borings may be required if deemed necessary by the Director of
Engineering.)



      (4)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply;
extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore
aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments and aquatic
vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and
erosion, both during and after construction activities.



(`86 Code, § 10.32)



§ 151.043  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Block layout shall show the block layout, including lot and
block numbers.  If a replat, the original lot and block arrangements shall
be shown in dotted or dashed lines.



   (B)   The maximum block length shall be 1,200 feet.  Pedestrian
ways through the block at least eight feet wide at the approximate centers
may be required for blocks over 900 feet long.



   (C)   Residential block length, width and area within bounding
streets and other features shall be sufficient to accommodate convenient
access, circulation control, and safe vehicular and pedestrian movement. 
The width of a block shall normally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots
of appropriate length.



   (D)   Blocks intended for commercial or industrial use must be of
sufficient size to provide for adequate off-street parking, loading and other
requirements of the city.



(`86 Code, § 10.33)



§ 151.044  LOTS.



   (A)   Lot layout.



      (1)   Lot dimensions to the nearest hundredth foot;



      (2)   Setback lines and lot areas for each lot;



      (3)   When lots are located on a curve, the width of a lot at
the building setback line; and



      (4)   If a replat, the original lot and block arrangements
shown in dotted or dashed lines.



   (B)   Lot standards.



      (1)   Each lot created by a subdivision shall front a publicly
dedicated street or a street which has received legal status, except that
lots in planned unit developments (PUDs) may have frontage on a private road
or street.  Where a proposed plat abuts a limited access highway or other
major highway, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots
to the streets.



      (2)   (a)   Areas served by central sewer and water
systems.  The lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum lot dimensions
and lot areas specified in Ch. 154 of this code.



         (b)   Other areas.



            1.   Non-shoreland areas.  Where individual
sewage disposal or individual water supply systems are to be installed, such
as subdivisions lying in that portion of unincorporated area subject to §
151.003, the minimum area of residential lots size shall be as follows:



               a.   On lot sewage disposal and lot water
supply, 22,000 square feet;



               b.   On lot sewage disposal, 15,000 square
feet; and



               c.   On lot water supply, 10,000 square feet.



            2.   Shoreland management areas.  Minimum lot
sizes and dimensions shall comply with §§ 154.045 through 154.060.



   (C)   Future arrangements.  When extraterritorial parcels of land
are subdivided into lots of one acre or larger, the plat shall be designed
and shall show, in dashed lines, how lots can be re-subdivided at some future
date when public sanitary sewers are available.



   (D)   Side lot lines.  Side lines of lots shall be substantially at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.



   (E)   Lot width related to depth.  To prevent narrow, deep lots,
the depth of a lot should not exceed 2¼ times the width of the street
frontage.



   (F)   Sides of a lot.  No lot shall have fewer than four sides and
no more than five sides.



   (G)   Lots bordered by parallel streets.  Lots bordered by parallel
streets shall not be permitted except where one of the streets is an arterial
or collector street, in which case the lots shall front on the non-arterial
or non-collector street.  The minimum required lot depth of the underlying
zoning district shall be increased by ten feet for the lots to allow for
screen planting along the back lot line.  A landscape easement will be
required to be recorded along with the recording of the final plat.



   (H)   Lot remnants.  All remnants of lots below minimum size left
over after subdividing of a larger tract shall be added to abutting lots
rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.



(`86 Code, § 10.34)



§ 151.045  STREETS.



   (A)   Layout.  The preliminary plat shall show proposed street
layout and width.  The layout shall include all contiguous land owned by the
subdivide.



   (B)   Design.



      (1)   Street layout shall be consistent with the comprehensive
plan and provide for public safety, efficient traffic circulation and
stormwater runoff.



      (2)   If a proposed subdivision abuts unsubdivided land, the
street layout shall allow for appropriate street continuation into adjoining
areas.  The streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the unsubdivided
land.



   (C)   Width and grade.



      (1)   (a)   The right-of-way width of all streets shall
conform to the following minimum dimensions:



            1.   Arterials, 80 feet;



            2.   Collector streets, 66 feet;



            3.   Local streets, 60 feet;



            4.   Frontage roads, 50 feet; and



            5.   Cul-de-sac radius, 60 feet.



         (b)   Greater or lesser widths may be required depending
upon anticipated traffic volumes, planned function of the street and
character of planned abutting land uses.  The Director of Engineering and
Zoning Administrator shall specify the width(s) in the staff report to the
Planning Commission and City Council.



      (2)   (a)   All center line gradients shall be at least
0.5% and shall not exceed the following:



            1.   Arterials and thoroughfares, 5%;



            2.   Collector streets, 6%; and



            3.   Minor streets, 8%.



         (b)   The Director of Engineering may consider, on
arterials and collector streets, a maximum of 8% grade where existing
topography dictates.



   (D)   Minimum carrying capacity.



      (1)   Seven-ton axle loading for local streets; and



      (2)   Nine-ton axle loading based on traffic volume for
arterial and collector streets.



   (E)   Maximum levels of service (LOS).  The impact of increased
subdivision build-out density on traffic volumes shall be consistent with the
maximum acceptable design LOS indicated in the comprehensive plan for
existing or planned arterials, collector streets, and frontage roads. 
Increased density and traffic volumes shall be concurrent with planned LOS
capacity and availability.



   (F)   Intersections.  Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect
at right angles.  In no case shall the angle formed by the intersection of
two streets be less than 60 degrees.  Intersections having more than four
corners shall be prohibited.  Adequate land for future intersection and
interchange construction needs shall be dedicated to the city.



   (G)   Tangents.  A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced
between reverse curves on collector streets and 50 feet on lesser streets.



   (H)   Deflections.  Other than at intersections, connecting street
lines that deflect from each other shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of no less than 500 feet for
arterials, 300 feet for collectors, 100 feet for all other streets.



   (I)   Intersection offsets.  Centerlines of arterial and collector
streets at intersections shall not be offset.  Offsets of focal streets
shall be considered on a case by case basis by the Director of Engineering.



   (J)   Local streets.  Local streets shall be laid out so as not to
encourage through traffic.



   (K)   Cul-de-sacs.  The undesirable effects of cul-de-sacs on
traffic movement, emergency vehicle access, school bus traffic and
snowplowing require limiting the maximum length of a street terminating in a
cul-de-sac to 500 feet, measured from the centerline of the street of origin
to the end of the right-of-way.



   (L)   Access to arterial streets.  If a proposed plat abuts a
limited access highway or arterial street, there shall be no direct vehicular
or pedestrian access from individual lots to the highways or streets. Access
to arterials shall be at intervals of not less than ¼-mile and through
existing and established crossroads.  The City Council may require the
developer to provide local service drives along the right-of-way of
arterials, or the Council may require that lots back on the arterial, in
which case, vehicular and pedestrian access between the lots and arterial
shall be prohibited.



   (M)    Platting of small tracts fronting arterial streets.  In the
platting of small tracts of land fronting arterial streets, where there is no
convenient access to existing entrances, and where access from the plat would
be closer than ¼-mile from an existing access point, an entrance permit may
be granted. Provision shall be made in the plats for the connection of roads
to abutting land.  As the abutting land is developed, and access becomes
possible at a preferred location, the City Council may, upon public hearing,
revoke the entrance permit.



   (N)   Stub streets.  Where adjoining lands are not subdivided, some
of the streets in the new subdivision shall be required to extend to the
boundary line of the tract to provide for future access.



   (O)   Street continuation and extension.  Street layout shall
provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into
the new subdivision when such extension is shown on the comprehensive plan,
or whenever the extension would meet traffic circulation objectives as
determined by the City Council.



   (P)   Half streets.  Half streets shall be prohibited.



   (Q)   Private streets.  Private streets may be permitted only in
planned unit developments (PUDs), however, they must conform to the same
standards as public streets.



   (R)   Corners.  Curb lines at street intersections shall be rounded
at a radius of not less than 20 feet. Corners at the entrances to the
turnaround portion of cul-de-sacs shall have right-of-way radii of not less
than 35 feet.



   (S)   Alleys.  Alleys, where permitted by the city, shall be at
least 20 feet wide in residential areas and at least 24 feet wide in
commercial areas.  The city may require alleys in commercial areas where
adequate off-street loading space is not available.  Dead-end alleys, alley
intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be prohibited.



   (T)   Hardship to owners of adjoining property.  The street
arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining
property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.



(`86 Code, § 10.35)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.046  PUBLIC EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Layout.  The preliminary plat shall show existing and
proposed easements, including types of easements and easement layout and
widths.



   (B)   Standards.  The following public easements shall be dedicated
on the plat:



      (1)   Drainage and utility easements of at least ten-feet wide
centered on all lot lines shall be provided.  Ten-foot wide drainage and
utility easements shall be required along the plat boundary lines and street
right-of-ways.  All easements shall be continuous from block to block.



      (2)   Easements for storm sewer, sanitary sewer or water shall
be at least 20 feet wide. Additional width shall be provided when more than
one utility is in the same easement, or when needed to safely excavate to the
depth of the utility.  The easements shall have continuity of alignment from
block to block.  Utility easements shall be kept free of any vegetation or
structures which would interfere with the free movement of utility service
vehicles.



      (3)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course,
drainage way, channel or stream, a drainage and/or floodage easement, based
on the 100-year two-hour storm event, shall be provided and shall conform
substantially to the lines of the watercourse or its flood plain.  Easement
width shall be determined by the Director of Engineering.



      (4)   Temporary construction easements may be required where
installation depths are greater than 12 feet.



(`86 Code, § 10.36)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.047  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement
right-of-way on at least one side of all streets.  This provision shall not
apply to cul-de-sacs, except as a link to trails or other sidewalks as
required by the Waseca City Council.  A recommendation as to the location of
sidewalks within areas to be platted shall be provided by the Community
Development Director.  These recommendations will be included in plans
provided to the Waseca City Council with the preliminary plat.



   (B)   Classification width.



      (1)   Residential districts;



         (a)   Residential non-collector and non-arterial (minor
and major), four feet; and



         (b)   Residential collector and arterial (minor and
major), five feet.



      (2)   Commercial districts, eight feet; and



      (3)   Industrial districts, five feet.



   (C)   Sidewalks shall slope  ¼-inch  per foot away from the
property line and the profile grade shall not exceed 5%.



   (D)   Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four-inch thick concrete and
placed on a four-inch gravel base.



   (E)   Sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way at the
property line.



(`86 Code, § 10.37)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord. 904, passed
6-6-06)



§ 151.048  PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS AND TRAILS.



   (A)   If required or planned by the subdivider, the preliminary plat
shall show layout and dimensions of pedestrian walkways and trails.



   (B)   Pedestrian ways shall connect to the city's existing or
planned trail system, to other public trails and to public service areas such
as parks, schools, shopping areas or to other appropriate locations of a
similar nature.



   (C)   Pedestrian rights-of-way shall be at least eight feet wide. 
Pedestrian rights-of-way dedications may be credited to the park, trail and
open space dedication requirement set forth in § 151.049, or credited to the
sidewalk dedication requirements set forth in § 151.047.



(`86 Code, § 10.38)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.049  PARKS, OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC USE.



   Each preliminary plat shall show layout, dimensions and acreages of
park land and open space, in accordance with the following standards:



      (1)   Land dedication or payment in lieu of land.



         (a)   In all new subdivisions, a percentage of the gross
area of all property subdivided shall be dedicated for parks, playgrounds or
other public use.  The percentage shall be in addition to the property
dedicated for streets, alleys, waterways, pedestrian ways or other public
ways.  If a proposed park, playground, school site, trail system or other
public use shown on the comprehensive plan, then the area shall be dedicated
to the public.



         (b)   If the subdivision is small or does not include a
park or public area shown on the comprehensive plan, or if in the judgment of
the Council the area proposed to be dedicated is not suitable or desirable
for park/playground purposes because of location, size or other reason, the
Council may require, in lieu of land dedication, a payment to the city.



         (c)   If a lot being platted is already developed, the
developer shall be exempt from the requirement to dedicate land or pay the
fee in lieu of the land dedication for that lot.  All undeveloped lots being
platted will be calculated for land dedication.  This change shall be
considered effective on the first day of March, 2005.



      (2)   Land dedication or payment schedule.  The following
schedule shall be used to determine the amount of land dedication or
fee-in-lieu of land:



 




Single-Family Development (Single-Family and Two-Family Homes)




Number of Lots Per Acre

 

Percent Land Dedication

 

*Payment-in-Lieu of Land



(Amount Per Lot)




Up to 3

 

8%

 

$420




More than 3 and up to 5

 

14%

 

$420




Multi-Family Development




Number of Units Per Acre

 

Percent Land Dedication

 

*Payment-in-Lieu of Land



(Amount Per Unit)




Up to 15

 

20%

 

$300




More than 15, but less than 30

 

35%

 

$275




30 or more

 

45%

 

$250




Mobile Home Park



13% of land for recreation


NOTE TO TABLE:

* Fee based on an assumed land cost of $15,000 per acre




 



      (3)   Dedication; payment terms.  Dedication of land for
public use shall be without restrictions or reservations and shall be
designated as an “outlot” on the plat.  Money given to the city in lieu
of land shall be used by the city only for acquiring or developing public
park land, trails or planned open space.  Payment made in lieu of land
dedication shall be made prior to execution of the final plat documents.



      (4)   Developer's alternate land dedication formula for park
land, trail(s) or open space.



         (a)   If requested, the City Council shall provide the
developer or landowner with the methodology used to calculate the value of
the land.



         (b)   A developer may propose an alternate land
dedication formula if a proposal is accompanied by supporting documentation,
including number of units per acre, average number of residents per unit,
actual cost of land documented by three independent appraisals done by
licensed appraisers not associated with the sale of the property being
platted, and other evidence as appropriate. The Council reserves the right to
hire any appraisals done to document actual land cost.



         (c)   If the City Council accepts the developer's
alternate land dedication formula, then the developer's documentation shall
be incorporated into his or her subdivider's agreement.



      (5)   Park dedication re-calculation upon subsequent
subdivision or higher density.



         (a)   If platted property is subsequently replatted or a
portion of it subdivided, such as splitting one or more lots, then the land
dedication formula set forth above shall apply to all additional lots created.



         (b)   If any portion of platted property is subsequently
approved for higher density development, then the land dedication formula set
forth above shall apply to the increase in density over the originally
planned density.  If a payment-in-lieu of land dedication is made, then the
payment shall equal the difference between the calculated fee at the higher
density and the originally calculated fee, as follows:



Fee for new density - Original density fee = Amount due



      (6)   Parkland grading and preparation.  If parkland is
dedicated, then the following standards shall pertain:



         (a)   The park land shall be graded to the contours set
forth in the preliminary plat.



         (b)   The developer shall provide a minimum of six
inches of black dirt over the entire park area and the area shall be seeded
with a type of seed approved by the city.  The financial guarantees by the
developer to the city shall be in effect at least until the time that the
park land is graded and seeded.



         (c)   At least 50% of the gross area dedicated for parks
shall be suitable for active recreation use; active recreation meaning
organized playground activities such as softball, football, etc.  These
areas to be used for organized playground activities shall be a slope of less
than 2% grade and be largely clear of forest vegetation.  Other areas to be
dedicated may be forested and may have steeper slopes.



         (d)   A site to be used for playground, sports or other
active recreation shall have a total frontage on one or more streets of at
least 200 feet and all other dimensions shall be at feast 200 feet.



      (7)   Trail grading and preparation.  If a trail is
dedicated, then the following standards shall pertain:



         (a)   The trail shall be graded to the contours set
forth in the preliminary plat.



         (b)   Minimum trail width shall be eight feet.



         (c)   Trail structure shall consist of four inches of
aggregate base and two inches of bituminous overlay.



      (8)   Open space grading and preparation.  If open space is
dedicated, then the following standards shall pertain:



         (a)   The open space shall be graded to the contours set
forth in the preliminary plat.



         (b)   As applicable, standards in § 151.051 shall
pertain.



         (c)   As applicable, state rules governing wetlands
and/or shorelands shall pertain.



      (9)   Protective or scenic easements.  As an open space
option; subject to acceptance by the City Council, protective or scenic
easements may be provided to a depth of 100 feet from the ordinary high water
level of all lakes, ponds and streams or to the logical, natural or
ecological boundary as can be agreed upon by the subdivider and the city.  A
protective or scenic easement may be credited toward the park, trail and open
space requirements set forth in this section.



      (10)   Dedication subject to city acceptance.  No areas may
be dedicated as parks, playgrounds or public lands unless the city approves
the dedication.



(`86 Code, § 10.39)  (Am. Ord. 612, passed 6-18-91; Am. Ord. 706, passed
12-2-97; Am. Ord. 879, passed 8-16-05)



§ 151.050  AGRICULTURAL BUFFERS.



   (A)   If a proposed subdivision abuts land zoned agricultural, house
pads within the subdivision shall be designed so that they are set back at
least 100 feet from the nearest agricultural district.



   (B)   Within the setback area defined under division (A) above, a
landscaped easement shall be established, having a minimum width of 15 feet
and running along the perimeter of the subdivision that abuts an agricultural
district.  Within the landscaped easement, a landscaped buffer shall be
established consisting of trees, vegetation or other visual natural screening.



(`86 Code, § 10.40)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.051  CONSERVATION OF TREES AND NATURAL FEATURES.



   (A)   The standards related to tree removal contained in § 154.154
shall apply to all proposed subdivisions.



   (B)   In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for
all natural features, such as tree growth, wetlands, steep slopes, water
courses or similar conditions, and plans adjusted to preserve those which
will add attractiveness, safety and stability to the proposed development.



   (C)   The subdivision shall be consistent with the following:



      (1)   The concept plan shall show preservation of existing
healthy trees and native vegetation, including the number and location of
existing trees, indicating those to be retained, and showing locations of
proposed new trees.



      (2)   Trees to be planted in residential subdivisions shall
measure not less than one and one- fourth inches in diameter at a height of
four feet above ground level.  No trees shall be planted within 30 feet of
the intersection of curb lines on corner lots.



      (3)   Consistent with approved grading plans, existing trees
shall be preserved within any right-of-way when the trees are suitably
located and in good health.



(`86 Code, § 10.41)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord. 792, passed
5-7-02)



§ 151.052  GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLANS.



   Grading and drainage plans, to the same scale as the preliminary plat
map, shall be submitted for each plat, providing the following information to
the standards set forth:



   (A)   Existing and proposed contour lines.



      (1)   Existing contours shall be shown at vertical intervals
of two feet.  Elevations shall be referenced to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD 1929).



      (2)   Contour lines shall be different line weights for
existing contour lines versus proposed contour lines.



      (3)   Contours shall be shown to a minimum of 150 feet into
adjacent property or to the centerline of the adjacent street.



   (B)   Lot and block layout.



      (1)   Lot dimensions to the nearest foot;



      (2)   Typical lot detail indicating where lot and house
elevations are shown;



      (3)   Building setback lines;



      (4)   Front and rear lot corner elevations;



      (5)   House pads layout, showing hold down elevations and
finished garage elevations;



      (6)   Spot elevations as appropriate to define drainage
patterns on the lot; and



      (7)   Legend with type of house styles and grade difference
for garage floor to walkouts or lookouts.



   (C)   Lot grading and drainage.  Lots shall be graded so water
drains away from building locations and flows along lot lines within the
proposed drainage and utility easements.  Any drainage flow from one lot
onto an abutting lot must be within a drainage easement.



   (D)   Street layout.



      (1)   Typical street section;



      (2)   Preliminary street grades and drainage;



      (3)   Centerline street elevations at 100 foot stations with
high and low points; and



      (4)   Cul-de-sac frontage along curb tines with spot
elevations.



   (E)   Street grade.  Centerline street gradients shall be in
accordance with § 151.045.



   (F)   Storm sewer alignment.  Storm sewer alignment shall be shown
with top and invert elevations.  Also, flared ends shall be shown with
invert elevations.



   (G)   Easements.  Existing and proposed easements, in accordance
with § 151.046.



   (H)   Grading plan.



      (1)   The grading plan for all single-family residential
subdivisions shall provide for an area with a slope not greater than 10%
extending not less than a depth of 20 feet from the rear line of the building
pad the entire width of the building pad, except as approved by the City
Engineer.



      (2)   House pad setback from flood elevations:  House pads
shall be set back 30 feet from 100-year flood elevation for storm sewer ponds
and lakes if the lake lot has municipal sewer; and 75 feet from the 100-year
flood elevation for lakes if the lake lot is unsewered.



      (3)   Lowest opening elevation:  two feet above the 100-year
flood elevation of adjacent storm sewer ponds.  Flooding elevations shall be
one foot above the ordinary high water level of any standing water if
determined.  If sufficient data on known high water levels is not available,
the elevation of the line of permanent aquatic vegetation shall be used as
the estimated high water standing water elevation.



   (I)   Garage floors.  Minimum elevation:  1½ feet above the
top-of-curb elevation, as measured from the top-of-curb at the high side of
the driveway to the garage floor.



   (J)   Driveway slopes.  Maximum slope:  10% from the top-of-curb
to the garage floor, as measured at the centerline of the driveway.



   (K)   Open areas, including yards and swales.



      (1)   Minimum slopes, 1%; and  (Preferred design is 1.5% or
greater.)



      (2)   Maximum slopes, 3:1, except existing slopes being
protected, which are subject to review.



   (L)   Emergency overflows.



      (1)   Emergency overflows shall be labeled and shown with spot
elevations and drainage arrows.  Emergency overflows must be established for
catch basins in the street and in rear lots.  Areas along rear lot lines
which are below the emergency overflow elevation shall be designated as
drainage easement on the final plat.



      (2)   Minimum elevation is 2.0 feet below the lowest opening
house elevation.



      (3)   Storm sewer ponds' slopes, 6:1 maximum grade.



   (M)   Elevations and boundaries of lakes, wetlands and ponds.  Each
grading and drainage plan shall show the following:



      (1)   Ordinary high water level contours of all lakes,
streams, wetlands, watercourses, marshes, and surface water features required
in M.S. § 505.02 (1), as it may be amended from time to time, obtained from
United States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate
sources;



      (2)   Location of 100-year floodplain areas, 100-year flood
elevations, and limits of floodway and flood fringe;



      (3)   Delineated wetland boundaries, completed by a qualified
professional according to the most current U.S. Corps of Engineers
methodology, and approved by the city’s designated official;



      (4)   Wooded areas;



      (5)   Rock outcrops;



      (6)   Power transmission poles and lines; and



      (7)   Other significant features required to be shown.



   (N)   Watercourses.  No more than 50% of the minimum lot size for
the underlying zoning district shall contain a wetland, watercourse or
marsh.  Setback shall comply with the standards established in Ch. 154,
Zoning.



   (O)   Drainage design.



      (1)   Drainage arrows at high points and at major grade
changes;



      (2)   Drainage design calculations which show that the
proposed improvements shall not change runoff rates onto adjacent public or
private property and shall not adversely impact downstream properties; and



      (3)   Drainage facility design shall be based on a 100-year
24-hour storm event for flood overflow ponds and based on a 10-year one-hour
storm event for piping.



   (P)   Grading and drainage plan preparation.  Grading and drainage
plan must be signed by a registered engineer.



(`86 Code, § 10.42)  (Am. Ord. 632, passed 12-15-92; Am. Ord. 706, passed
12-2-97; Am. Ord. 1006, passed 10-1-13)



§ 151.053  SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.



   The standards related to soil erosion and sediment control contained in
§ 154.153 shall apply to all proposed subdivisions.



(`86 Code, § 10.43)



§ 151.054  OTHER INFORMATION FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   The preliminary plat shall show other information as follows:



   (A)   Where a subdivides owns property adjacent to that which is
being proposed for the subdivision, the subdivides shall submit a sketch plan
of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships
between the proposed subdivision and the future subdivision.



   (B)   Potential resubdivision and use shall be indicated for any lot
having any dimension that exceeds 200% of the minimum standard for the
underlying zoning district.



   (C)   A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during
construction and after development has been completed.



   (D)   Other information as may be requested by the city staff,
Planning Commission or City Council.



(`86 Code, § 10.44)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.055  SOLAR LOTS.



   All subdivisions and planned unit developments may be designed to
accommodate the use of both active and passive solar energy systems.  If
subdivisions are planned, then the subdivider shall provide protective
covenants to protect solar orientation.



(`86 Code, § 10.45)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS



§ 151.070  FINAL PREPARATION.



   The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor who is registered in the
state and shall comply with the appropriate provisions of Minnesota Statutes
and of these regulations.



(`86 Code, § 10.50)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.071  IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION.



   (A)   Data, as required by the Director of Engineering, i.e.,
accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles and curvatures
used to describe boundaries, streets, easements and other important features;



   (B)   Identification and description data as required for the
preliminary plat;



   (C)   Boundaries of the property, lines of all proposed streets and
alleys, with their width, and other areas intended for public use;



   (D)   Lines of adjoining streets and alleys, with their width and
names;



   (E)   All lot lines and easements, with figures showing their
dimensions; and



   (F)   An identification system for all lots and blocks.



(`86 Code, § 10.50)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.072  CERTIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that
the plat represents a survey made by him or her and that monuments and
markers thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic
details are correct.



   (B)   Notarized certification by owner, and by any mortgage holder
of record, of adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets, utility
extensions and other public areas.



   (C)   Certification bearing the signature of the County Treasurer
indicating that all taxes currently due have been paid.



   (D)   Certification bearing the signature of the County Auditor
indicating that all delinquent taxes on the property have been paid.



   (E)   Certification bearing the signature of the County Recorder
indicating the document number (if any) and the date, book and page on which
the final plat was recorded.



   (F)   Title opinion by a practicing attorney-at-law based upon an
examination of an abstract of the records of the County Recorder for the land
included within the plat and showing the title to be in the name of the owner
or subdivider.  The date of continuation of the abstract examined or the
date of the examination of the records shall be within 30 days prior to the
date the final plat is filed with the County Auditor.  The owner or
subdivider shown in the title opinion shall be the owner of record of the
platted lands on the date of recording of the plat with the County Recorder.



   (G)   Certification bearing the signature of the Director of
Engineering indicating compliance with M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (H)   Certification bearing the signature of the City Manager
indicating date, month and year in which the final plat was approved by the
City Council.



(`86 Code, § 10.50)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



§ 151.085  IMPROVEMENTS PERFORMED BY CITY.



   Unless otherwise specified by the City Council and set forth in the
development agreement, all public improvements shall be completed by the
city.  The means and methods of payment by the subdivider for public
improvements are established in the sections below.  The city will not
financially participate in any general site grading, lot and block corner
staking or improvements not public as part of any plat.  The subdivider
shall be responsible for those improvements at his or her expense.  If any
improvement benefits property beyond this plat, the city shall consider
assessing that property under state statutes.



(`86 Code, § 10.52)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.086  IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR ALL SUBDIVISIONS.



   The subdivider-developer shall be required to provide the following
improvements to residential subdivisions unless the Council elects to do so
under a development agreement.



   (A)   Steel monuments shall be placed within six inches of final
elevation at all lot corners, block corners, angle points, points of curves
in streets and at intermediate points as shown on the final plat. The
installation shall be the subdivider's expense and responsibility.  All
U.S., state, county or other official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation
stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise
position.



   (B)   Following the Director of Engineering's approval of street and
sidewalk grading, and after utility installation, streets and sidewalks shall
be surfaced according to standards contained in §§ 151.045 and 151.047 and
according to Director of Engineering specifications.



   (C)   (1)   All utilities shall be installed underground so as to
enhance the visual appearance of the area, unless special permission is
granted by the Council for other installations.  Where utilities are to be
installed in street or alley right-of-way, the installations shall take place
prior to street surfacing. Water and sewer services shall be laid to the
property line.  Sizes of water and sewer mains and service lines shall be
specified by the Director of Engineering.



      (2)   Sanitary sewer facilities adequate to serve the
subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the latest plans and
specifications of the Director of Engineering and shall meet the requirements
of the master plan for sewer main extensions of the municipality.



   (D)   Storm sewer and/or other surface drainage facilities shall be
installed as determined by the Director of Engineering for the proper
drainage of surface waters.



(`86 Code, § 10.53)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.087  SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.



   Public improvements shall conform to engineering standards and
specifications as required by the City Council.  The Director of Engineering
shall inspect the improvements.  The improvements shall be subject to
Director of Engineering approval and shall be made in sequence as he or she
determines.



(`86 Code, § 10.54)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.088  AGREEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Development agreement.



      (1)   Prior to the installation of any required improvements
and before the subdivider may submit the final plat for approval, the
subdivider shall enter into a written development agreement with the city
identifying the respective responsibilities for construction of public
improvements, timing of construction of public improvements and form of
financial guarantee, together with other standard development agreement
provisions.



      (2)   The development agreement shall provide for the Director
of Engineering to supervise construction, and shall grant to the Director of
Engineering authority to coordinate the required improvements with any other
work being done or contracted by the city.



   (B)   Effect of subdivides default on future subdivision
proposals.  No subdivider shall be permitted to start work on any other
subdivision without special approval of the City Council if he or she has
previously defaulted on work or commitments.



   (C)   Development agreement recording.  The city shall file the
development agreement with the County Recorder.



(`86 Code, § 10.55)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.089  FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.



   (A)   An escrow deposit shall be made with the Finance Director of
125% of the total cost of improvements as estimated by the Director of
Engineering, pursuant to the development agreement.  The total costs shall
include costs of engineering and inspection by the city.  The city shall be
entitled to reimburse itself out of the deposit for any expense incurred by
the city for completion of the work in case of subdivider default under the
agreement, and for any damages sustained due to any breach thereof.  Upon
completion of the work and termination of any liability, the balance
remaining in the deposit shall be refunded to the subdivider.



   (B)   In lieu of making the escrow deposit, the subdivider may
furnish a bank letter of credit or performance bond with corporate surety in
a penal sum equal to 125% of the total cost of improvements as estimated by
the Director of Engineering pursuant to the agreement.  The bond shall be
approved as to form by the City Attorney and filed with the Finance Director.



   (C)   If the subdivider defaults in the terms or conditions of the
contract with the city for the subdivision improvements, the city may
complete the project referred to in the contract and assess all completion
costs incurred by the city against the real property being subdivided as a
special assessment and collect it the same as if it were any other special
assessment levied by the city against real property.



(`86 Code, § 10.56)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.100  MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   If a proposed subdivision will result in three or fewer
parcels, the city may waive some of the requirements of this chapter.  If
the subdivision will not create more than three lots, the newly created
property lines will not cause any results to violate this chapter or Ch. 154
of this code, and the subdivision will not involve city vacation of existing
easements, then the division may be approved by the Zoning Administrator or
Director of Engineering, after submission of a survey by a registered land
surveyor, showing the original lot and the proposed subdivision.



   (B)   If a proposed minor subdivision would cause any resulting lot
or the setbacks of existing structures from newly created lot lines to
violate this chapter or Ch. 154 of this code, then the subdivider may request
variance under § 151.101.



   (C)   If a proposed minor subdivision will involve city vacation of
existing easements, then the request shall proceed to the City Council who
may consider an ordinance vacating existing easements and may accept new
easements from the subdivider.



   (D)   The applicant shall file the completed application form
together with a certificate of survey showing the original lot lines, the
proposed subdivision, legal description of the existing parcel, legal
description of the resulting parcels after subdivision and other exhibits as
required by the Zoning Administrator or Director of Engineering. The
applicant shall pay, at the time of application, the required Subdivision Fee
and the required County Recording Fee. If the minor subdivision also requires
a variance, the applicant shall pay the required variance fee and will be
exempt from the required subdivision fee.



   (E)   If the City Planner is to grant administrative approval for a
proposed minor subdivision, each of the provisions shown below must be met:



      (1)   The proposed subdivision will not result in more than
three lots.



      (2)   Each lot shall have no fewer than four sides and no more
than five sides.



      (3)   All necessary utility and drainage easements are
provided for.



      (4)   The property to be divided will not require the
dedication of public right-of-way for purposes of gaining access to the
property.



      (5)   The property has not been divided through the provisions
of this section within the previous five years.



      (6)   The subdivision meets all design standards as specified
elsewhere in this chapter.



   (F)   Staff may impose conditions to approval on any proposed minor
subdivision that are deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the public
interest and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section
including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The applicant shall provide required utility and
easements and be responsible for the cost of filing and recording written
easements with the Waseca County Recorder's Office; and



      (2)   The applicant shall pay parkland dedication fees for
each residential lot created beyond the original number of existing lots
prior to subdividing.



(`86 Code, § 10.60)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord. 888, passed
11-1-05)



§ 151.101  MODIFICATIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   The City Council may grant a variance, upon receiving a
Planning Commission report, to the subdivider who demonstrates that, due to
exceptional topography or other physical conditions, compliance with this
chapter would cause exceptional and undue hardship, provided that the relief
may be granted without detriment to the public welfare and without impairing
the intent and purpose of this chapter.  The Planning Commission may
recommend variations from the requirements of this chapter in specific which,
in its opinion, do not affect the comprehensive plan or the intent of this
chapter.  Any modifications thus recommended shall be entered in the minutes
of the Planning Commission, setting forth the reasons justifying the
modifications.



   (B)   The City Council may approve variances from this chapter
which, in its opinion, meet the above requirements and do not adversely
affect the purposes of this chapter.



(`86 Code, § 10.61)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.102  RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   The Urban Service District and the Rural Service District
constitute separate taxing districts for the purpose of all municipal
property taxes except those levied for the payment of bonds and judgments and
interest thereon.



   (B)   The Urban Service District shall include all properties within
the limits of the city, except those set forth herein as Rural Service
District.



   (C)   The Rural Service District shall include only the land which
is classified by the County Assessor as agricultural homestead or
agricultural non-homestead land.



   (D)   On a judgment of the City Council, the ratio between the
tax-supported municipal service benefits to Rural Service District parcels
and to Urban Service District parcels is 70%, plus any municipal property
taxes levied for the payment of bonds and judgments and interest thereon.



   (E)   No city services beyond that normally provided by the
townships of the county will be provided by the city in a Rural Service
District except fire, police and planning services and an additional services
as the Council may prescribe.



   (F)   If any land in the Rural Service District is platted, or if
building permit application is made for construction, the City Council shall,
by ordinance, transfer the parcel from the Rural Service District to the
Urban Service District.



   (G)   (1)   No parcel shall be included in a Rural Service
District of five acres or less and no parcel shall remain in a Rural Service
District unless the parcel consists of five acres or more.



      (2)   Any parcel within a Rural Service District for five
years without development shall be considered by the City Council for
exclusion from the Rural Service District.  By amendment hereof the parcel
shall be included in the Urban Service District if any area adjacent thereto
is determined by the City Council to be substantially developed as urban
property.



(`86 Code, § 10.62)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97)



§ 151.103  BUILDING PERMITS.



   No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement,
alteration or repair, demolition or moving of any building or structure on
any lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these
regulations, nor shall the municipality have any obligation to issue
certificates of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel created
in violation of these regulations.  No building permit shall be issued for
construction on any lot within a subdivision until all the roadways are paved
with Class 5 base material so as to be accessible by emergency vehicles.  In
addition, no building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot
within the subdivision until the developer provides the city with an
affidavit stating that all grading within the subdivision exists as indicated
on the approved grading plan.  (This affidavit form will be provided by the
city.)  In addition, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all
roadways required for the subdivision or required for the approved
subdivision phase, and any other improvements in the development agreement
are fully completed in conformance with the approved plans and specifications
and accepted by the city upon recommendation of the Director of Engineering.



(`86 Code, § 10.63)  (Am. Ord. 706, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord. 897, passed
2-7-06)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   Any person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these
regulations, or who sells, leases or offers for sale or lease any lot, block
or tract of land herewith regulated before all the requirements of these
regulations have been complied with, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof be subject to fine and/or imprisonment.  Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(`86 Code, § 10.64)



CHAPTER 152:  SIGN REGULATIONS



Section



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Permit required



   152.03   Nonconforming signs



   152.04   Abandoned signs



   152.05   Existing land uses



   152.06   Allowed signs



   152.07   Areas of special control



   152.08   Appeals



   152.09   Construction specifications



   152.10   Safety, visibility and the like



   152.11   Performance standards; business and industrial



   152.12   Performance standards; residential



   152.13   Exemptions



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED SIGN.  A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts
any person, advertises a bonafide business, lessor, owner, product, activity
conducted or product available on the premises where the sign is displayed.



   ADVERTISING MESSAGE.  The symbol and/or wording on a sign describing
products or services being offered to the public.



   ANIMATED SIGN.  Any sign which includes action or motion.  For
purposes of this code, this term does not refer to flashing or indexing, both
of which are separately defined.



   ARCHITECTURAL BLADE.  A roof sign or projecting sign with no legs or
braces, designed to look as though it could have been part of the building
structure, rather than something suspended from or standing on the building.



   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION.  Any projection which is not intended for
occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a
building, but shall not include signs.



   AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A freestanding sign which identifies the
name of a neighborhood, a residential subdivision, a multiple residential
complex consisting of three or more structures, a shopping center consisting
of five or more separate businesses, an industrial area, an office complex
consisting of three or more structures, or any combination of the above
located on contiguous property.



   AWNING.  A temporary hood or cover which projects from and is entirely
supported by the exterior wall of a building, is composed of non-rigid
materials, such as canvas or other treated cloth, except for the supporting
framework, and, is of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed
against the face of the supporting building.



   AWNING SIGN.  A non-illuminated identification sign affixed flat to
the surface of an awning and which does not extend vertically or horizontally
beyond the limits of the awning.



   BACKGROUND ANIMATION.   The appearance of movement on a sign that
creates a special effect or scene set in the background of a sign, but where
the informational message portion displays static content in the foreground
of the sign.



   BANNER or PENNANT.  A temporary sign composed of lightweight material,
such as paper, cloth or plastic, either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid
flame, secured or mounted so as to allow movement of the sign by movement of
the atmosphere; erected for the purpose of announcing open houses, grand
openings or special events.



   BILLBOARD.  A sign erected and used for the purpose of advertising a
product, event, person or subject not related to the premises on which the
sign is located.



   BUILDING FACADE, FACE OR WALL.  The portion of any exterior elevation
of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves
and the entire width of the building elevation.



   BUILDING FRONTAGE.  The linear length of a building facing the
right-of-way.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  A distance to be measured from the average finished
grade at the building frontage line to the top of the cornice of a flat roof,
to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean distance of the highest
gable on a pitched or hipped roof.



   BULLETIN or BULLETIN BOARD.  A sign which accommodates changeable
symbols and/or wording and which displays information on activities and
events on the premises or in the community.



   CANOPY or MARQUEE.  A permanent roof-like structure attached to and
supported by a building, projecting from part or all of a building face over
the entrance to a building and constructed of a durable material such as
metal, glass or plastic, but is not the same as a projecting roof.



   CANOPY or MARQUEE SIGN.  Any sign attached to or constructed in or on
a canopy or marquee and which does not extend horizontally beyond the limits
of the canopy or marquee.



   CHANGING SIGN.  A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or
illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or
the surface of the sign.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A non-illuminated sign placed at a construction
site identifying the project and/or names of architects, engineers,
developers, contractors or other individuals or firms involved with the
project.



   DISSOLVE MODE.   A mode of message transition on an EMC accomplished
by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually
appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual
appearance and legibility of the second message.



   ELECTRICAL SIGN.  Any sign containing electrical wiring which is
attached or intended to be attached to an electrical energy source.



   ELECTRONIC SIGN/MESSAGE BOARD.  Any sign that displays a message
electronically.



   FADE MODE.   A mode of message transition on an EMC accomplished by
varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces
intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message
gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.



   FLASHING SIGN.  Any illuminated sign that has artificial light or
color which is not maintained at a constant light level intensity or color
when such sign is in use.



   FREESTANDING SIGN.  Any self-supporting sign not attached to any other
structure.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign which is limited to the name, address and
number of a building, institution or person and to the activity carried on in
the building or institution, or the occupancy of the person.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign illuminated by artificial light, either
directly from a source of light incorporated in or connected with such a
sign, or indirectly from a light source separate from the sign but
intentionally directed upon it.



   INDEXING SIGN.  A sign made of a series of triangular vertical
sections that turn and stop, or index, to show three pictures or messages in
the same area.



   INFORMATIONAL SIGN.  Any sign intended to display information of
interest to the public, such as directions, time, temperature, date,
atmospheric conditions, news, traffic control, instructions, and the like.



   INTEGRAL BUILDING SIGN.  A sign bearing the name of a building, dates
of structure on, commemorative tablets and the like, which are an integral
part of the building or structure.



   KIOSK.  A self-supporting vertical structure multi-lateral in shape
whose exterior surfaces are designed to display many informational messages
at once, such as information about public or private goods or services,
cultural events, news, and the like.



   LOT (OF RECORD). A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise
legally described, as of the effective date of the ordinance, and which is
occupied or intended to be occupied by one principal building, or principal
use together with any accessory buildings and open spaces as required by this
subchapter.



   MARQUEE.  See “Canopy or Marquee.”



   MARQUEE SIGN.  See “Canopy or Marquee.”



   MONUMENT SIGN.  A freestanding sign not exceeding ten feet in height
resting on the ground in or on a structure such as a frame, posts or poles.



   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN.  A sign which advertises goods, products or
services not necessarily sold on the premises on which the sign is located.



   OUTDOOR WALL GRAPHIC.  Any mosaic, mural, painting or graphic art or
combination of these professionally applied to a building and which does not
contain any brand-name product symbol or name, lettering, logo or any
advertising message.



   PARAPET.  The portion of a building wall that rises above roof level.



   PERMANENT WINDOW SIGN.  A window sign permanently affixed to the
interior side of a window for the purpose of advertising the place of
business.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership
or any other legal entity, singular or plural.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  A sign designated to be moveable from one location to
another and which is not permanently attached to the ground or to any
structure.



   PREMISES.  A contiguous area of land with its appurtenances and
building which is under common ownership.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is
attached to and projects from a building wall.



   PUBLIC ENTRANCE.  A place of entry at a premises which is accessible
to the general public.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  A person, firm or corporation, municipal department,
board or commission duly authorized to furnish and who is furnishing, under
federal, state or municipal regulations, gas, steam, electricity, sewage
disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water to the public.



   PYLON SIGN.  A freestanding sign erected upon a pylon or post
structure which is greater than nine feet in height.



   READER BOARD SIGN.  A sign intended to display a message through the
use of manually changed letters, that is permanently attached to a
ground/pylon sign or affixed to a wall of the principal building.  All other
signs shall be deemed as temporary signs.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  A sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of
the property upon which it is located.



   ROOF LINE.  The uppermost line of the roof of a building, or in the
case of an extended facade, the uppermost height of the facade.



   ROTATING SIGN.  Any sign which revolves, rotates or has any moving
parts.



   SANDWICH BOARD.  A freestanding temporary sign, with no moving parts
or flashing lights, no larger than eight square feet total sign size per
side, no taller than four feet from grade; displayed outside an establishment
during business hours.  It is not intended as permanent business signage.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  An integrated grouping of commercial stores under
single ownership or control.



   SIGN HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measures from grade to the highest
point of the sign.



   SIGN SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  Any structure which supports or is capable of
supporting a sign, including decorative cover.



   SPECIAL INFORMATIONAL SIGN.  A sign, not permanently affixed to the
building, composed of cloth and containing a one-word generic message, such
as “Open,” “Antiques,” “Gifts” or “Sale,” without displaying
the name of the business.



   SPECIAL PURPOSE, SEASONAL OR HOLIDAY SIGN.  A temporary sign designed
to commemorate or advertise a holiday or a special event.



   STREET FRONTAGE.  The linear frontage of a parcel of property abutting
a public street.



   SUSPENDED SIGN.  A sign attached to and located below any permanent
save, roof or canopy.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  A sign erected for a specified period of time which
is not permanently affixed to any building or structure, including portable
reader boards.



   TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGN.  A window sign temporarily placed against the
interior side of a window for the purpose of advertising a special sale or a
product sold inside the place of business.



   TRANSITION.  The means by which an electronic sign/message board
changes from one message to another; or from one message segment to the next
in cases where the message is conveyed by using more than one consecutive
display frame.



   TRAVEL MODE.  A mode of messaging transition on electronic
sign/message board where the message moves or appears to move horizontally.



   UNDER CANOPY or MARQUEE SIGN.  A sign suspended below the ceiling or
roof of a canopy or marquee.



   WINDOW SIGN.  A sign installed inside a window for purposes of viewing
from outside the premises.  This does not include merchandise located in a
window.



(`86 Code, § 9.85)  (Ord. 779, passed 11-20-01; Am. Ord. 926, passed
6-5-07; Am. Ord. 973, passed 11-1-11; Am. Ord. 976, passed 12-6-11; Am. Ord.
988, passed 11-5-13)



§ 152.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, any person wishing
to erect a sign shall first obtain a permit from the city.  The purpose of
permitting signage in the city is because signs greatly shape the character
and quality of the environment and community. As a historic community, this
city is unique. The proper control of signs is therefore important in order
to maintain that historical value and appreciation. Application shall be made
to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the city.  At the time of
application, the applicant shall pay a fee as set forth in the city's
schedule of fees to the Records Secretary.  At the request of the Zoning
Administrator, two blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications
and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground
shall be submitted with the application.  At the request of the Zoning
Administrator, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing how the
structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the
amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the city shall
be submitted with the application.



   (B)   If a complete sign permit application is found by the Zoning
Administrator to be consistent with this code, the permit shall be granted.



   (C)   Each permit issued shall be valid as long as the sign is
installed within six months of permit issuance.



(`86 Code, § 9.81) (Ord. 779, passed 11-20-01)



§ 152.03  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Any permanent, non-abandoned sign which does not comply with
this chapter shall be allowed to continue after enactment of this chapter,
provided that the sign not be rebuilt, altered, replaced or relocated, and
that no change in business use occurs without the sign's being brought into
compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   Nonconforming billboards shall retain legal
nonconforming status if only the sign sheet or changeable letter or symbols
are altered or replaced.



      (2)   However, if the sign board or structure is rebuilt or
replaced, the entire nonconforming billboard must comply with this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   Any non-exempt temporary sign must comply with this
chapter upon adoption.



      (2)   Any temporary sign existing upon enactment of this
chapter shall be removed within 30 days.



      (3)   Thereafter, the owner of the sign or owner of the
premises may apply for up to four temporary 30-day installations per year in
accordance with § 152.11.



   (D)   Any sign structure currently situated on the public
right-of-way is illegal and shall be removed within 30 days of enactment of
this chapter.



(`86 Code, § 9.81) (Am. Ord. 926, passed 6-5-07)



§ 152.04  ABANDONED SIGNS.



   (A)   (1)   Any sign that advertises any activity, business,
product or service no longer conducted or available on the site on which the
sign is located is prohibited.  Any sign which is located on property which
becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three months or more or any
sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies,
shall be deemed to have been abandoned.



      (2)   Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily
suspended because of a change in ownership or management of the business
shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period
of six months.



   (B)   (1)   Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the
sign or owner of the premises within 30 days of abandonment.  All sign
supports and structure shall also be removed, except that pylon structures
may be allowed to remain.



      (2)   Failure to remove the sign shall be cause for the city
to remove the sign and to charge the property owner for the removal.



   (C)   Any abandoned sign existing upon enactment of this chapter
shall be removed within 30 days.



(`86 Code, § 9.81)



§ 152.05  EXISTING LAND USES.



   Signs on existing land uses shall be allowed to retain those signs
which conform to regulations that apply to the actual use rather than zoned
use; however, no changes may be made in sign types nor may the sign area be
increased.



(`86 Code, § 9.81)



§ 152.06  ALLOWED SIGNS.



   (A)   Only signs of a subject matter relating exclusively to the
premises on which they are located, or to products, accommodations or
activities on those premises, shall be allowed, except as provided in this
section and as provided in § 152.11.



   (B)   An off-premise freestanding sign may be allowed within a
unified commercial or industrial development provided that the total
allowable sign area and number of freestanding signs for all properties
within the development is not exceeded.  A comprehensive sign plan shall be
required in all developments where there is common or shared signage.  Such
signage plan shall show the location of each and every sign on all properties
within the development; the square footage of each sign, including wall
signage, projecting signage, and the like; and any additional information
that may be necessary to determine overall compliance with allowable sign
area and number of freestanding signs.



(`86 Code, § 9.81)  (Am. Ord. 988, passed 11-5-13)



§ 152.07  AREAS OF SPECIAL CONTROL.



   (A)   Recognizing certain limitations of this chapter in relating
effectively wall signing situations within the city, and further recognizing
there exist certain areas within the city that require special consideration,
this section will provide a vehicle in which these areas can be handled. 
The areas of particular concern are:



      (1)   Scenic areas;



      (2)   Community and regional shopping centers;



      (3)   Industrial parks;



      (4)   Hospitals, historic preservation sites and district; and



      (5)   City owned parks.



   (B)   In scenic areas, community and regional shopping centers,
industrial parks, hospitals and historic preservation sites and districts,
the City Council by special permit may establish special regulations for
signage which are either more restrictive or less restrictive than those
provided by this chapter, having regard to the character of the area of
special control to which the request will apply.  The character and type of
land use adjacent to these areas should be examined.



   (C)   (1)   A comprehensive sign plan may be provided for
business premises which occupy a shopping center, industrial park or scenic
area development.  Such a plan, which shall include the location, size,
height, lighting and orientation of all signs shall be submitted for
preliminary plan approval regulations to the city.



      (2)   Provided a comprehensive plan is presented, exceptions
to the sign performance standards of this chapter may be permitted if the
sign areas and densities for the plan as a whole are in conformity with the
intent of this chapter and if the exception results in an improved
relationship between the various parts of the plan.



   (D)   Any city owned park may be designated as an area of special
control for signage by City Council Resolution, provided a recommendation
from the City Park Board has been received by the City Council. The elements
of the Resolution shall include all regulations and/or criteria to be placed
on signage in the designated park.



(`86 Code, § 9.81) (Ord. 779, passed 11-20-01; Am. Ord. 830, passed 3-1-04)



§ 152.08  APPEALS.



   Any decision of the city regarding enforcement or application of this
chapter may be appealed in accordance with § 154.173.



(`86 Code, § 9.81)



§ 152.09  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.



   All signs shall comply with provisions of Volume VI of the Uniform
Building Code, the Uniform Sign Code.



(`86 Code, § 9.81)



§ 152.10  SAFETY, VISIBILITY AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Every sign, including, but not limited to those signs for
which no permits or permit fees are required, shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable and good structural material condition at all times, including
the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning and
maintaining the immediate surrounding premises in a clean, sanitary and
inoffensive condition free of obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. 
Signs in good repair are not corroded, do not have deteriorated paint of
finished surfaces, and do not have loose members, broken parts or similar
deterioration.



   (B)   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any
premises owned or controlled by him or her any sign which is in a dangerous
or defective condition.  Any sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner
of the sign or the owner of the premises.



   (C)   (1)   No sign shall, by reason of its location, color,
illumination or intensity, obstruct vision of drivers or pedestrians or
obscure visibility of any traffic control devise, sign or signal. 
Illumination must be effectively shielded so as not to impair vision of any
operator or a motor vehicle.  Illumination with flashing lights is
prohibited.



      (2)   Any sign which imitates or resembles an official traffic
sign or signal or which bears the words “Stop,” “Go Slow,”
“Caution,” “Danger,” “Warning” or similar words is prohibited.



   (D)   (1)   Any sign which bears or contains statements, words or
pictures of an obscene, pornographic, immoral character shall be considered a
nuisance and is prohibited.



      (2)   Any sign which emits audible sound, odor or visible
matter shall be considered a public nuisance and is prohibited.



(`86 Code, § 9.82)



§ 152.11  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL.



   (A)   Freestanding monument sign (low profile).



      (1)   Base material:  Durable, stone, masonry or wood
material.



      (2)   Maximum height:  Ten feet.



      (3)   Maximum area:  100 square feet.



      (4)   Minimum setback: 



         (a)   Three feet from lot lines in Central Business and
Neighborhood Business Districts;



         (b)   Five feet from lot lines in all other areas.



      (5)   Landscaping:  The area around the base of the sign must
be landscaped with appropriate greenery.



   (B)   Awnings. A sign that is painted on, printed on or attached to
an awning.



      (1)   Number of signs per business:  Not more than one per
lot.



      (2)   Maximum projection over public sidewalk:  50% of the
distance between the building line and the curb line in the central business
district.  In all other areas, no canopy projection over public right-of-way
shall be permitted.



      (3)   Minimum clearance above grade:  eight feet.



      (4)   Maximum length:  length of building.



      (5)   Maximum area for signs affixed to marquee or awning, one
square foot per linear foot of business frontage.



   (C)   Free-standing pylon signs.



      (1)   Pylon signs shall be prohibited in any location on
property zoned I-1, Limited Industry or B-1, Central Business District.



      (2)   On property zoned B-3, Limited Business, pylon signs
shall be allowed only on property that has frontage directly on State Street
or Elm Avenue, or any frontage road thereof.



      (3)   Maximum sign area and height:



 

Lot Area
(feet squared)
 
Maximum Height
 
Pylon Sign Maximum Area (feet squared)


Less than 6,000
 
20
 
50


6,000 - 12,000
 
24
 
80


12,000 - 24,000
 
28
 
120


24,000 - 48,000
 
32
 
160


More than 48,000
 
36
 
180



 



      (4)   Maximum number per business:  one per 300 feet of
business lot frontage.  (One for frontage up to 300 feet with additional
sign allowed for every 300 feet beyond initial 300-foot frontage.)



      (5)   Minimum setback, pylon sign:  pylon structure shall be
situated within lot line boundaries.  In all other areas, no sign attached
to a pylon structure shall project over the public right-of-way.



   (D)   Building face sign maximum.



      (1)   Two feet squared per linear foot of business frontage;



      (2)   One foot squared for each front foot of building siding
on a street (side of corner lot);



      (3)   One foot squared for each linear foot of building rear,
viewable by pedestrians or vehicular traffic; and



      (4)   Maximum area for any building face sign shall be 100
square feet in central business and neighborhood business district and 180
square feet in highway commercial and industrial districts.



   (E)   Suspended sign maximums.  One square foot, with one sign per
business.



   (F)   Projecting signs.  Projecting signs are permitted, subject to
the following standards:



      (1)   Minimum height above grade: eight feet; ten-foot minimum
clearance for a projecting sign on a corner building when a sign is placed on
the building corner or within 25 feet of the building corner, whether the
corner is at a street intersection or at an alley intersection;



      (2)   Maximum height above grade: 16 feet;



      (3)   Maximum projection permitted: four feet;



      (4)   Maximum size: nine feet squared; and



      (5)   Maximum number per building: one.  Where a building
contains more than one tenant, the maximum number of projecting signs is
still one per building, rather than one for each individual business.



   (G)   Electronic message signs/boards.



      (1)   Electronic message displays shall display static
foreground images for intervals of at least five seconds per image.  Static
foreground images may be accompanied by the display of background animation,
as defined in this chapter, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.



      (2)   If the sign is within 200 feet of a residential district
and is visible from a residential use, the sign shall not be illuminated
between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.



      (3)   Transitions on the sign/board may display fade mode and
dissolve mode, as defined in this chapter, but shall not be permitted to
transition using travel mode, as defined in this chapter.



      (4)   Transition modes, messages, and background animation
which cause any portion of the sign to flash or appear to flash are
prohibited.



      (5)   The sign/board shall only be used to promote activities,
products, or services pertaining to the subject property, except as provided
in § 152.06; time and temperature; gas pricing; or other public service
oriented messages.



      (6)   The sign/board shall have automatic light dimming
capabilities that adjust the brightness to the ambient light at all times of
day.



      (7)   The sign/board shall not exceed a maximum brightness
level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured from a preset
distance depending on sign size.  The measurement distance shall be
determined using the following calculation:  the square root of the product
of the sign area and 100. 



         Example using a 12-square foot sign:  √(12x100) = 34.6
feet measuring distance.



      (8)   The sign/board shall not exceed 25% of the allowable
sign area or exceed 40 square feet per face, whichever is less.



      (9)   The sign/board shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet
from a residential district or use.



      (10)   Electronic message signs/boards shall be prohibited
within the portion of the Central Business District bounded by 3rd Avenue
North and a line that corresponds to the westerly extension of 3rd Avenue
South, on both sides of State Street from State Street to the alley, and in
the case of the areas south of 2nd Avenue South, the lots between State
Street and a line that corresponds to the easterly line of the above noted
alleys, as shown in Figure 1.



Figure 1.  Electronic Message Boards Prohibited







 



      (11)   Existing electronic message signs/boards shall meet the
requirements of divisions (1) through (7) above within 90 days of the
effective date of this division (G).



   (H)   Incidental signs.



      (1)   Up to two incidental signs may be attached to a
freestanding sign structure or flat against a building wall.  The signs are
restricted to credit cards accepted, price-posting signs, official notices
required by law or trade affiliations.



      (2)   Areas of each sign shall not exceed five square feet;
the total area of all such signs shall not exceed ten square feet.



   (I)   Incidental signs; service station pumps.



      (1)   One permanently affixed incidental sign may be attached
to each gasoline station pump.  The signs are restricted to advertising of
products or services available on-site, credit cards accepted, price-posting
signs, official notices required by law or trade affiliations.



      (2)   Area of each sign shall not exceed two feet squared.



   (J)   Directional signs.  One sign is permitted near each
driveway.  The area of each sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.  Maximum
permitted height shall be 12 feet.



   (K)   Special informational signs.



      (1)   Display. Each business may display one special
informational sign containing a one-word generic message, such as “Open,”
“Antiques,” “Gifts,” “Sale,” without displaying the name of the
business.  The signs shall be attached to the building face or projecting
from the building in a flag bracket.



      (2)   Sign structure and support. Each sign shall be composed
of cloth, enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted so
as to allow movement of the sign by movement of the atmosphere.  No strings,
fiber ropes or wood slats shall be permitted for support or anchorage
purposes.  Use of wire rope of -inch minimum diameter is acceptable to
support and attach the signs.  Each sign shall be perforated over at least
10% of its area to reduce wind resistance.



      (3)   Projections. If the special informational sign is
projecting, it shall comply with the standards for projecting signs set forth
in division (E) above.



      (4)   Maximum sign area.



         (a)   Level 1, four square feet; and



         (b)   Level 2, nine square feet.



      (5)   Maximum number of signs.



         (a)   Level 1, one per building; may be used in
combination with a projecting sign.



         (b)   Level 2, each building may have one; and  (Level
2 special informational sign or one projecting sign, but not both.)



         (c)   Levels 1 and 2:  where a building contains more
than one tenant, the maximum number of signs indicated above is per building
rather than per individual business.



      (6)   Maximum display time.  Special informational sign
display shall be limited to the hours each business day that the business or
businesses to whom the sign pertain(s) is/are actually open.  Where a
building contains more than one tenant, the display time may coincide with
the business having business hours beginning sooner or ending later than the
other businesses.



   (L)   Combination of signs and maximum aggregate sign area.



      (1)   Maximum aggregate sign area of all signs on premise
(except for exempt signs):  two square feet per linear foot of business lot
frontage plus one square foot for each lot frontage on side street plus one
square foot for each linear foot of building rear viewable by pedestrian or
vehicular traffic and having public entrance.  For purposes of calculating
the maximum aggregate sign area for one side of a building, only the maximum
area for that side of the building may be used.  The maximum allowable areas
for all sides of a building shall not be added together to determine the
maximum area for one side.



      (2)   Each building may have one permanent projecting sign and
one Level 1 special informational sign or each building may have one
permanent projecting sign or one Level 2 special informational sign, but not
both.  Where a building contains more than one tenant, the maximum number of
projecting sign and Level 1 or Level 2 special informational sign
combinations indicated above is per building rather than per individual
business.



   (M)   Billboard; highway business and industrial areas only.



      (1)   Maximum area, 350 feet squared;



      (2)   Maximum height, 25 feet;



      (3)   Minimum setback from highway right-of-way, 45 feet; and



      (4)   Minimum spacing, 600 feet, with 600-foot buffer between
residential uses and sign.



   (N)   Signs by conditional use permit.  Wall graphics, billboard,
kiosk.  Marquees and canopy signs.



   (O)   Temporary signs.



      (1)   General provisions.



         (a)   Such signs shall be permitted in the B-1, B-2,
B-3, B-4, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts.



         (b)   Such signs shall require a temporary (30-day) sign
permit.  Each property shall be limited to four such permits per calendar
year.



         (c)   Such signs shall be limited to a total of 32
square feet per side per property at any one given time.



         (d)   Such signs shall be located on the property which
the advertising pertains to.



         (e)   Such signs shall not be located within any road
right-of-way.



         (f)   Such signs must be maintained and not frayed, torn
or tattered.



      (2)   Exempt temporary signs; no permit required.



         (a)   Sandwich boards during business hours such that
they are not located within the road right-of-way.



         (b)   Temporary signs for sales events which last no
longer than three days.



   (P)   Prohibited signs.



      (1)   Abandoned sign;



      (2)   Animated sign;



      (3)   Changing sign, except signs displaying any one or a
combination of the following:  time, temperature and stock market indices;



      (4)   Flashing sign;



      (5)   Indexing sign (sign having multi-prisms that turn to
show three advertising messages in the same sign area);



      (6)   Roof sign, except for a sign that forms a parapet wall
above the roof line, is flush with or set back from the building face, does
not cause the overall height of the building (including the sign) to exceed
the height limitation for principal buildings in subject zoning district, and
does not exceed the maximum area for a building face sign;



      (7)   Rotating sign; and



      (8)   Marquees and/or canopies, except by Conditional Use
Permit, inlcuding recommendations from the Historical Preservation
Commission, and the Waseca Planning Commission.



(`86 Code, § 9.83) (Ord. 779, passed 11-20-01; Am. Ord. 926, passed 6-5-07;
Am. Ord. 973, passed 11-1-11; Am. Ord. 976, passed 12-6-11; Am. Ord. 988,
passed 11-5-13)



§ 152.12  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   Wall signs; maximum area.



      (1)   Two square feet, single-family to four-plex
identification signs (such as address and/or name plates);



      (2)   Eight square feet, identification sign for multi-family
building of five or more units; and



      (3)   One square feet per each one foot of building frontage,
identification sign for schools and churches.



   (B)   Freestanding signs; maximum area.



      (1)   Sixteen square feet, identification sign for
multi-family buildings, schools and churches.



      (2)   Sixty-four square feet, identification signs and
construction signs used at residential subdivisions and other development
project sites.



   (C)   Freestanding signs; maximum height.



      (1)   Five feet, identification signs for multi-family
buildings, churches, schools and remodeling construction projects; and



      (2)   Twelve feet, identification signs and construction signs
for residential subdivisions and other development project sites.



   (D)   Freestanding signs; minimum setback from street.  Five feet
from property line in all districts.



   (E)   Electronic message board signs.



      (1)   Electronic message displays shall display static
foreground images for intervals of at least five seconds per image.  Static
foreground images may be accompanied by the display of background animation,
as defined in this chapter, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



      (2)   If the sign is within 200 feet of a residential use and
is visible from a residential use, the sign shall not be illuminated between
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



      (3)   Transitions on the sign/board may display fade mode and
dissolve mode, as defined in this chapter, but shall not be permitted to
transition using travel mode, as defined in this chapter.



      (4)   Transition modes, messages, and background animation
which cause any portion of the sign to flash or appear to flash are
prohibited.



      (5)   The sign/board may only be used to promote activities,
products, or services pertaining to the subject property; time and
temperature; gas pricing; or other public service oriented messages.



      (6)   The sign/board shall have automatic light dimming
capabilities that adjust the brightness to the ambient light at all times of
day.



      (7)   The sign/board shall not exceed a maximum brightness
level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured from a preset
distance depending on sign size.  The measurement distance shall be
determined using the following calculation:  the square root of the product
of the sign area and 100. 



         Example using a 12-square foot sign:  √(12x100) = 34.6
feet measuring distance.



      (8)   The sign/board shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet
from a residential use.



      (9)   The sign/board shall not exceed 50% of the allowable
sign area or exceed 40 square feet per face, whichever is less.



      (10)   Existing electronic message signs/boards shall meet the
requirements of divisions (1) through (7) above within 90 days of the
effective date of this division (E).



   (F)   Maximum number of signs.



      (1)   One per building, single-family or multi-family wall
identification signs;



      (2)   One per 150 feet of lot frontage, multi-family building,
church and school freestanding identification signs; and  (One freestanding
sign allowed for frontage up to 150 feet; one additional freestanding sign
allowed for each additional 150 feet frontage beyond the initial 150 feet.)



      (3)   One per 500 feet of lot frontage, identification signs
and construction signs for residential subdivisions and other new development
projects.  (One freestanding sign for each frontage up to 500 feet, then one
additional sign for each additional 500 feet frontage beyond initial 500
feet.)



(`86 Code, § 9.84) (Am. Ord. 973, passed 11-1-11; Am. Ord. 988, passed
11-5-13)



§ 152.13  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following signs are generally exempt from provisions of this code,
with exceptions as noted:



   (A)   All non-commercial signs of any size may be posted from August
1 in a state general election year until ten days following the state general
election;



   (B)   Construction signs and small scale remodeling or rehab
signs;  (Signs advertising the contractor working on a remodeling or rehab
job for a single building rather than a major site redevelopment or new site
construction such as a new subdivision or new commercial/industrial facility.
Signs advertising a contractor or small scale rehabilitation or remodeling
projects shall be exempt from the permit process.  However, the signs shall
not exceed 32 square feet or six feet in height, nor shall they be set back
less than five feet from the property line.)



   (C)   Signs which provide direction or instruction and are located
entirely on the property to which they pertain and do not in any way
advertise a business and do not exceed four square feet in area, signs
identifying rest rooms, public telephones, walkways or signs providing
direction such as parking lot entrance and exit signs and those of similar
nature;



   (D)   The flags, emblems or insignia of any nation or political
subdivision or corporate flag.  Flag poles, however, shall not exceed a
height of 30 feet;



   (E)   Governmental signs for control of traffic and other regulatory
purposes, street signs, danger signs, railroad crossing signs and signs of
public service companies indicating danger and aids to service or safety
which are erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance
of his or her public duty;



   (F)   Signs lettered into a building face to give the name and/or
date of construction of the building itself;



   (G)   Signs located within the interior of any building or within an
enclosed lobby or court of any building, and signs for and located within the
inner or outer lobby, court or entrance of any theater, that are not visible
from the public right-of-way;  (This does not, however, exempt signs from
the structural, electrical or material specifications as set out in this
code.)



   (H)   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the
building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material;



   (I)   Notice bulletin boards not over 24 square feet in area for
medical, public, charitable or religious institutions and clustered service
club signs where the same are located on the premises of the institution;



   (J)   No trespassing or no dumping signs not to exceed 1½ square
feet in area per sign and not exceeding four in number per lot, except that
special permission may be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for
additional signs under proven special circumstances;



   (K)   Official notices posted by public officers or employees in the
performance of their duties;



   (L)   Signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose
by any law, statute or ordinance; which may be of any type, number, area,
height above grade, location, illumination or animation, required by the law,
statute or ordinance under which the signs are erected;



   (M)   Except in residential zones, for each ground floor occupancy
of a building not more than two permanent signs may be painted on or
otherwise displayed from the inside surface of any window, showcase or other
similar facility;  (The signs shall be in addition to those signs permitted
under the other provisions of this code.  The total copy area of the signs,
however, shaft not exceed a maximum of 25% of the total window area, or one
square foot per lineal front foot of the premises occupied, whichever is the
lesser.)



   (N)   Signs advertising property for sale and containing the name,
address and phone number of the real estate firm or seller;  (The area of
each real estate sign, however, shall be limited to ten square feet and shall
be removed within seven days of sale of the property.  The number of real
estate signs erected per property shall be limited to the number of real
estate firms or sellers of the property.  Maximum height of the sign shall
be four feet.)



   (O)   Signs in the display window of a business use which are
incorporated with a display of merchandise or a display relating to services
offered which comply with the division above;



   (P)   Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized
historical agencies or identification emblems of religious orders or
histories agencies, provided that no symbol, plaque or identification emblem
shall exceed four square feet in area, and provided further that all the
symbols, plaques and identification emblems shall be placed flat against a
building;



   (Q)   Temporary signs not exceeding four square feet in area
pertaining to drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational or
religious organizations, provided that the signs are posted only during the
drive or no more than 30 days before the event and are removed no more than
15 days after an event; and



   (R)   Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but
containing no advertising material, of a size as may be necessary, to be
removed upon subsidence of danger.



(`86 Code, § 9.84A)  (Am. Ord. 649, passed 12-7-93)



CHAPTER 153:  AIRPORT ZONING



Section



   153.01   Purpose and authority



   153.02   Short title



   153.03   Definitions



   153.04   Airspace obstruction zoning



   153.05   Land use safety zoning



   153.06   Zoning map



   153.07   Nonconforming uses



   153.08   Permits required



   153.09   Variances



   153.10   Hazard markings and lightings



   153.11   Zoning Administrator; duties



   153.12   Board of Adjustment



Cross-reference:



   Airport Advisory Board, see § 37.10



   Joint Airport Zoning Board, see § 37.11



§ 153.01  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   The Waseca City-Waseca County Joint Airport Zoning Board, created and
established by joint action of the Common Council of the city and the Board
of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to the provisions and
authority of M.S. § 360.063, as it may be amended from time to time, hereby
finds and declares that:



   (A)   An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of
the Waseca Municipal Airport, and property or occupants of land in its
vicinity, and also if of the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size of
the area available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus
tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Waseca Municipal Airport and
the public investment therein.



   (B)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Waseca Municipal Airport.



   (C)   For the protection of the public health, safety, order,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare, and for the promotion of the
most appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or
establishment of airport hazards.



   (D)   The prevention of these airport hazards should be
accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police
power without compensation.



   (E)   The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport
hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation or marking and
lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political
subdivisions may raise and expend public funds.



(`86 Code, § 12.01)



§ 153.02  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as “Waseca Municipal Airport Zoning
Chapter.”  Those sections of land affected by this chapter are indicated
in § 153.06.



(`86 Code, § 12.02)



§ 153.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIRPORT.  The Waseca Municipal Airport located in the east half of
Section 14, Township 107 north, Range 23 West of the 5th Principal Meridian.



   AIRPORT ELEVATION.  The established elevation of the highest point on
the usable landing area which elevation is established to be 1,126 feet above
mean sea level.



   AIRPORT HAZARD.  Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs
the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of
aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land which
is hazardous to persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.



   DWELLING.  Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.



   HEIGHT.  The purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.



   INSTRUMENT RUNWAY.  A runway equipped or to be equipped with a
precision electronic navigation aid or landing aid or other air navigation
facilities suitable to permit the landing of aircraft by an instrument
approach under restricted visibility conditions.



   LANDING AREA.  The area of the airport used for the landing, taking
off or taxing of aircraft.



   LANDING STRIP.  Any grass or turf covered area of the airport
specifically designated and used for the landing and/or take-off of
aircraft.  This term shall have the same meaning throughout this chapter as
does the term “runway.”



   NONCONFORMING USE.  Any pre-existing structure, tree, natural growth
or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or
an amendment hereto.



   NON-INSTRUMENT RUNWAY.  A runway other than an instrument runway.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic, and includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.



   RUNWAY.  Any surface of the airport which is specifically designated
and used for the landing and/or take-off of aircraft.



   SLOPE.  An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic
ratio or horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.



   STRUCTURE.  An object constructed or installed by man, including, but
without limitations buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission
lines.



   TREE.  Any object of natural growth.



   WATER SURFACES.  The same meaning as land for the establishment of
protected zones.



(`86 Code, § 12.03)



§ 153.04  AIRSPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONING.



   (A)   Airspace zones.  In order to carry out the purposes of this
chapter, the following airspace zones are hereby established:  primary zone,
horizontal zone, conical zone, approach zone and transitional zone and whose
locations and dimensions are as follows:



      (1)   Primary zone.  All that land which lies directly under
an imaginary primary surface longitudinally centered on a runway and
extending 200 feet beyond each end of the runways.  The elevation of any
point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway centerline.  The width of the primary surface is 500
feet for all runways.



      (2)   Horizontal zone.  All that land which lies directly
under an imaginary horizontal surface 100 feet above the established airport
elevation, or a height of 1,226 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of
which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of
each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent
arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.  The radius of each arc is 10,000 feet
for all runways.



      (3)   Conical zone.  All that land which lies directly under
an imaginary conical surface extending upward and outward for the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet.



      (4)   Approach zone.  All that land which lies directly under
an imaginary approach surface longitudinally centered on the extended
centerline at each end of all runways.  The inner edge of the approach
surface is at the same width and elevation as, and coincides with, the
primary surface.  The approach surface inclines upward and outward at a
slope of 40 to 1, expanding uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet, and then continuing at the same rate of
divergence to the periphery of the conical surface.



      (5)   Transitional zone.  All that land which lies directly
under an imaginary transitional surface extending upward and outward at right
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope
of 7 to 1 from the sides of the primary surfaces and from the sides of the
approach surfaces until they intersect the horizontal surface or the conical
surface.



   (B)   Height restriction.  Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, and except as necessary and incidental to airport operations, no
structure or tree shall be constructed, altered or allowed to grow in any
airspace zone created division (A) above so as to project above any of the
imaginary airspace surfaces described in division (A) above.  Where an area
is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive
limitations shall prevail.



(`86 Code, § 12.04)



§ 153.05  LAND USE SAFETY ZONING.



   (A)   Safety zone boundaries.  In order to carry out the purpose of
this chapter, there are hereby created and established the following safety
zone boundaries:



      (1)   Safety Zone A.  All that land in the approach zones of
the runways which is located within a horizontal distance of 2,600 feet from
each end of the primary zones.



      (2)   Safety Zone B.  All that land in the approach zones of
the runways which is located within a horizontal distance of 3,900 feet from
each end of the primary zones.



      (3)   Safety Zone C.  All that land under any of the defined
surfaces, within the perimeter of the horizontal zone, and located within the
existing boundaries of the city and which is not in zones A or B.



      (4)   Safety Zone D.  All that land which is enclosed within
the perimeter of the horizontal zone and which is not included in Zone A,
Zone B or Zone C.



   (B)   Use restrictions.



      (1)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth herein, no use shall be made of any load in any of the safety zones
defined in division (A) above which creates or causes interference with the
operations of radio or electronic facilities on the airport or in aircraft or
with radio or electronic communications between the airport and aircraft,
which are operated in accordance with the Federal Communications Commission
Rules and Regulations Part 87, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and other lights, results in glare in eyes of pilots
using the airport, or otherwise endangers the landing, taking off or
maneuvering of aircraft.



      (2)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in § 153.04 (B), and to the general restrictions contained in division
(B)(1) above, areas designated as Zone A shall contain no buildings or
temporary structures and shall be restricted to those uses which will not
create, attract or bring together as assembly of persons thereon.  Permitted
uses may include agriculture, light outdoor recreation (non-spectator),
cemeteries and auto parking.



      (3)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in § 153.04 (B), and to the general restrictions contained in division
(B)(1) above, areas designated as Zone B shall be used for the following
purposes only:



         (a)   For agricultural and residential purposes,
provided there shall not be more than one single-family dwelling per
three-acre tract of land.



         (b)   Any commercial or industrial use which meets the
following minimum standards:



            1.   Each single commercial or industrial use
shall not create, attract or bring together a site populations that would
exceed 15 times that of the site acreage.



            2.   Each single commercial or industrial site
shall be of a size not less than three acres.



            3.   Each single commercial or industrial site
shall contain no dwellings and shall contain no more than one building per
three-acre tract of land.



            4.   The maximum ground area to be covered by a
single commercial or industrial building shall not exceed the following
minimum ratios with respect to the building site area:



 

At Least (Acres)
 
But Less Than (Acres)
 
Ratio of Site Area to First Building Area
 
First Floor Building Area (Square Feet)
 
Max. Population (15 Persons/A)


3
 
4
 
12:1
 
10,900
 
45


4
 
6
 
10:1
 
17,400
 
60


6
 
10
 
8:1
 
32,600
 
90


10
 
20
 
6:1
 
72,500
 
150


20
 
and up
 
4:1
 
218,000
 
300



 



         (c)   The following uses are specifically prohibited in
Zone B; churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums, hotels and motels,
trailer courts, camp grounds and other places of public or semi-public
assembly.



      (4)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in § 153.04 (B), and to the general restriction contained in division
(B)(1) above, the land in zone shall be subject to Code Ch. 154 .



      (5)   Zone D is subject to only the height restrictions set
forth in § 153.04 (B), and to the general restrictions contained in division
(B)(1) above.



(`86 Code, § 12.05)



§ 153.06  ZONING MAP.



   The several zones herein established are shown on the airport zoning
map consisting of three sheets, prepared by Orlin A. Ortloff, Director of
Engineering, and dated January 9, 1974, attached hereto and made a part
hereof, which map, together with the amendments thereto as may from time to
time be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone
boundaries and other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby
adopted as part of this chapter.



(`86 Code, § 12.06)



§ 153.07  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of
any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective
date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction
or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two years thereof.



(`86 Code, § 12.07)



§ 153.08  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Except as specifically provided in divisions
(A)(1)(a) and (b) below, no material change shall be made in the use of land
and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, plated or otherwise
established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have
been applied for and granted by the Zoning Administrator, hereinafter
provided for.



      (2)   Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose
for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it
to conform to the regulations herein prescribed.  If the determination is in
the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.



         (a)   However, a permit for a tree or structure of less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the
horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond
a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runways except when
the tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective
zone.



         (b)   Nothing contained in this foregoing exception
shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction,
alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height
limitations established by this chapter, as set forth in § 153.04.



   (B)   Before any existing use or structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or repaired, or rebuilt within any zone established
herein, a permit must be secured authorizing the replacement, change or
repair.  No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or
creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or
tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the
effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto, or than it is when
the application for a permit is made.  Except as indicated, all applications
for a permit shall be granted.



   (C)   Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that a
nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80% torn
down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that
would allow the structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.  A nonconforming use
structure or tree shall be determined to have been abandoned when its use has
been discontinued for more than six consecutive months, or where it has been
abandoned or more than 80% thereof has either been torn down, become unusable
by physical deterioration or decay, and the conditions shall have existed for
more than six consecutive months. Whether application is made for a permit
under this section or not, the Zoning Administrator may order the owner of
the abandoned or partially destroyed nonconforming structure, at their own
expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct or equip the same in the manner
necessary to conform to the provisions of this chapter.  In the event the
owner of the nonconforming structure shall neglect or refuse to comply with
such order for ten days after receipt of written notice of the order, the
Zoning Administrator may, by appropriate legal action, proceed to have the
abandoned or partially destroyed nonconforming structure lowered, removed,
reconstructed or equipped and assess the cost and expense thereof against the
land on which the structure is or was located.  Unless an assessment is paid
within 90 days from the service of notice thereof on the owner of the land,
the sum shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date the
cost and expense is incurred until paid, and shall be collected in the same
manner as are general taxes.



(`86 Code, § 12.08)



§ 153.09  VARIANCES.



   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or permit the growth of any tree, or use their property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment, hereinafter provided for, for a variance from the regulations. 
The variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not be contrary
to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with
the spirit of this chapter; provided any variance so allowed may be subject
to any reasonable conditions that the Board of Adjustment may deem necessary
to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.



(`86 Code, § 12.09)



§ 153.10  HAZARD MARKINGS AND LIGHTINGS.



   (A)   The owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of the
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary the Zoning Administrator to
indicate the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the
presence of the airport hazards.  The markers and lights shall be installed,
operated and maintained at the expense of the city.



   (B)   Any permit or variance granted by the Zoning Administrator or
Board of Adjustment as the case may be, may, if the action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the
circumstances, so condition the permit or variance as to require the owner of
the structure or tree in question at his or her own expense, to install,
operate and maintain thereon the markers and lights as may be necessary to
indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.



(`86 Code, § 12.10)



§ 153.11  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   It shall be the duty of the Waseca County Planning and Zoning
Administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. 
Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Waseca County
Planning and Zoning Administrator upon a form furnished by him or her. 
Permit applications shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him
or her.  Variance applications shall be forthwith transmitted by the Waseca
County Planning and Zoning Administrator for action by the Board of
Adjustment hereinafter provided for.



(`86 Code, § 12.11)



§ 153.12  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members
appointed by the Waseca City-Waseca County Joint Airport Zoning Board, and
each shall serve for a term of three years and until his/her successor is
duly appointed and qualified.  Of the members first appointed, one shall be
appointed for a term of one year, two for a term of two years, and two for a
term of three years.  Upon their appointment, the members shall select a
chairperson to act at the pleasure of the Board.  Members shall be removable
by the Joint Airport Zoning Board for cause, upon written charges, after a
public hearing.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise the following
powers:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement
of this chapter;



      (2)   To hear and decide exceptions to the terms of this
chapter upon which the Board of Adjustments under the regulations may be
required to pass; and



      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.



   (C)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its
governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. 
Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at other times as the Board of Adjustments may determine. 
The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.  All hearings of
the Board of Adjustment shall be public.  The Board of Adjustment shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be a
public record.



      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of
fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its
legal conclusions from the facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any
order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect any variation in this chapter.



(`86 Code, § 12.12)



CHAPTER 154:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   154.001   Title



   154.002   Authority



   154.003   Purpose



   154.004   Effective date



   154.005   Applicability



   154.006   Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan



   154.007   Relationship to other laws and agreements



   154.008   Transitional regulations



   154.009   Severability




Zoning Districts




   154.011   General provisions



   154.012   District established




Residential Districts




   154.014   Principal and accessory uses in the residential districts



   154.015   R-1, Suburban Residential District



   154.016   R-2, Urban Residential District



   154.017   R-3, Multi-Family District, Low and Medium Density



   154.018   R-4, Multi-Family District, High Density



   154.019   R-M, Manufactured Home Community District




Commercial Districts




   154.022   Principal and accessory uses in the business districts



   154.023   B-1, Central Business District



   154.024   B-2, Community Retail and Service Business District



   154.025   B-3, Neighborhood Transition Business District



   154.026   B-4, Regional Retail and Service Business District




Industrial Districts




   154.029   Principal and accessory uses in the industrial districts



   154.030   I-1, Limited Industry District



   154.031   I-2, Moderate Industry District




Floodplain Management Overlay District




   154.034   Purpose



   154.035   Permit requirements



   154.036   Permit application



   154.037   Duties of the Zoning Administrator



   154.038   Review of the permit application



   154.039   Review of subdivision proposals



   154.040   Water, sewage and on-site waste disposal



   154.041   Annexation and extraterritorial jurisdiction



   154.042   Penalty



   154.043   Abrogation And greater restriction



   154.044   Separability




Shoreland Overlay District




   154.047   Purpose



   154.048   Included water bodies



   154.049   Permitted uses



   154.050   Conditional use permit required



   154.051   Variances



   154.052   Land use districts



   154.053   Performance standards



   154.054   Shoreland alterations



   154.055   Placement and design of roads, driveways and the like



   154.056   Stormwater management



   154.057   Standards for commercial, industrial and public uses



   154.058   Agricultural use standards



   154.059   Forest management standards



   154.060   Water supply



   154.061   Sewage treatment



   154.062   Alterations of beds of public waters



   154.063   Notification required




Heritage Preservation Overlay District




   154.066   Purpose



   154.067   Application of district provisions



   154.068   Heritage Preservation Commission



   154.069   Designation of heritage preservation sites



   154.070   Review of permit applications




Airport Zoning




   154.073   Purpose and authority



   154.074   Short title



   154.075   Airspace obstruction zoning



   154.076   Land use safety zoning



   154.077   Zoning map



   154.078   Permits required



   154.079   Variances



   154.080   Hazard markings and lightings



   154.081   Zoning Administrator



   154.082   Board of Adjustment




Planned Unit Development Overlay District




   154.085   Purpose



   154.086   Relationship to other applicable regulations



   154.087   Platting requirement



   154.088   Minimum project size



   154.089   Phasing of development



   154.090   Administration



   154.091   Principal and accessory uses in the Planned Unit
Development Overlay District



   154.092   Development standards in the PUD Overlay District




Temporary Uses and Structures




   154.095   Purpose



   154.096   Table of allowed uses and structures



   154.097   General standards for temporary uses and structures



   154.098   Specific regulations for certain temporary uses and
structures




Non-Conforming Uses and Structures




   154.101   Purpose



   154.102   Authority to continue



   154.103   Discontinuance



   154.104   Change in use



   154.105   Building permits and ordinance amendments



   154.106   Existing non-conforming lots




Specific Development Requirements




   154.109   Aggregate mining, interim



   154.110   Agricultural operations



   154.111   Animal clinic



   154.112   Bars or taverns



   154.113   Bed-and-breakfast homes



   154.114   Boarding houses



   154.115   Car washes



   154.116   Cellular telephone relay facilities



   154.117   Child care, drop-in program



   154.118   Convenience stores



   154.119   Day care facilities, child, commercial



   154.120   Drive-up window service



   154.121   Fitness centers



   154.122   Garages, residential



   154.123   Group home or residential care facility, overnight



   154.124   Home occupations



   154.125   Manufactured home communities



   154.126   Manufacturing, potentially hazardous materials, products
or emissions



   154.127   Manufacturing of products from stone, clay or concrete



   154.128   Radio antennas, private



   154.129   Residential care facility



   154.130   Residential specialty shops



   154.131   Restaurant, outdoor seating or drive-in service



   154.132   Schools, K-12, public or private



   154.133   Sexually-oriented uses



   154.134   Solar energy systems



   154.135   Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs



   154.136   Truck stops



   154.137   Vehicle fuel and service stations



   154.138   Vehicle repair, mechanical



   154.139   Vehicle repair, body



   154.140   Vehicle sales, new or used autos, light trucks, motorcycles



   154.141   Waste recycling or waste transfer facility



   154.142   Wind energy conversion systems in non-residential zoning
districts



   154.143   Wind energy conversion systems in residential zoning
districts




General Development Requirements




   154.148   Purpose



   154.149   Applicability



   154.150   Accessory buildings and structures, generally



   154.151   Accessory dwelling units, detached



   154.152   Building materials, exterior



   154.153   Bulk storage of liquid or grain



   154.154   Corner sight triangles



   154.155   Driveways and private internal access roads



   154.156   Erosion control and stormwater management



   154.157   Explosive and flammable materials; hazardous materials



   154.158   Exterior storage



   154.159   Landscaping, screening and fences



   154.160   Lighting, exterior



   154.161   Parking requirements, off-street



   154.162   Parking in residential districts, supplementary



   154.163   Private sewage systems



   154.164   Prohibited types of dwelling units



   154.165   Refuse



   154.166   Relocating houses or other structures



   154.167   Single-family detached dwellings



   154.168   Utilities, private



   154.169   Wetlands




Application Reviews and Procedures




   154.173   Purpose



   154.174   Summary of decision-making and review bodies



   154.175   Common review procedures and requirements



   154.176   Comprehensive Plan amendment



   154.177   Zoning map or text amendment



   154.178   Site plan review and approval



   154.179   Conditional use permit



   154.180   Variance



   154.181   Planned unit development



   154.182   Interim use permit



   154.183   Temporary or seasonal use permit



   154.184   Administrative adjustment



   154.185   Building permit



   154.186   Certificate of occupancy



   154.187   Home occupation permit



   154.188   Grading, drainage and erosion control permit



   154.189   Driveway permit



   154.190   Plat



   154.191   Sign permit




Rules and Definitions




   154.196   General rules for interpretation



   154.197   Common district requirements



   154.198   Lot and parcel controls



   154.199   Encroachments allowed into required setback areas



   154.200   Heights limits and exceptions



   154.201   Rules of measurement



   154.202   Definitions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.001  TITLE.



   The chapter shall be known as “Waseca Zoning Ordinance” except as
referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this chapter”.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.002  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the
Municipal Planning Act, Minnesota Statutes.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.003  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:



      (1)   To implement the policies of the City of Waseca
Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   To protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the community and its people through the establishment of
regulations governing development and use;



      (3)   To promote orderly development and redevelopment;



      (4)   To protect the established use areas;



      (5)   To provide adequate light, air, and convenience of
access to property;



      (6)   To prevent congestion in the public right-of-way;



      (7)   To prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration
of structures by regulating land, buildings, yards, and allowed residential
densities;



      (8)   To provide for compatibility of different land uses;



      (9)   To provide for administration and enforcement of this
chapter;



      (10)   To provide for amendments;



      (11)   To prescribe penalties for violation of such
regulations; and



      (12)   To define powers and duties of the City staff, the City
Council, the Planning Commission, and the City Council in relation to the
Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held as the minimum requirements for the promotion of
public health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.004  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be effective on and after January 16, 2016. The
adoption of this chapter shall not be construed to confer any protected legal
status on uses in existence prior to the effective date that did not conform
to previous ordinance provisions. Uses that were illegal under previous
ordinance provisions shall not be converted to a legal non- conforming use by
reason of adoption of this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.005  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter is applicable to all land located within the city both now
and as may be incorporated in the future. The use of land and buildings or
structures, and the construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion, or
relocation of buildings or structures shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.006  RELATION TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   It is the policy of the City of Waseca that the Comprehensive Plan is
the city’s guiding document for the regulation of land use and development.
The enforcement, amendment, and administration of this chapter is to be
accomplished with due consideration of the recommendations contained in the
Comprehensive Plan as developed and amended from time to time by the Planning
Commission and City Council of the city.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.007  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS AND AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Conflict with other public laws, chapters, regulations, or
permits.



      (1)   This chapter is intended to complement other municipal,
state, and federal regulations that affect land use. This chapter is not
intended to revoke or repeal any other public law, ordinance, regulation, or
permit.



      (2)   Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other chapter or regulation; the
provisions of this chapter shall apply, except as prohibited by statute.



      (3)   Where the provisions of any statute, other chapter or
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of
that statute, other chapter or regulation shall apply.



   (B)   Conflict with private agreements.



      (1)   The existence of any easement, covenant, or other
private agreement with respect to property affected by this chapter shall not
affect the duty of any interested person to comply with this chapter.



      (2)   The city shall have no obligation to waive or modify the
requirements of this chapter to conform to private agreements, nor shall it
be obligated to enforce such agreements.



   (C)   Conflict between standards in this chapter. In the event of
conflict between one or more of the standards in this chapter, priority shall
be established based on the following descending hierarchy:



      (1)   Overlay Zoning District requirements;



      (2)   Base Zoning District requirements;



      (3)   Rules of Measurement in § 154.201; and



      (4)   Sections 154.002 through 154.009.



   (Example: if an overlay district standard conflicts with a base
district standard, the overlay district standard shall control and take
precedence.)



   (D)   Conflicts between other standards. In cases where two or more
standards conflict within the same hierarchy category identified in division
(C) of this section, the more restrictive standard shall not necessarily
control.  For example, if two overlay zoning district requirements conflict,
this subsection shall apply. The determination as to which control applies
shall be made by the City Council.  The following standards shall govern the
Council in issuing use interpretations:



      (1)   Greater consistency with the goals and objectives
contained within the adopted Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   More supportive of the purposes of this chapter as
described in § 154.003, Purpose;



      (3)   Increased compatibility with adjacent development and
surrounding community character;



      (4)   Enhanced environmental quality and natural resource
protection;



      (5)   Greater protection and preservation of historic and
cultural resources; and



      (6)   A superior level of building form, design, or
architecture.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.008  TRANSITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of transitional regulations is to resolve
the status of properties with pending applications and properties with
outstanding violations, at the time of the adoption of this chapter.



   (B)   Violations continue. Any violation of previous versions of
this chapter shall continue to be a violation under this chapter and shall be
subject to the penalties and enforcement set forth in Sub-Chapter 18,
Enforcement, unless the use, development, construction, or other activity
complies with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Uses, structures, and lots rendered nonconforming. Where any
use, building, structure, or lot that legally existed on the effective date
of this chapter does not meet all standards set forth in this chapter, such
building,  structure, lot or parcel shall be subject to the requirements of
§§ 154.101 through 154.106, Non-Conforming Uses and Structures.



   (D)   Existing legal nonconformities. Legal nonconforming lots of
record and uses that existed on the effective date of this chapter shall be
controlled by §§ 154.101 through 154.106, Non-Conforming Uses and
Structures.



   (E)   Processing of applications commenced or approved under
previous ordinances.



      (1)   Pending application.



         (a)   Any complete application that has been submitted
or accepted for review, but upon which no final action has been taken by the
appropriate decision making body prior to the effective date of this chapter,
shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of ordinances in effect
on the date the application was deemed complete by the city.



         (b)   An applicant with a pending application may waive
the review available under the prior ordinance through a written letter to
the Planning Director, and instead request review under the provisions of
this chapter.



      (2)   Approved projects.



         (a)   Approved land use and other related actions by the
City of Waseca authorized under the prior ordinance, including Building
Permits that are valid on the effective date of this chapter, shall remain
valid until their expiration date, where applicable.



         (b)   Projects with valid approvals or permits shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter where the standards will not
materially affect the project.  Where use of these standards would
materially affect the project, the project shall be completed pursuant to the
development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided that the
permit or approval is valid and has not lapsed.



         (c)   Any building or development for which a building
permit was granted prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
permitted to proceed as permitted or approved, even if such building or
development does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, as long as
the building permit remains valid.



         (d)   Building permits authorized in accordance with the
ordinance existing prior to the effective date of this chapter shall still be
valid, but shall not be renewed if the permit expires. All future permits
shall only be issued if in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.009  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   Provisions. If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates
any provision of this chapter, then such judgment shall not affect the
validity and continued enforcement of any other provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Properties. If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates
the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
structure, or situation, then such judgment shall not affect the application
of that provision to any other building, structure, or situation not
specifically included in that judgment.



   (C)   Approvals. If any court of competent jurisdiction rules
invalid any condition attached to an approval under this chapter, then such
judgment shall not affect any other conditions or requirements attached to
the same approval that are not specifically included in that judgment.



   (D)   Administrative actions. Whenever a condition or limitation is
included in an administrative action authorizing regulatory activity, then it
shall be conclusively presumed that the authorizing officer, commission, or
board considered such condition or limitation necessary to carry out the
spirit and intent of this chapter, and that the officer, commission, or board
would not have granted the authorization to which the condition or limitation
pertained except in the determination that the condition or limitation was
lawful.



   (E)   Appeals. No judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction
shall be considered final until all appeals therefore have been exhausted.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 154.011  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Adoption of zoning map.



      (1)   The map entitled City of Waseca Official Zoning Map,
hereinafter referred to as the “zoning map,” and all explanatory matters
thereon, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. Questions
concerning a zoning designation or boundaries of a zoning district shown on
the zoning map shall be resolved by referring back to the previously adopted
ordinances delimiting the districts and boundaries.



      (2)   A copy of the official zoning map is shown at the end of
this subchapter.  However, this copy may be out of date and, thus, the
Community Development Department should be contacted to verify the zoning of
any property.



   (B)   Types of zoning districts. Land within the city is generally
classified by this chapter to be within one of a number of base zoning
districts. Land within any base zoning district may also be classified into
one or more overlay zoning districts, in which case regulations governing
development in the overlay district shall apply in addition to the
regulations governing development in the underlying base zoning district,
unless expressly stated otherwise.



   (C)   District boundaries.



      (1)   The boundaries of the districts are established as shown
on the zoning map.



      (2)   Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning map, the
district boundaries are parcel lines or the corporate limit lines, as they
existed at the time of the enactment of this chapter.



      (3)   New base district lines or rezoning lines shall follow
parcel lines.



   (D)   Zoning classifications for newly annexed property. Any land
annexed to the city in the future shall initially be placed in the R-1,
Suburban Residential District, unless placed in another district by action of
the City Council after recommendation of the Planning Commission.



   (E)   Essential public services. Essential public services,
including public parks but not including government buildings, are a
permitted use in any zoning district.



   (F)   Signs. Signs are a permitted accessory use in any zoning
district if they conform to the regulations of City Code Chapter 152, Signs.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.012  DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Base districts. Table 3-1, Base Zoning Districts, sets out the
base residential, business, and industrial zoning districts established by
this chapter.



Table 3-1:  Base Zoning Districts



 


Abbreviation

 

District Name





R-1
 
Suburban Residential District


R-2
 
Urban Residential District


R-3
 
Multi-Family District, Low and Medium Density


R-4
 
Multi-Family District, High Density


R-M
 
Manufactured Home Community District


B-1
 
Central Business District


B-2
 
Community Retail and Service Business District


B-3
 
Neighborhood Transition Business District


B-4
 
Regional Retail and Service Business District


I-1
 
Limited Industry District


I-2
 
Moderate Industry District




 



   (B)   Overlay districts. Table 3-2, Overlay Zoning Districts, sets
out the overlay zoning districts established by this chapter.



Table 3-2:  Overlay Zoning Districts



 


Abbreviation

 

District Name



PUD
 
Planned-Unit Development Overlay District


FP
 
Floodplain Management Overlay District


SO
 
Shoreland Overlay District


HP
 
Heritage Preservation Overlay District


A
 
Airport Safety Overlay District



 



   (C)   Classification of districts. Land shall be classified or
reclassified into a base or overlay zoning district only in accordance with
the procedures and requirements set forth in §§ 154.173 through 154.191,
Application Reviews and Procedures. 



   (D)   Diagrams and photographs for illustrative purposes only.
Graphics in this chapter of physical regulations are for illustrative
purposes only, and may not be consistent with all listed requirements. In all
cases, the dimensional requirement text of this chapter shall control.







 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 154.014  PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Summary tables of principal and accessory uses. All principal
uses allowed in the residential districts are summarized in Table 4-1 and
listed in the sections for the individual zoning districts.  All accessory
uses are summarized Table 4-2 and listed in the sections for the individual
zoning districts.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Principal uses specified with a “P” are
permitted by-right in the district or districts where designated, provided
that the use complies with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
Essential public services and signs are permitted uses in any zoning
district. 



   (C)   Conditional uses. Permitted uses specified with a “C” are
allowed as a conditional use in the district or districts where designated,
upon approval by the City Council, provided that the use complies with all
other applicable provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses, buildings and
structures located within a residential district shall comply with the
provisions of §§ 154.148 through 154.169. 



   (E)   Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as either “P”
(permitted) or “C” (conditional) in a particular district or any use not
determined by the Planning Director to be substantially similar to a use
listed as permitted or conditional in a particular district shall be
prohibited in that district.  Such determination shall be made in the manner
provided for in § 154.007, which addresses conflicts between substantially
similar uses.



   (F)   Specific development requirements. Principal permitted and
conditional uses indicated under the specific development standards column
shall be subject to the standards identified in §§ 154.109 through 154.143,
Specific Development Requirements. 



   (G)   General development requirements. Development of land for
multi-family residential, schools, places of worship, parks or other
non-residential purposes shall conform to the requirements for traffic
circulation, landscape design, fencing, lighting, and other considerations as
specified in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development
Requirements.  Signs are regulated by Chapter 152 of the code. 



   (H)   Dimensional Requirements in the Residential Districts.
Dimensional requirements for the residential districts are presented under
§§ 154.015 through 154.018, the R-1 District through the R-4 District. 



Table 4-1:  Summary of the Principal Permitted and Conditional Land Uses in
the Residential Districts



P:  Permitted      C:  Conditional   - -:  Not allowed



 


Land Uses

 

Zoning Districts

 





Specific Development Requirements




R-1

 

R-2

 

R-3

 

R-4

 

R-M





Residential Uses


Apartment buildings, up to 6 dwelling units
 

--

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Apartment buildings, up to 16 dwelling units
 

--

 

--

 

P

 

P

 



 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Apartment buildings, more than 16 dwelling units
 

--

 

--

 

C

 

P

 



 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Detached accessory dwelling units
 

--

 

C

 

C

 

--

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Manufactured (mobile) home parks
 

--

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Over-night care facility or group home, state- licensed or non-licensed,
serving 6 or fewer persons
 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Over-night care facility or group home, state- licensed or non-licensed,
serving 7 through 16 persons
 

--

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Seniors’ housing
 

--

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Single-family detached dwellings
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

--

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Two-family dwellings
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

--

 

--

 
 


Townhouses
 

--

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Commercial Uses


Bed-and-breakfast homes
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Boarding houses
 

--

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Cemeteries
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

--

 

--

 
 


Golf courses
 

C

 

C

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Nursing homes
 

--

 

--

 

C

 

C

 

--

 
 


Residential specialty shops
 

--

 

C

 

--

 

--

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Public and Semi-Public Uses


Essential services
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Places of public worship
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

--

 
 


Public parks; park buildings
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Schools, K-12
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143




 



Table 4-2:  Summary Table of Accessory Land Uses in the Residential Districts



 






Land Uses

 

Zoning Districts

 





Specific Requirements




R-1

 

R-2

 

R-3

 

R-4

 

R-M





Children’s play equipment
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Cellular telephone relay
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Day care, in-home, State-licensed, serving 14 or fewer children or 12 or
fewer adults
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Day care, in-home, State-licensed, up to 16 adults or children
 

--

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Day care, children, religious or school setting
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

--

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Child care, in-home, drop-in program
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Dog houses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Garages or carports, detached
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Greenhouses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Home occupations
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Manufactured home park office, community building or storm shelter
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Radio antennas, private
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Screen houses; gazebos
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Solar energy systems
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Storage buildings
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Swimming pools; hot tubs
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Wind energy conversion  systems
 

C

 

C

 

--

 

--

 

--

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169




 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.015  R-1, SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to allow low-density
single-family detached dwellings in the developing portions of the city where
city sewer and water is available.  All dwelling units in an R-1 district
shall be required to connect to city sewers.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1.



      (2)   Some permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements. Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



      (3)   In the R-1 zoning district, there shall be no more than
one 1-, 2- or 3-family dwelling per land parcel, not counting accessory
dwelling units.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for requirements
that must be met for approval of some conditional uses.  Refer also to §§
154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



   (D)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-2.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 and §§ 154.148
through 154.169 for conditions that must be met for approval of certain
accessory uses. 



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 4-3:  Required Setbacks, R-1 District



 


 

Front

 

Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

From Wetland  Lake or Storm Pond



Single-family detached dwelling
 

301

 

10

 

202

 

30

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Driveway
 

Not applicable

 

5

 

10

 

5

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Parking3
 

10

 

5

 

10

 

5

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169



1   If two or more existing houses on the same side of the block have
front setbacks other than the standard, the setbacks for the remaining lots
on that side of the block may be the average setback of the existing houses.



2   If an adjacent house has a front yard facing the side street, then the
corner side setback shall equal the front setback of the adjacent house.



3   For parking other than in the driveway.




 



Table 4-4:  Minimum Lot Dimensions, R-1 District



 


 

Area

 

Width

 

Depth



Single-family detached dwelling

   Non-corner lot

   Corner lot
 





10,400



11,700

 





80



90

 





130



130




 



Table 4-5:  Maximum Structure Height, R-1 District



 

   
 

Feet



Principal Building1
 

32



Fences

   Front yards

   Side or rear yards
 





4



6




1   Or 2.5 stories, whichever is less.  See § 154.201, Rules of
Measurement, Building Height. 




 



Table 4-6:  Requirements for Detached Accessory Structures, R-1 District



 


 

One- or Two-Family Residential Use

 

Permitted Non-Residential Use





Number of structures allowed
 

3

 

3



Size of first structure maximum
 

600 sf

 

1,000 sf



Size of other structures, maximum
 

120 sf

 

250 sf



Lot coverage maximum
 

10 %

 

10 %



Height maximum - garage
 

20

 

20



Side wall height max - garage*
 

9

 

9



Height maximum - other
 

12

 

12



Minimum setbacks**

   Front

   Side

   Corner side

   Rear

   From principal structure
 





No closer than principal



5



No closer than principal



5



10

 





No closer than principal



5



No closer than principal



5



10




*     See also § 154.150(B)(5)
**   No permanent structure (one attached to frost-free footings) shall be
located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise allows
such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an easement
but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands.





 



   (F)   Maximum building coverage. No more than 40% of the parcel
shall be occupied by buildings having vertical mass including dwellings,
garages, storage buildings, gazebos and greenhouses but not including
driveways, parking areas, decks, patios, unscreened courts, wind or solar
energy equipment, play equipment or dog houses.



   (G)   Driveway width. The maximum width of a residential driveway at
the property line shall be 24 feet.



   (H)   Specific development requirements. Some conditional uses and
some permitted uses have specific requirements that are presented in §§
154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements.  Refer to Table
4-1 for the uses that have specific requirements.



   (I)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.016  R-2, URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to allow the
continuation of existing residential development and infilling of existing
lots in the older residential areas of the city where central sewer and water
systems are available.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1.



      (2)   Some Permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements. Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



      (3)   In the R-2 zoning district, there shall be no more than
one 1-, 2- or 3-family dwelling per land parcel, not counting accessory
dwelling units.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for specific
requirements that must be met for approval of some conditional uses.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



      (3)   In the R-2 zoning district, there shall be no more than
one 1-, 2- or 3-family dwelling per land parcel, not counting accessory
dwelling units.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Refer to Table 4-2.  Refer to §§ 154.109
through 154.143 and §§ 154.148 through 154.169 for conditions that must be
met for approval of certain accessory uses.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 4-7:  Required Setbacks, R-2 District



 


 

Front

 

Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

Side abutting SF House

 

From Alley

 

From any Water Body





Single-family detached dwelling
 

251

 

7

 

202

 

25

 

Not applicable

 

25

 
§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District; § 154.169, Wetlands


Two- or three-family dwelling
 

251

 

10

 

202

 

25

 

15

 

25



Townhouse cluster
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

20

 

25



Apartment building, up to 6 dwelling units
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

25

 

25



Driveway
 

Not applicable

 

5

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

--



Parking3
 

10

 

5

 

202

 

10

 

10

 

5




1   If two or more existing houses on the same side of the block have
front setbacks other than the standard, the setbacks for the remaining lots
on that side of the block may be the average setback of the existing houses.



2   If an adjacent house has a front yard facing the side street, then the
corner side setback shall equal the front setback of the adjacent house.



3   For parking other than in the driveway.





 



Table 4-8:  Minimum Lot Dimensions, R-2 District



 


 

Area

 

Width

 

Depth



Single-family detached dwelling

   Non-corner lot

   Corner lot
 





8,000



10,800

 





66



90

 





120



120



Two- or three-family dwelling (per unit)
 

5,000

 

120

 

120



Townhouse (per dwelling unit)
 

4,000

 

--

 

--



Apartment building (per dwelling unit)
 

3,000

 

--

 

--



   Seniors’ housing

   Apartments

   Townhouses
 





2,000



4,000

 

--

 

--




 



Table 4-9:  Maximum Structure Height, R-2 District



 


 

Feet



Principal building1
 

32



Fences

   Front yards

   Side or rear yards
 





4



6



1   Or 2.5 stories, whichever is less.  See § 154.201, Rules of
Measurement, Building Height.



 



Table 4-10:  Requirements for Detached Accessory Structures, R-2 District



 


 

One- or Two-Family Residential Use

 

Multiple-Family Residential Use

 

Permitted Non-Residential Use





Number of structures allowed
 

3

 

3

 

3



Size of first structure maximum
 

700 sf

 

300 sf / unit

 

1,000 sf



Size of other structures, max. 
 

120 sf

 

250 sf

 

250 sf



Lot coverage maximum
 

10 %

 

10 %

 

10 %



Height maximum - garage
 

20

 

20

 

20



Side wall height max -
 



 



 





Garage*
 

9

 

9

 

9



Height maximum - other
 

12

 

12

 

12



Minimum setbacks

   Front

   Side

   Corner side

   Rear

   From principal structure

   From alley
 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5

 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5

 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5




*     See also § 154.150(B)(5)
*   No permanent structure (one attached to frost-free footings) shall be
located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise allows
such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an easement
but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands.





 



   (F)   Maximum building coverage. No more than 40% of the parcel
shall be occupied by buildings having vertical mass including dwellings,
garages, storage buildings, gazebos and greenhouses but not including
driveways, parking areas, decks, patios, unscreened courts, wind or solar
energy equipment, play equipment or dog houses.



   (G)   Driveway width.The maximum width of a residential driveway at
the property line shall be 24 feet.



   (H)   Specific development requirements. Some conditional uses and
some permitted uses have specific requirements that are presented in §§
154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements.  Refer to Table
4-1 for the uses that have specific requirements.



   (I)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.017  R-3, MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT, LOW AND MEDIUM DENSITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The major purpose of this district is to allow
low-density multi-family dwelling (two to 15 units), including apartments and
townhouses in approximate areas of the city.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1.



      (2)   Some permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements. Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



      (3)   In the R-3 zoning district, there shall be no more than
one 2- or 3-family dwelling per land parcel, not counting accessory dwelling
units.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for specific
requirements that must be met for approval of some Conditional Uses.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



      (3)   In the R-3 zoning district, there shall be no more than
one 2- or 3-family dwelling per land parcel, not counting accessory dwelling
units.



   (D)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-2.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 and §§ 154.148
through 154.169 for conditions that must be met for approval of certain
accessory uses.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 4-11:  Required Setbacks, R-3 District



 


 

Front

 

Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

Side abutting SF House

 

From any Water Body





Two- or three-family dwelling
 

251

 

10

 

202

 

25

 

15

 
§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District; § 154.169, Wetlands


Townhouse cluster
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

20



Apartment building, up to 16 dwelling units
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

25



Apartment building, more than 16 dwelling units
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

25



Non-residential buildings
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

25



Driveway
 

Not applicable

 

5

 

10

 

10

 

10



Parking3
 

10

 

5

 

202

 

10

 

10




1   If two or more existing houses on the same side of the block have
front setbacks other than the standard, the setbacks for the remaining lots
on that side of the block may be the average setback of the existing houses. 



2   If an adjacent house has a front yard facing the side street, then the
corner side setback shall equal the front setback of the adjacent house.



3   For parking other than in the driveway.





 



Table 4-12:  Minimum Lot Dimensions, R-3 District



 


 

Area

 

Width

 

Depth



Two- or three-family dwelling (per dwelling unit)
 

5,000

 

120

 

120



Townhouse (per dwelling unit)
 

4,000

 

--

 

--



Apartment building (per dwelling unit)
 

3,000

 

--

 

--



Seniors’ housing (per unit)

   Apartments

   Townhouses
 





1,750



3,750

 

--

 

--




 



Table 4-13:  Maximum Structure Height, R-3 District



 


 

Feet



Principal Building1
 

40



Fences

   Front yards

   Side or rear yards
 





4



6




 



1   Or 3.5 stories, whichever is less, measured to the mid-point of the
roof slope.  See §§ 154.201, Rules of Measurement, Building Height.



Table 4-14:  Requirements for Detached Accessory Structures, R-3 District



 


 

Two-or Three-Family Residential Use

 

Multiple-Family Residential Use

 

Permitted Non-Residential Use





Number of structures allowed
 

2

 

2

 

2



Size of first structure maximum
 

700 sf

 

300 sf / unit

 

1,000 sf



Size of second structure, maximum
 

120 sf

 

250 sf

 

250 sf



Lot coverage maximum
 

10 %

 

10 %

 

10 %



Height maximum - garage
 

20

 

20

 

20



Side wall height max - garage *
 

9

 

9

 

9



Height maximum - other
 

12

 

12

 

12



Minimum setbacks

   Front

   Side

   Corner side

   Rear

   From principal structure

   From alley
 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5

 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5

 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5





*     See also § 154.150(B)(5)
**   No permanent structure (one attached to frost-free footings) shall be
located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise allows
such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an easement
but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands.




 



   (F)   Maximum building coverage. No more than 50% of the parcel
shall be occupied by buildings having vertical mass including dwellings,
garages, storage buildings, gazebos and greenhouses but not including
driveways, parking areas, decks, patios, unscreened courts,  Not allowed in
this district or solar energy equipment, play equipment or dog houses.



   (G)   Driveway width. The maximum width of a residential driveway at
the property line shall be 24 feet. 



   (H)   Specific development requirements. Some conditional uses and
some permitted uses have specific requirements that are presented in §§
154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements.  Refer to Table
4-1 for the uses that have specific requirements.



   (I)   General development requirements. See §§ 154.148 through
154.169, General Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.018  R-4, MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT, HIGH DENSITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The major purpose of this district is to allow
multi-family dwellings (15 or more units), including apartments and
townhouses in appropriate areas where city sewer is available.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1.



      (2)   Some permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements. Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



      (3)   In the R-4 zoning district, there shall be no more than
one 2- or 3-family dwelling per land parcel, not counting accessory dwelling
units.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for specific
requirements that must be met for approval of some conditional uses.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



      (3)   In the R-4 zoning district, there shall be no more than
one 2- or 3-family dwelling per land parcel, not counting accessory dwelling
units.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Refer to Table 4-2.  Refer to §§ 154.109
through 154.143 and §§ 154.148 through 154.169 for conditions that must be
met for approval of any accessory uses.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 4-15:  Required Setbacks, R-4 District



 


 

Front

 

Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

Side abutting SF House

 

From Water Body





Two- or three-family dwelling
 

251

 

10

 

202

 

25

 

15

 


 

 

§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District; § 154.169, Wetlands


Townhouse cluster
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

20



Apartment building
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

25



Non-residential buildings
 

25

 

15

 

202

 

25

 

25



Driveway
 

Not applicable

 

5

 

10

 

10

 

10



Parking3
 

10

 

5

 

202

 

10

 

10



1   If two or more existing houses on the same side of the block have
front setbacks other than the standard, the setbacks for the remaining lots
on that side of the block may be the average setback of the existing houses. 

2   If an adjacent house has a front yard facing the side street, then the
corner side setback shall equal the front setback of the adjacent house. 

3   For parking other than in the driveway. 




 



Table 4-16:  Minimum Lot Dimensions, R-4 District



 


 

Area

 

Width

 

Depth



Two- or three-family dwelling
 

5,000

 

120

 

120



Townhouse (per dwelling unit)
 

4,000

 

--

 

--



Apartment building (per dwelling unit)
 

3,000

 

--

 

--



Seniors’ housing

   Apartments

   Townhouses
 





1,500



3,500

 

--

 

--




 



Table 4-17:  Maximum Structure Height, R-4 District



 


 

Feet



Principal building1
 

50



Fences

   Front yards

   Side or rear yards
 





4



6



1   Or 4 stories, whichever is less.  See § 154.201, Rules of
Measurement, Building Height.



 



Table 4-18:  Requirements for Detached Accessory Structures, R-4 District



 


 

Two-or Three-Family Residential Use

 

Multiple-Family Residential Use

 

Permitted Non-Residential Use





Number of structures allowed
 

2

 

2

 

2



Size of first structure max.
 

700 sf

 

300 sf / unit

 

1,000 sf



Size of second structure max.
 

120 sf

 

250 sf

 

250 sf



Lot coverage maximum
 

10 %

 

10 %

 

10 %



Height maximum - garage
 

20

 

20

 

20



Side wall height max. - garage*
 

9

 

9

 

9



Height maximum - other
 

12

 

12

 

12



Minimum setbacks

   Front

   Side

   Corner side

   Rear

   From principal structure

   From alley
 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5

 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5

 





No closer than principal



3



No closer than principal



3



10



5



*     See also § 154.150(B)(5)
**    No permanent structure (one attached to frost-free footings) shall
be located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise allows
such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an easement
but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands.




 



   (F)   Maximum building coverage. No more than 50% of the parcel
shall be occupied by buildings having vertical mass including dwellings,
garages, storage buildings, gazebos and greenhouses but not including
driveways, parking areas, decks, patios, unscreened courts, energy equipment,
play equipment or dog houses.



   (G)   Driveway width. The maximum width of a residential driveway at
the property line shall be 24 feet.



   (H)   Specific development requirements. Some conditional uses and
some permitted uses have specific requirements that are presented in §§
154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements.  Refer to Table
4-1 for the uses that have specific requirements.



   (I)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.019  R-M, MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to allow manufactured
or mobile home communities in appropriate areas of the city.



   (B)   Location. Manufactured home communities are permitted by M.S.
§ 462.357(1)(b), as it may be amended from time to time, as a conditional
use in zoning districts that allow two-family dwellings, or by the city as a
permitted use in the R-M zoning district.



   (C)   Permitted principal use.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-1. Manufactured home communities are
the only permitted principal use in the R-M zoning district.



      (2)   Manufactured home communities have requirements that are
presented in §§ 154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements.
Refer also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



   (D)   Conditional principal uses. Refer to Table 4-1.  There are no
conditional principal uses in the R-M zoning district.



   (E)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 4-2.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 and §§ 154.148
through 154.169 for conditions that must be met for approval of certain
accessory uses.



   (F)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 4-19:  Required Setbacks, R-M District1



 


 

Front2

 

Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

From a Residential District

 

From any Water Body



Principal building
 

15

 

5, 253

 

20

 

10

 

80

 
§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District; § 154.169, Wetlands


Driveway
 

--

 

5

 

10

 

5

 

40



Parking4
 

155

 

5

 

10

 

5

 

40



Community building
 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

80




1   Setbacks shall be measured from the lot lines of the manufactured home
site, assuming that the lots are not platted.  If platted, the setback
measurements would be from the platted property lines.



2   Front setback shall be measured from the back of the curb, assuming
that the street is not in a platted public right-of-way.



3   The side of the house with the principal door shall face onto the
larger setback.  The principal door shall not face the street on a corner
lot.



4   The driveway between the curb and the parking pad shall be paved with
asphalt or concrete. 



5   Parking pads shall have a front setback equal to the front setback of
the house.




 



Table 4-20:  Minimum Lot Dimensions, R-M District



 


 

Area

 

Width

 

Width, Corner Lot

 

Depth



Single-wide house
 

4,500

 

45

 

60

 

100



Double-wide house
 

6,000

 

60

 

75

 

100




 



Table 4-21:  Maximum Structure Height, R-M District



 

 
 

Feet



Principal building
 

20




 



Table 4-22:  Requirements for Detached Accessory Structures, R-M District



 



Number of structures allowed
 

2



Size of first structure maximum
 

360 sf



Size of second structure max.
 

120 sf



Height maximum - garage
 

14



Side wall height max - garage*
 

8



Height maximum - other
 

9



Minimum setbacks

   Front

   Side

   Corner side

   Rear
 





35



3



20



3



* See also § 154.150(B)(5)




 



   (G)   Specific development requirements. Manufactured home
communities and some accessory uses have requirements that are presented in
§§ 154.109 through 154.143 and §§ 154.148 through 154.169.



   (H)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 154.022  PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Summary tables of principal and accessory uses. All principal
uses allowed in the business districts are summarized in Table 5-1 and listed
in the Sections for the individual zoning districts.  All accessory uses are
summarized in Table 5-2 and listed in the Sections for the individual zoning
districts. 



   (B)   Permitted uses. Principal uses specified with a “P” are
permitted by-right in the district or districts where designated, provided
that the use complies with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Permitted uses specified with a “C” are
allowed as a conditional use in the district or districts where designated,
provided that the use complies with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Accessory buildings and structures shall
comply with the provisions of §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements, Accessory Buildings and Structures. 



   (E)   Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as either “P”
(permitted) or “C” (conditional) in a particular district, or any use not
determined by the Planning Director to be substantially similar to a use
listed as permitted or conditional, shall be prohibited in that district. 
Such determination shall be made in the manner provided for in § 154.007,
which addresses the determination of substantially similar uses.



   (F)   Dimensional requirements in the business districts. 
Dimensional requirements for the business districts are presented under §§
154.023 through 154.026 , the B-1 District through the B-4 District.



   (G)   Specific development standards. Principal permitted and
conditional uses indicated under the specific development standards column
shall be subject to the standards identified in §§ 154.109 through 154.143,
Specific Development Standards.



   (H)   General development requirements. Development of land for
commercial, industrial, other non-residential uses or multiple-family housing
shall conform to the requirements for traffic circulation, landscape design,
screening, trash handling, lighting, parking, loading and other
considerations as specified in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements.  Signs are regulated by Chapter 152 of the City
Code.



Table 5-1:  Summary of the Principal Permitted and Conditional Land Uses in
the Business Districts



   P:  Permitted      C:  Conditional      --:  Not allowed



 


Land Uses

 

Zoning Districts

 

Specific Development Requirements




B-1

 

B-2

 

B-3

 

B-4





Business Uses


Retail and/or service businesses that deal directly with the final consumer
or beneficiary, with building floor areas under 8,000 square feet, but not
including drive-through service or drive-in service
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Retail and/or service businesses that deal directly with the final consumer
or beneficiary, with building floor areas equal to or greater than 8,000
square feet, but not including drive-through or drive-in service
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
 


Agricultural commodities sales businesses
 

C

 

--

 

--

 

P

 
 


Animal veterinary clinics
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Bars or taverns
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Beer micro-breweries
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
As per statute


Car washes, freestanding
 

--

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
 


Convenience store with fuel sales
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Cultural facilities including museums, libraries, art studios and art
galleries
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

--

 
 


Day care, commercial child
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

--

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Drive-through service
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Funeral homes, mortuaries and/or crematoria
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Fuel sales and mechanical repair for autos and/or trucks
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Garden supplies, greenhouses and plant nurseries, retail
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Hazardous liquid storage
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Hotel or motel
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
 


Kennel, commercial
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Mixed-use building, commercial and residential
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

--

 
 


Nursing homes
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

--

 
 


Offices or medical clinics
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Recreation, entertainment or banquet facilities, including bowling alleys and
movie theatres
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
 


Restaurants, cafes or supper clubs, including those with outdoor seating
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Restaurant with drive-up window or drive-in service
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Schools, post-secondary
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

--

 
 


Self-service storage without outdoor storage
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 
 


Temporary or seasonal businesses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Tobacco products shop
 

P

 

--

 

--

 

--

 
 


Truck stops
 



 

--

 

--

 

P

 
 


Vehicle repair, mechanical
 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Vehicle repair, body
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Vehicle sales, automobiles, light trucks, boats, motorcycles or all-terrain
vehicles
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Vehicle sales, heavy trucks or recreational vehicles
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 
 


Public and Semi-Public Uses


Essential services
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Governmental buildings
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Hospitals
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
 


Public parks; park buildings
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Places of public worship
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Schools, public or private
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 




 



Table 5-2:  Summary Table of Accessory Land Uses in the Business Districts



 


Land Uses

 

Zoning Districts

 

Specific Requirements




B-1

 

B-2

 

B-3

 

B-4





Car washes
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Cellular telephone relay facilities or other telecommunication towers
 

--

 

--

 

C

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Parking ramp
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Radio antennas, private
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Signs
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Solar energy systems
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Storage buildings or garages <1,500 sf
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Storage buildings or garages >1,500 sf
 

C

 

P

 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143, §§ 154.148 - 154.169


Temporary or seasonal businesses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 


Wind energy systems
 

--

 

C

 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143




 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16; Ord. 1050, passed 9-20-16)



§ 154.023  B-1,  CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The B-1 District is intended to allow a mixture of
retail and/or service businesses, civic and governmental institutions,
housing above businesses, and established industries in a compact environment
oriented toward public space that encourages walking.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-1.



      (2)   Some permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143,  Specific Development Requirements.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for specific
conditions that must be met for approval of some conditional uses.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



   (D)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-2.   



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 and §§ 154.148
through 154.169 for conditions that must be met for approval of certain
accessory uses.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 5-3:  Required Setbacks, B-1 District



 


 

Front

 

Interior Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

From R District

 

From Alley

 

From Wetland, Lake or Storm Pond



Principal building1
 

0

 

0

 

0

 

0

 

50

 

0

 
§ 154.169, Wetlands


Accessory structure2
 

To rear of bldg.

 

5

 

20

 

5

 

50

 

0



Parking
 

10

 

3

 

5

 

3

 

15

 

0



Driveway
 

--

 

3

 

5

 

3

 

15

 

--



1   The front setback of buildings that front on State Street shall match
the average setback of other buildings on that block face.

2   No permanent structure (one attached to frost-free footings) shall be
located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise allows
such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an easement
but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands.



 



Table 5-4:  Maximum Structure Height, B-1 District



 

Principal building1
 

50



Accessory building2
 

15



   1   Or 4 stories, whichever is less. 

   2   See also § 154.148, Accessory Buildings and Structures,
Generally



 



   (F)   Driveway width. The maximum width for any portion of a
commercial driveway in the public road right-of-way shall be 28 feet if two
lanes or 36 feet if three lanes.  Alterative designs may be approved by the
City Engineer. 



   (G)   Specific development requirements.



      (1)   Some conditional uses and some permitted uses have
specific requirements that are presented in §§ 154.109 through 154.143 ,
Specific Development Requirements.



      (2)   Refer to Table 5-1 for the uses that have specific
requirements.



   (H)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements.  All buildings are subject to the exterior
building requirements section of the General Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.024  B-2, COMMUNITY RETAIL AND SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The B-2 District is intended to allow a mixture of
retail and/or service businesses that deal directly with the final consumer
and attract large numbers of automobile trips from the city and the region.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-1.



      (2)   Some permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143 , Specific Development Requirements.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169 , General Development Requirements.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-1. 



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for specific
conditions that must be met for approval of some conditional uses.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169 , General Development Requirements.



   (D)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-2.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 and §§ 154.148
through 154.169 , for conditions that must be met for approval of certain
accessory uses.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 5-5:  Required Setbacks, B-2 District



 


 

Front

 

Interior Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

From R District

 

From Alley

 

From Wetland, Lake or Storm Pond



Principal building
 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

50

 

20

 
§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District; § 154.169, Wetlands 


Accessory structure1
 

40

 

5

 

20

 

5

 

25

 

5



Parking
 

10

 

10

 

20

 

10

 

25

 

5



Driveway
 

--

 

10

 

20

 

10

 

25

 

--



1   No permanent structure (one attached to frost-free footings) shall be
located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise allows
such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an easement
but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands. 



 



Table 5-6:  Maximum Structure Height, B-2 District



 


 

Business

 

Mixed-Use



Principal building1
 

40

 

40



Accessory building2
 

15

 

15



1   Or three stories, whichever is less. 

2   See also § 154.150, Accessory Buildings and Structures



 



   (F)   Driveway width. The maximum width for any portion of a
commercial driveway in the public road right-of-way shall be 28 feet if two
lanes or 36 feet if three lanes.  Alterative designs may be approved by the
City Engineer.



   (G)   Specific development requirements. Some conditional uses and
some permitted uses have specific requirements, which are presented in §§
154.109 through 154.143 , Specific Development Requirements.  Refer to Table
5-1 for the uses that have specific requirements.



   (H)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169 ,
General Development Requirements.  All buildings are subject to the exterior
bridling requirements section of the General Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.025  B-3,  NEIGHBORHOOD TRANSITION BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The B-3 District is intended to allow small retail
and/or service businesses that deal directly with the consumer, are
compatible with nearby residential neighborhoods and are designed to minimize
adverse effects on housing.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-1.



      (2)   Some permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143 , Specific Development Requirements.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169 , General Development Requirements.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 , Specific
Development Requirements for conditions that must be met for approval of some
conditional uses.  Refer also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169 , General
Development Requirements.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Refer to Table 5-2.  Refer to §§ 154.109
through 154.143and §§ 154.148 through 154.169 for conditions that must be
met for approval of certain accessory uses.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 5-7:  Required Setbacks, B-3 District



 


 

Front

 

Interior Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

From R District

 

From Wetland, Lake or Storm Pond



Principal building
 

20

 

15

 

20

 

15

 

30

 
§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District; § 154.169, Wetlands


Accessory structure1
 

30

 

5

 

15

 

5

 

25



Parking2
 

10

 

10

 

15

 

10

 

20



Driveway
 

--

 

5

 

15

 

10

 

20



1   No permanent structure (one attached to frost-free footings) shall be
located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise allows
such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an easement
but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands. 

2   No parking is allowed in the front yard (between the principal
building and the street).



 



Table 5-8:  Maximum Structure Height, B-3 District



 

Principal building1
 

40



Accessory building2
 

15



1   Or three stories, whichever is less.

2   See also § 154.148, Accessory Buildings and Structures, Generally



 



Table 5-9:  Maximum Building Size, B-3 District



 

 
 
Business


Principal buIlding
 

8,000 s.f.




 



   (F)   Driveway width. The maximum width for any portion of a
commercial driveway in the public road right-of-way shall be 28 feet if two
lanes or 36 feet if three lanes.  Alterative designs may be approved by the
City Engineer.



   (G)   Specific development requirements. Some conditional uses and
some permitted uses have specific requirements that are presented in §§
154.109 through 154.143 , Specific Development Requirements.  Refer to Table
5-1 for the uses that have specific requirements.



   (H)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169 ,
General Development Requirements.  All buildings are subject to the exterior
building requirements section of the General Development Requirements. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.026  B-4,  REGIONAL RETAIL AND SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The B-4 District is intended to allow retail and/or
service businesses that require outdoor storage of merchandise, close
proximity to a state or federal highway or easy truck access.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-1.



      (2)   Some permitted uses have specific requirements that are
presented in §§ 154.109 through 154.143 , Specific Development
Requirements. Refer also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169 , General
Development Requirements.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 5-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 , for specific
conditions that must be met for approval of any conditional uses.  Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169 , General Development Requirements. 



   (D)   Accessory uses. Refer to Table 5-2. Refer to §§ 154.109
through 154.143and §§ 154.148 through 154.169 for conditions that must be
met for approval of certain accessory uses.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 5-10:  Required Setbacks, B-4 District



 


 

Front

 

Interior Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear

 

From R District

 

From Wetland, Lake or Storm Pond



Principal building
 

25

 

20

 

25

 

20

 

50

 

§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District; § 154.169, Wetlands



Accessory structure1
 

40

 

5

 

25

 

5

 

50



Parking
 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

35



Driveway
 

--

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

35



1   No permanent structure (one attached to frost-free footings) shall be
located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise allows
such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an easement
but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands.



 



Table 5-11:  Maximum Structure Height, B-4 District



 

Principal building1
 

40



Accessory building2
 

15



1   Or three stories, whichever is less. 

2   See also § 154.148, Accessory Buildings and Structures, Generally



 



   (F)   Driveway width. The maximum width for any portion of a
commercial driveway in the public road right-of-way shall be 28 feet if two
lanes or 36 feet if three lanes.  Alterative designs may be approved by the
City Engineer.



   (G)   Specific development requirements. All conditional uses and
some permitted uses have specific requirements, which are presented in §§
154.109 through 154.143 , Specific Development Requirements.  Refer to Table
5-1 for the uses that have specific requirements.



   (H)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169 ,
General Development Requirements.  All buildings are subject to the exterior
building requirements section of the General Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS



§ 154.029  PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Summary tables of principal and accessory uses. All principal
uses allowed in the industrial districts are summarized in Table 6-1 and
listed in the sections for the individual zoning districts.  All accessory
uses are summarized Table 6-2 and listed in the sections for the individual
zoning districts. 



   (B)   Permitted uses. Principal uses specified with a “P” are
permitted by-right in the district or districts where designated, provided
that the use complies with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Permitted uses specified with a “C” are
allowed as a conditional use in the district or districts where designated,
provided that the use complies with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Accessory buildings and structures located in
an industrial district shall comply with the provisions of §§ 154.148
through 154.169 , General Development Requirements, Accessory Buildings and
Structures.



   (E)   Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as either “P”
(permitted) or “C” (conditional) in a particular district or any use not
determined by the Zoning Administrator to be substantially similar to a use
listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited in that district. 
Such determination shall be made in the manner provided for in § 154.007,
which addresses the determination of substantially similar uses.



   (F)   Dimensional requirements in the industrial districts.
Dimensional requirements for the industrial districts are presented under
§§ 154.030 through 1543.031, the I-1 District through the I-2 District.



   (G)   Specific development standards. Principal permitted and
conditional uses indicated under the specific development standards column
shall be subject to the standards identified in §§ 154.109 through 154.143
, Specific Development Standards.



   (H)   General development requirements. Development of land for
industrial, commercial, industrial or other non-residential uses shall
conform to the requirements for traffic circulation, landscape design,
screening, trash handling, lighting, parking, loading and other
considerations as specified in §§ 154.148 through 154.169 , General
Development Requirements. Signs are regulated by Chapter 152 of the City Code.



Table 6-1:  Summary of the Principal Permitted and Conditional Land Uses in
the Industrial Districts



   P: Permitted      C: Conditional      --: Not allowed



 


Land Uses

 

Zoning Districts

 

Specific Development Requirements




I-1

 

I-2





Industrial Uses


Alcohol distillation
 

--

 

C

 
 


Animal veterinary clinics
 

P

 

P

 
 


Beer brewing
 

P

 

P

 
State regulation


Bulk storage of liquid or grain
 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Construction trades shops
 

P

 

P

 
 


Distillation of bone, coal, tar, petroleum, grain or wood alcohol
 

--

 

--

 
 


Drugs and pharmaceutical manufacturing
 

C

 

P

 
 


Fertilizer manufacturing, compost or storage
 

--

 

--

 
 


Food manufacturing except meat and rendering
 

--

 

P

 
 


Hazardous liquid storage
 

C

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Laboratories
 

P

 

P

 
 


Manufacturing, non-hazardous materials, products or emissions
 

P

 

P

 
 


Manufacturing, potentially hazardous materials, products or emissions
 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Manufacturing of products from stone, clay or concrete
 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Manufacturing or bulk storage of explosives
 

--

 

--

 
 


Offices
 

P

 

P

 
 


Outdoor storage of materials or products
 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Processing of garbage, offal, dead animals, refuse or rancid fats
 

--

 

--

 
 


Recycling of residential, commercial or industrial wastes
 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Vehicle salvage
 

--

 

--

 
 


Warehousing and logistics
 

--

 

P

 
 


Waste recycling facility
 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Waste transfer facility
 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Wholesale trade
 

P

 

P

 
 


Commercial Uses


Animal clinics
 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Automobile renting and leasing
 

P

 

P

 
 


Business services
 

P

 

P

 
 


Communication stations and broadcasting
 

P

 

P

 
 


Electrical and electronic repair
 

P

 

P

 
 


Fitness centers
 

C

 

C

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Industrial product sales
 

P

 

P

 
 


Industrial services
 

P

 

P

 
 


Kennel, commercial
 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Laundry services and tailoring
 

P

 

P

 
 


Plant nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores
 

P

 

P

 
 


Restaurants
 

C

 

C

 
 


Self-service storage with outdoor storage
 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Self-service storage without outdoor storage
 

P

 

P

 
 


Salvage yard
 

--

 

--

 
 


Trade schools
 

P

 

P

 
 


Vehicle repair, mechanical
 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Vehicle repair, body
 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Vehicle sales, new or used autos, light trucks, boats, motorcycles or
all-terrain vehicles
 

--

 

P

 
§§ 154.109 - 154.143


Public and semi-public uses
 



 



 
 


Essential services
 

P

 

P

 
 


Public administration or utility buildings
 

P

 

P

 
 


Public works yards and storage buildings
 

--

 

C

 
 




 



Table 6-2:  Summary Table of Accessory Land Uses in the Industrial Districts



 


Land Uses

 

Zoning Districts

 

Specific Requirements




I-1

 

I-2





Bulk storage of liquid
 

--

 

C

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Cellular telephone relay facilities
 

C

 

C

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Fitness centers
 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Parking
 

P

 

P

 
 


Radio antennas, private
 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169


Storage garage or building
 

P

 

P

 
 


Loading
 

P

 

P

 
 


Wind energy conversion systems
 

P

 

P

 
§§ 154.148 - 154.169




 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.030  I-1,  LIMITED INDUSTRY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the I-1, Limited Industry District is
to provide locations for light industrial, office, logistics and business
service buildings in a landscaped setting.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 6-1.



      (2)   Some permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements. Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 6-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for specific
conditions that must be met for approval of some conditional uses. Refer also
to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



   (D)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 6-2.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 and §§ 154.148
through 154.169 for conditions that must be met for approval of certain
accessory uses.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 6-3:  Required Setbacks, I-1 District



 




 

Front

 

Side

 

Rear

 

From Residential District

 

From Wetland, Lake or Stormwater Pond



Principal building
 

30

 

7

 

10

 

40

 

§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District;
§ 154.169, Wetlands



Parking
 

10

 

7

 

10

 

20



Driveway
 

10

 

7

 

10

 

20



Accessory building
 

30

 

7

 

5

 

40




 



Table 6-4:  Minimum Lot Dimensions, I-1 District



 


Feature

 

Minimum



Area
 

40,000 s.f.



Width
 

150




 



   (F)   Driveway width. The maximum width for any portion of an
industrial driveway in the public road right-of-way shall be 28 feet if two
lanes or 36 feet if three lanes.  Alterative designs may be approved by the
City Engineer.



   (G)   Specific development requirements.



      (1)   Some conditional uses and some permitted uses have
specific requirements that are presented in §§ 154.109 through 154.143,
Specific Development Requirements.



      (2)   Refer to Table 6-1 for the uses that have specific
requirements.



   (H)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements. All buildings are subject to the exterior building
requirements section of the General Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.031  I-2,  MODERATE INDUSTRY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the I-2, Moderate Industry District is
to provide for a full range of industrial uses to be located in areas set
aside specifically for industry, compatible commercial uses and support
services.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 6-1.



      (4)   Some permitted uses have requirements that are presented
in §§ 154.109 through 154.143, Specific Development Requirements. Refer
also to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



   (C)   Conditional principal uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 6-1.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for specific
conditions that must be met for approval of some Conditional Uses. Refer also
to §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General Development Requirements.



   (D)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Refer to Table 6-2.



      (2)   Refer to §§ 154.109 through 154.143 and §§ 154.148
through 154.169 for conditions that must be met for approval of certain
accessory uses.



   (E)   Prohibited uses.



      (1)   Distillation of bone, coal, tar, petroleum, grain or
wood;



      (2)   Manufacturing or bulk storage of explosives;



      (3)   Fertilizer manufacturing, compost or storage processing
of garbage, offal, dead animals, refuse or rancid fats;



      (4)   Livestock feeding yards, slaughter houses or processing
plants; and



      (5)   Any industry that creates an excessive odor, noise or
air pollution problem.



   (F)   Dimensional requirements.



Table 6-5:  Required Setbacks, I-2 District



 




 

Front

 

Side

 

Rear

 

Corner Side

 

From R District

 

From Alley

 

From Wetland, Lake or Stormwater Pond



Principal building
 

301

 

15

 

15

 

301

 

50

 

15

 
§§ 154.047 - 154.063, Shoreland Overlay District;
§ 154.169, Wetlands


Accessory building
 

30

 

5

 

5

 

30

 

50

 

5



Parking
 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

30

 

5



Driveway
 

Not applicable

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

30

 

5




1   Or the average of existing setbacks of all buildings on the same block
facing the same street, provided that no building is located closer than 20
feet to the front property line. 




 



Table 6-6:  Minimum Lot Dimensions, I-2 District



 


Feature

 

Minimum



Area
 

40,000 s.f.



Width
 

150




 



   (G)   Driveway width. The maximum width for any portion of an
industrial driveway in the public road right-of-way shall be 28 feet if two
lanes or 36 feet if three lanes.  Alterative designs may be approved by the
City Engineer.



   (H)   Specific development requirements.



      (1)   Some conditional uses and some permitted uses have
specific requirements that are presented in §§ 154.109 through 154.143,
Specific Development Requirements.



      (2)   Refer to Table 5-1 for the uses that have specific
requirements.



   (I)   General development requirements. Development requirements
that apply to all uses are presented in §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements.  All buildings are subject to the exterior
building requirements section of the General Development Requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 154.034  PURPOSE.



   The floodplain management regulations are established to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize those losses
caused by the occupancy of flood prone areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
that are not designed to minimize flood damage. Permitted uses in the
Floodplain Management Overlay District shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district, as
listed elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.035  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, move, or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining
a separate permit for each building or structure from the Building Official
or designee.



   (B)   No man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, fences, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, shall
be commenced until a separate permit has been obtained from the Building
Official or designee for each change.



   (C)   No manufactured home shall be placed on improved or unimproved
real estate without first obtaining a separate permit for each mobile home
from the Building Official or designee.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)  Penalty, see § 154.042



§ 154.036  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a permit application
on a form provided by the city. The form must be completed and submitted to
the Building Official or designee with a fee as established by the City
Council before the issuance of a permit shall be considered.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.037  DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator, hereinafter referred to as the
responsible person, is appointed as the person responsible for receiving
applications and examining the plans and specifications for the proposed
construction or development.



   (B)   After reviewing the application, the responsible person may
require any additional measures that are necessary to meet the minimum
requirements of this subchapter.



   (C)   The responsible person shall review proposed development to
assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental
agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including
§ 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. 1334.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.038  REVIEW OF THE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The responsible person shall review all permit applications to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements (including the placement of
manufactured homes) shall be:



   (A)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



   (B)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage;



   (C)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage; and



   (D)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.039  REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   The responsible person shall review subdivision proposals and other
proposed new development to determine whether such proposals will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed
new development is in a flood prone area, any such proposal shall be reviewed
to assure that:



   (A)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage within the flood prone area;



   (B)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and



   (C)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood
hazard.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.040  WATER, SEWAGE AND ON-SITE WASTE DISPOSAL.



   The responsible person shall require within flood prone areas:



   (A)   New and replacement water supply systems to be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;



   (B)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters; and



   (C)   On-site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.041  ANNEXATION AND EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.



   The City of Waseca shall not approve any development located in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA) outside the corporate limits unless such
development or plat is in accordance with the following:



   (A)    A floodplain ordinance legally adopted by the City of Waseca
that meets the minimum federal (44 CFR 60.3), state (Minnesota Regulation
Parts 6120.5000 through 6120.6200), and local requirements for development
within a special flood hazard area.



   (B)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Waseca County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Waseca or that
may be annexed into the City of Waseca are generally identified as such on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated August 19, 1985 prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.042  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates this subchapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than $25 nor more than $200. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.043  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION.



   (A)   This subchapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants or deed restriction.



   (B)   Where this subchapter and other ordinances, easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.044  SEPARABILITY.



   The provisions and sections of this subchapter shall be deemed
separable and the invalidity of any portion of this subchapter shall not
affect the validity of the remainder.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 154.047  PURPOSE.



   The major purpose of the shoreland overlay district is to control the
density and location of developments in the shorelands of the public waters
of the city in order to preserve the water quality and the natural
characteristics of the shorelands in the city.  This subchapter was adopted
pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in M.S. Ch. 103G, as it
may be amended from time to time, Minn. Rules Parts 6120.2500 through
6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Ch. 462,
as it may be amended from time to time.  The shoreland district shall
include all lands within the designated shoreland line as shown on the
official zoning map amended and approved by the City Council for the city and
the Department of Natural Resources on April 20, 2004, by Ordinance 832 and
as revised on October 5, 2004 by Ordinance 858.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.048  INCLUDED WATER BODIES.



   These regulations will apply to all lakes classified by the Department
of Natural Resources, as follows:



   (A)   Clear Lake, general development classification, identification
number 81-14; and



   (B)   Loon Lake, general development classification, identification
number 81-15; and



   (C)   Gaiter Lake, natural environment classification,
identification number 81-18.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.049  PERMITTED USES.



   All permitted uses allowed in and regulated by the applicable zoning
districts underlying this district as indicated on that official map of the
city.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.050  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   All conditional uses and applicable attached conditions
allowed in and regulated by the applicable zoning districts underlying this
district as indicated on the official zoning map of the city, with the
exception that planned unit developments (PUDs) shall not be allowed in the
R-1 district when it is underlying this district.



   (B)   Water-oriented accessory structures, provided they are not
used for habitation and do not contain sanitary facilities.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.051  VARIANCES.



   Variances may only be granted in accordance with the legal standards
described in M.S. § 462.357. They may not circumvent the general purposes
and intent of the official controls. No variance may be granted that would
allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject
property is located. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of variances
to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties and the public
interest. In considering variance requests, boards of adjustment must also
consider whether existing sewage treatment systems on the properties need
upgrading before additional development is approved.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.052  LAND USE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Land use districts adopted by the city, and the allowable land
uses therein for the shoreland overlay zoning district, shall be properly
delineated on the official zoning map for the shorelands of this community.



   (B)   These land use districts are in conformance with the criteria
specified in Minn. Rules Part 6120.3200 (3).



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.053  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following general standards shall be followed in all
shoreland districts:



      (1)   When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands,
and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
storm water runoff before discharge to public waters.



      (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner
that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be
stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used
to retain sediment on the site.



      (3)   When development density, topographic features, and soil
and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm water
runoff using natural features and vegetations, various types of constructed
facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and
human-made materials and facilities.



   (B)   The following specific standards and setback requirements
shall be followed in all shoreland districts.



      (1)   Lot area and width shall be the same as standards of
underlying districts; however, residential lot areas (in square feet) and
widths (in feet) shall meet the following minimum standards:



Table 8-1:  General Development Lake



 




 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots




Development Type

 

Area (Feet)

 

Width (Feet)

 

Area (Feet)

 

Width (Feet)





Single, sewered
 

15,000

 

75

 

10,000

 

75



Duplex, sewered
 

26,000

 

135

 

17,500

 

135



Triplex, sewered
 

38,000

 

195

 

25,000

 

190



Quad, sewered
 

49,000

 

255

 

32,500

 

245



Single, unsewered
 

20,000

 

100

 

40,000

 

150



Duplex, unsewered
 

40,000

 

180

 

80,000

 

265



Triplex, unsewered
 

60,000

 

260

 

120,000

 

375



Quad, unsewered
 

80,000

 

340

 

160,000

 

490





 



Table 8-2:  Natural Environment Lake



 




 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots




Development Type

 

Area (Feet)

 

Width (Feet)

 

Area (Feet)

 

Width (Feet)





Single, sewered
 

40,000

 

125

 

20,000

 

125



Duplex, sewered
 

70,000

 

225

 

35,000

 

220



Triplex, sewered
 

100,000

 

325

 

52,000

 

315



Quad, sewered
 

130,000

 

425

 

65,000

 

410



Single, unsewered
 

80,000

 

200

 

80,000

 

200



Duplex, unsewered
 

120,000

 

300

 

160,000

 

400



Triplex, unsewered
 

160,000

 

400

 

240,000

 

600



Quad, unsewered
 

200,000

 

500

 

320,000

 

800





 



      (2)   Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities
exceeding those in this table can only be allowed if designed and approved as
residential planned unit developments under §§ 154.085 through 154.092. 
Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters can be used to
meet lot area standards, and lot width standards must be met at both the
ordinary high water level and at the building line.  The sewered lot area
dimensions can only be used if publicly owned sewer system service is
available to the property.



      (3)   On natural environment lakes, subdivisions of duplexes,
triplexes, and quads must also meet the following standards:



         (a)   Each building must be set back at least 200 feet
from the ordinary high water level;



         (b)   Each building must have common sewage treatment
and water systems that serve all dwelling units in the building;



         (c)   Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be
centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and



         (d)   No more than 25% of a lake’s shoreline can be in
duplex, triplex, or quad developments.



      (4)   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25%
of the lot area.



      (5)   One guest cottage may be allowed on lots meeting or
exceeding the duplex lot area and width dimensions presented above, provided
that the lot exceeds the minimum lot dimensions of a duplex lot and that both
the principal building and guest cottage are located within the smallest
duplex-sized lot that could be created; the cottage must not cover more than
700 square feet of land surface and must not exceed 15 feet in height; and,
the cottage must be located or designed to reduce its visibility as viewed
from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks or color, assuming summer leaf-on conditions.



      (6)   Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or
as recreation areas for use by owners of nonriparian lots within subdivisions
are permissible, subject to the following minimum standards:



         (a)   Lots must meet the width and size requirements for
residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access
lots; except, riparian lots located across the street from non- riparian lots
owned by the same party or parties will be allowed controlled access to the
public waters;



         (b)   If docking, mooring or over-water storage of more
than six watercraft is to be conducted at a controlled access lot, then the
width of the lot shall be increased by 25% for each watercraft beyond six;



         (c)   Lots must be jointly owned by all purchasers of
lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of non-riparian lots in the
subdivision who are provided riparian access rights on the access lot; and



         (d)   Covenants or other equally effective legal
instruments must be developed that specify that lot owners have authority to
use the access lot and what activities are allowed.  The activities may
include watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring or
docking.  They must also include other outdoor recreational activities that
do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or
the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners, such as
swimming, sunbathing or picnicking.  The covenants must limit the total
number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total number of watercraft
allowed to be continuously moored, docked or stored over water, and must
require centralization of all common facilities and activities in the most
suitable locations on the lot to minimize topographic and vegetation
alterations.  They must also require all parking areas, storage buildings
and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as much as
practical from view from public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



      (7)   Setback of structures from the ordinary high water level:



         (a)   General development lakes, sewered - 50 feet.



         (b)   Natural environment lakes, sewered - 150 feet.



         (c)   General development lakes, unsewered - 75 feet.



         (d)   Natural environment lakes, unsewered - 150 feet.



         (e)   Sewage treatment system - 75 feet.



      (8)   When more than one setback applies to a site, structures
and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks.  Where structures exist
on abutting lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure
setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the adjoining
setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed building
site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.



      (9)   Additional structure setbacks:



         (a)   From top of bluff - 30 feet.



         (b)   From unplatted cemetery - 50 feet.



         (c)   From federal, state or county highway right-of-way
line - 50 feet.



         (d)   From town road or city street right-of-way line -
20 feet.



      (10)   Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways
and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.



      (11)   Commercial, industrial, public and semi-public uses
without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without
public waters frontage, or if located on lots or parcels with public waters
frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level
setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation
or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



      (12)   The lowest floor must be placed at least three feet
above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high
water level, whichever is higher, except as otherwise provided in this
section.



         (a)   Water-oriented structures may have the lowest
floor placed lower than the elevation specified herein if the structure is
constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation, electrical and
mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation, and if long duration
flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and
wind-driven waves and debris.



         (b)   On lots in the Pondview of Waseca subdivision, the
lowest floor must be placed at least one foot above the highest known water
level of 1,129.38 feet.



      (13)   Each lot may have one water-oriented accessory
structure set back a minimum of ten feet from the ordinary high water level,
provided that:



         (a)   The structure not exceed ten feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails;



         (b)   The structure not occupy an area greater than 250
square feet, with the exception of structures used solely for watercraft
storage, which may not occupy an area greater than 400 square feet nor be
more than 20 feet wide;



         (c)   Detached decks not exceed eight feet above grade
at any point;



         (d)   The structure must be treated to reduce visibility
from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;



         (e)   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails,
but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area; and



         (f)   The structure or facility must not be designed or
used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage
treatment facilities.



      (14)   Stairways, lifts and landings.



         (a)   Residential lots:



            1.   Maximum width of stairways and lifts, four
feet.



            2.   Maximum area, landings and lifts, 32 square
feet.



         (b)   All lots.



            1.   No canopies or roofs over stairways, lifts
and landings;



            2.   Stairways, lifts and landings must be located
in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from public
water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.



            3.   Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility
paths for physically handicapped persons are allowed for achieving access to
shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of
division (14)(a) above are complied with in addition to the requirements of
Minn. Regulations Ch. 1340.



      (15)   No structure may be placed on a significant historic
site in a manner that affects the value of the site unless adequate
information about the site has been removed and documented in a public
repository.



      (16)   The Zoning Administrator must evaluate possible soil
erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing
a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways,
structures or other improvements on steep slopes.  When determined
necessary, conditions must be attached to permits to prevent erosion and to
preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles and other
facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer,
leaf-on vegetation.



      (17)   All structures in residential districts, except
churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, must not exceed 25 feet
in height.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.054  SHORELAND ALTERATIONS.



   (A)   Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to
prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland
aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish
and wildlife habitat.



   (B)   Use of fertilizer and pesticides in the Shoreland Overlay
District must be done in such a way as to minimize runoff into the shore
impact zone or public water by the use of earth, vegetation, or both.



   (C)   Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural
and forest management uses as regulated in §§ 154.058 and 154.059
respectively, is allowed subject to the following standards:



      (1)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff
impact zones and on steep slopes is prohibited.  Intensive vegetation
clearing outside of these areas is permitted if the activity is consistent
with the forest management standards in § 154.059.



      (2)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes,
limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning and trimming of
trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling
site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic
areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and watercraft access
areas and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities,
provided that:



         (a)   The screening of structures, vehicles or other
facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is
not substantially reduced; and



         (b)   The above provisions are not applicable to the
removal of trees, limbs or branches that are dead, diseased or pose safety
hazards.



   (D)   When grading and filling or excavations are authorized under a
validly issued construction permit, separate issuance of a grading and
filling permit is not required.  If grading, filling or excavation
activities will not involve a construction permit, then a grading and filling
permit will be required for:



      (1)   The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on
steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and



      (2)   The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material
outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.



   (E)   The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to
during the reviews of requests for construction permits, grading and filling
permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivisions:



      (1)   Evaluation of a wetland, prior to issuance of a grading
and filling permit, to determine how extensively the proposed activity would
affect the following functional qualities of the wetland:



         (a)   Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;



         (b)   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce
flood damage;



         (c)   Fish and wildlife habitat;



         (d)   Recreational use;



         (e)   Shoreline or bank stabilization; and



         (f)   Noteworthiness, including qualities such as
historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals or
others;



      (2)   Determination of whether the wetland alteration proposed
requires permits, reviews or approvals by other local, state or federal
agencies such as watershed districts, the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources or the United States Army Corps of Engineers;



      (3)   Design and implementation of alterations so as to ensure
that only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time
possible; (Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for
temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be
established as soon as possible.)



      (4)   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments
before they reach any surface water, stabilizing altered areas to acceptable
erosion control standards consistent with guidelines of the Waseca County
Soil and Water Conservation District and the United States Soil Conservation
Service;



      (5)   Review of plans to place fill or excavated material on
steep slopes by qualified professionals to ensure continued slope stability,
and that slopes created are less than 30%;



      (6)   Placement of fill or excavated material so as not to
create an unstable slope;



      (7)   No placement of fill or excavated material in bluff
impact zones;



      (8)   Authorization by the commissioner for any alterations
below the ordinary high water level of public waters, under M.S. Chapter
103G, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (9)   Topography alterations permitted only if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect
adjacent or nearby properties; and



      (10)   Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated
grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket permitted if the
finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical,
the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high
water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level
does not exceed three feet.



   (F)   Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a
public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons and harbors, must be
controlled by local shoreland controls.  Permission for excavations may be
given only after the commissioner has approved the proposed connection to
public waters.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.055  PLACEMENT AND DESIGN OF ROADS, DRIVEWAYS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Roads, driveways and parking areas must be designed to take
advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening
from view from public waters.



   (B)   Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that
all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and
control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical
guides of the Waseca County Soil and Water Conservation District or other
applicable technical materials.



   (C)   Vegetation alteration necessary for construction of roads and
parking areas are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards contained
in § 154.054.



   (D)   Roads, driveways and parking areas must meet structure
setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones when
other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist.  If no
alternatives exist, they may be placed in these areas and must be designed to
minimize adverse impacts.



   (E)   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening, erosion control and grading and filling conditions
of § 154.054 are met.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.056  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   Standards contained in § 154.156 shall be adhered to.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.057  STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND PUBLIC USES.



   (A)   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public
or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public
waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters.



   (B)   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or
parcels without public waters frontage, or if located on lots or parcels with
public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary
high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the
water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer leaf-on conditions.



   (C)   Those with water-oriented needs must meet the following
standards:



      (1)   The uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and
vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;



      (2)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for
patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid
obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the
need; and



      (3)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may
use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to
the following standards:



         (a)   No advertising signs or supporting facilities for
the signs shall be placed in or upon public water;



         (b)   Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the
shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary
to convey needed information.  They must only convey the location and name
of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available. 
The signs must not contain other detailed information such as product brands
and prices, must not be located higher than ten feet above the ground, and
must not exceed 32 square feet in size.  If illuminated, lights must be
shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters; and



         (c)   Other outside lighting may be located within the
shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate
potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent
direct illumination out across public waters.  This does not preclude use of
navigational lights.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.058  AGRICULTURAL USE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, sod farming and wild crop harvesting may be permitted uses if
steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent
vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource
Management Systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the
Waseca County Soil and Water Conservation District or the United States Soil
Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency.  The
shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal
to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.



   (B)   Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are
located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water level or within a bluff
impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing
ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact zones.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.059  FOREST MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.



   Harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be conducted
consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution
Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management
“Best Management Practices in Minnesota”.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.060  WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes
shall conform to Minnesota Department of Health and Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency standards for water quality.



   (B)   Private wells must be located, constructed, maintained and
sealed in accordance with or in a more thorough manner than the Water Well
Construction Code of the Minnesota Department of Health.



   (C)   Municipal water supply facilities shall be used where
available.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.061  SEWAGE TREATMENT.



   (A)   Municipal sewer systems shall be used where available.



   (B)   All private sewage and other sanitary waste disposal systems
shall conform to applicable standards, criteria, rules and regulations of
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, as set forth in the document titled,
“Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards, Ch. 7080,” is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.



   (C)   On-site sewage treatment systems shall be set back at least 75
feet from the ordinary high water level and four feet above highest known
ground water table, bedrock or impervious soil conditions.



   (D)   Sewage treatment systems that are now inconsistent with the
design criteria identified in division (B) above shall be reconstructed
whenever a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on,
or use of, the property.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.062  ALTERATIONS OF BEDS OF PUBLIC WATERS.



   Any work which will change or diminish the course, current or cross
section of a public water shall be approved by the Commissioner before the
work is begun.  This includes construction of channels and ditches,
lagooning, dredging of lakes or stream bottom for removal of muck, silt or
weeds and filling in the lake or stream bed.  Approval shall be construed to
mean the issuance by the Commissioner of a permit under the procedures of
M.S. Chapter 103F, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.063  NOTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider
variances, amendments, subdivisions/ plats or conditional uses under local
shoreland management controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the
Commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked at least ten days
before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed
subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/plat.



   (B)   A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and
final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s
designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



HERITAGE PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 154.066  PURPOSE.



   The Heritage Preservation Overlay District is established to promote
the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public
through the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of properties of
historic, architectural, and cultural significance.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.067  APPLICATION OF DISTRICT PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this section shall apply to those properties
identified on the official zoning map, incorporated herein by reference, as
HP, Heritage Preservation Overlay districts/sites. Such  shall in no way
affect the established allowable uses and requirements set forth elsewhere in
this subchapter for the underlying zoning district.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.068  HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   The Heritage Preservation Commission, as established in Chapter 155 of
this Code of Ordinances shall have such powers and duties as shall be
provided in this section with respect to the establishment and regulation of
properties within the Heritage Preservation District.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.069  DESIGNATION OF HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITES.



   Heritage preservation sites shall be designated as follows:



   (A)   Criteria. The Commission shall recommend to the City Council
areas, buildings, districts, or objects to be designated heritage
preservation sites. In considering the designation of heritage preservation
sites, the Commission shall apply the following criteria:



      (1)   The character, interest, or value as part of the
development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city, state or
county;



      (2)   The location as a site of a significant historic event;



      (3)   The identification with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the city’s culture and development;



      (4)   The embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural style, period, or treatment;



      (5)   The identification as work of an architect or master
builder whose individual work has influenced the city’s development;



      (6)   The embodiment of elements of architectural design,
detail, materials, or craftsmanship, which represent a significant
architectural innovation; and



      (7)   The unique location or singular physical characteristic
representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood,
community or the city.



   (B)   Findings and recommendations. The Commission shall determine
if the proposed heritage preservation site is eligible for heritage
preservation as determined by the criteria specified in this section.



   (C)   Communications with Minnesota Historical Society. A copy of
the Commission’s proposed designation of a heritage preservation site,
including boundaries, and a program for the preservation of a heritage
preservation site shall be sent to the Minnesota Historical Society/State
Preservation Office.



   (D)   Public hearings. Prior to the Commission recommending to the
City Council any building, district or object for designation as a heritage
preservation site, the Commission shall hold a public hearing and seek the
recommendations of concerned citizens. Prior to the hearing, the Commission
shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation, notice of
the hearing at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and notice of
the hearing shall be sent to all owners of the property proposed to be
designated a heritage preservation site.



   (E)   City Council designation. The City Council, upon request of
the Commission may by ordinance designate a heritage preservation site and
make appropriate adjustments to the zoning map. Upon the approval of the
heritage preservation site, the Commission shall transmit to the City Council
its recommendation for the proposed program for the heritage preservation
site.



   (F)   Planning Commission notification. The City Council shall
advise the City Planning Commission of the proposed designation of a heritage
preservation district, including boundaries, and a program for the
preservation of a heritage preservation district. Upon City Council approval,
the Planning Commission will be notified of the change in the status of the
property, and the Council shall direct the Zoning Administrator to amend the
map.



   (G)   Gifts, donations and negotiations. The Commission may
recommend to the City Council that certain property eligible for designation
as a heritage preservation site be acquired by gift, donation, or
negotiation. The Commission may recommend that the city accept gifts and
contributions made to the city. The city staff may assist in preparing
applications for grant funds for heritage preservation.



   (H)   State and National Register of Historic Places. Any property
designated to the State Register of Historic Places or the National Register
of Historic Places shall automatically become designated a local historic
site or district. Upon designation, the Heritage Preservation Commission
shall notify the Planning Commission of the designation and recommend that
the official zoning map be amended to reflect the change in status of the
property or properties.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.070  REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Site alteration permit. A site alteration permit shall be
required for any alteration of any designated heritage preservation site. 
The Commission shall review the city’s issuance of a site alteration permit
in a heritage preservation site in the City of Waseca.  In addition to any
other specifics the Zoning Administrator may require, the site alteration
permit application shall be accompanied by detailed plans including a
property plan, building elevations and design details and materials as
necessary to evaluate the request.  The Commission may ask for additional
plans and details they feel necessary to evaluate the permit. Besides the
site alteration permit, regular city permits shall be required.  Once the
Commission has reviewed the permits according to division (F) of this
section, recommendation for approval or disapproval will be made to the City
Council. Recommendation for approval or disapproval of the site alteration
permit by the City Council will be accompanied with specific reasons/findings
why the alterations meet or do not meet the city’s approved design
guidelines and standards for reasonable rehabilitation related to the
particular building or preservation site. The following are subject to a site
alteration permit:



      (1)   Painting, changes to architectural details and other
related exterior alterations;



      (2)   Additions or deletion of awnings, shutters, canopies,
and similar appurtenances;



      (3)   Application or use of exterior materials of a different
kind, type, color, or texture than those already in use which will
substantially cover one or more sides of the structure. This provision
applies to roofing as well as siding;



      (4)   Signs;



      (5)   Construction of a new building or auxiliary structure;



      (6)   Any addition to or alteration of an existing structure,
which increases the square footage in the structure or otherwise alters its
size, height, contour, or outline;



      (7)   Change or alteration of a structure’s architectural
style;



      (8)   Alteration of a roofline; and



      (9)   Demolition in whole or in part. This does not apply to
structures required to be demolished in accordance with M.S. Chapter 463.



   (B)   City actions. The Commission shall review and make
recommendations to the City Council concerning city activity that could
change the nature or appearance of a heritage preservation site.



   (C)   Preservation program. All decisions of the Commission with
respect to this section shall be in accordance with the approved program for
the rehabilitation of each heritage preservation site.  The Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties shall be used as
a guide in the evaluation of applications for site alteration permits as
follows:



      (1)   A property will be used as it was historically or be
given a new use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials,
features, spaces, and spatial relationships;



      (2)   The historic character of a property will be retained
and preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alterations of
features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will
be avoided;



      (3)   Each property will be recognized as a physical record of
its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other
historic properties, will not be undertaken;



      (4)   Changes to a property that have acquired historic
significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved;



      (5)   Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and
construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property will be preserved;



      (6)   Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather
than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color,
texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of historic features
will be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence;



      (7)   Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to
historic materials will not be used;



      (8)   Archeological resources will be protected and preserved
in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be
undertaken;



      (9)   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new
construction will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial
relationships that characterize the property. The new work will be
differentiated from the old and will be compatible with the historic
materials, features, size, scale, and proportion, and massing to protect the
integrity of the property and its environment; and



      (10)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction
will be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment
would be unimpaired.



   (D)   Commission findings. Before  making recommendation regarding
permit or application required under division (A) of this section, the
Commission shall make findings based on the program for preservation of the
heritage preservation site in regard to the following:



      (1)   In the case of a proposed alteration or addition to
existing buildings, the Commission shall make written findings on how the
structure may be architecturally or historically affected. To be considered
are the existing exterior appearances, building height, building width,
depth, or other dimensions, roof style, type of building materials,
ornamentation, paving, and setback;



      (2)   In the case of the proposed demolition of a building
prior to the approval of demolition, the Commission shall make written
findings on the following:



         (a)   Architectural and historic merit of the building;



         (b)   The effect on surrounding buildings;



         (c)   The effect on any new proposed construction on the
remainder of the building (in case of partial demolition) and on surrounding
buildings; and



         (d)   The economic value or usefulness of the building
as it now exists, or if altered or modified, in comparison with the value or
usefulness of any proposed structures designated to replace the present
building or buildings; and



      (3)   In the case of a proposed new building, the Commission
shall make written findings on how the building will in itself, or by reason
of its location on the property, materially affect the architectural or
historic value of buildings on adjacent sites or in the immediate vicinity
within the heritage preservation site.



   (E)   City Council decision. The Council shall consider the
request(s) in light of the criteria listed above and render a decision.  In
approving an application, the Council may impose conditions on the approval
as are deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with the approval and to
protect adjacent properties.  Denial of any request shall be accompanied by
findings of fact as to how the request did not meet one or more of the review
criteria.  (Ord. 974, passed 11-1-11; Am. Ord. 1040, passed 1-15-16)



AIRPORT ZONING



§ 154.073  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   The Waseca City-Waseca County Joint Airport Zoning Board, created and
established by joint action of the Common Council of the City and the Board
of County Commissioners of the County pursuant to the provisions and
authority of M.S. § 360.063, as it may be amended from time to time, hereby
finds and declares that:



   (A)   An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of
the Waseca Municipal Airport, and property or occupants of land in its
vicinity, and also if of the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size of
the area available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus
tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Waseca Municipal Airport and
the public investment therein.



   (B)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Waseca Municipal Airport.



   (C)   For the protection of the public health, safety, order,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare, and for the promotion of the
most appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or
establishment of airport hazards.



   (D)   The prevention of these airport hazards should be
accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police
power without compensation.



   (E)   The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport
hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation or marking and
lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political
subdivisions may raise and expend public funds.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.074  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as “Waseca Municipal Airport Zoning
Chapter”.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.075  AIRSPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONING.



   (A)   Airspace zones. In order to carry out the purposes of this
chapter, the following airspace zones are hereby established:  primary zone,
horizontal zone, conical zone, approach zone and transitional zone and whose
locations and dimensions are as follows:



      (1)   Primary zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary primary surface longitudinally centered on a runway and extending
200 feet beyond each end of the runways.  The elevation of any point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway centerline.  The width of the primary surface is 500 feet for all
runways.



      (2)   Horizontal zone. All that land which lies directly under
an imaginary horizontal surface 100 feet above the established airport
elevation, or a height of 1,226 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of
which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of
each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent
arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.  The radius of each arc is 10,000 feet
for all runways.



      (3)   Conical zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary conical surface extending upward and outward for the periphery of
the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet.



      (4)   Approach zone. All that land which lies directly under
an imaginary approach surface longitudinally centered on the extended
centerline at each end of all runways.  The inner edge of the approach
surface is at the same width and elevation as, and coincides with, the
primary surface.  The approach surface inclines upward and outward at a
slope of 40 to 1, expanding uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet, and then continuing at the same rate of
divergence to the periphery of the conical surface.



      (5)   Transitional zone. All that land which lies directly
under an imaginary transitional surface extending upward and outward at right
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope
of 7 to 1 from the sides of the primary surfaces and from the sides of the
approach surfaces until they intersect the horizontal surface or the conical
surface.



   (B)   Height restriction. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, and except as necessary and incidental to airport operations, no
structure or tree shall be constructed, altered or allowed to grow in any
airspace zone created division (A) above so as to project above any of the
imaginary airspace surfaces described in division (A) above.  Where an area
is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive
limitations shall prevail.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.076  LAND USE SAFETY ZONING.



   (A)   Safety zone boundaries.  In order to carry out the purpose of
this chapter, there are hereby created and established the following safety
zone boundaries:



      (1)   Safety Zone A. All that land in the approach zones of
the runways which is located within a horizontal distance of 2,600 feet from
each end of the primary zones.



      (2)   Safety Zone B. All that land in the approach zones of
the runways which is located within a horizontal distance of 3,900 feet from
each end of the primary zones.



      (3)   Safety Zone C. All that land under any of the defined
surfaces, within the perimeter of the horizontal zone, and located within the
existing boundaries of the city and which is not in zones A or B.



      (4)   Safety Zone D. All that land which is enclosed within
the perimeter of the horizontal zone and which is not included in Zone A,
Zone B or Zone C.



   (B)   Use restrictions.



      (1)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth herein, no use shall be made of any load in any of the safety zones
defined in division (A) above which creates or causes interference with the
operations of radio or electronic facilities on the airport or in aircraft or
with radio or electronic communications between the airport and aircraft,
which are operated in accordance with the Federal Communications Commission
Rules and Regulations Part 87, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and other lights, results in glare in eyes of pilots
using the airport, or otherwise endangers the landing, taking off or
maneuvering of aircraft.



      (2)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in § 154.075(B), and to the general restrictions contained in division
(B)(1) above, areas designated as Zone A shall contain no buildings or
temporary structures and shall be restricted to those uses which will not
create, attract or bring together as assembly of persons thereon.  Permitted
uses may include agriculture, light outdoor recreation (non-spectator),
cemeteries and auto parking.



      (3)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in § 154.075(B), and to the general restrictions contained in division
(B)(1) above, areas designated as Zone B shall be used for the following
purposes only:



         (a)   For agricultural and residential purposes,
provided there shall not be more than one single-family dwelling per
three-acre tract of land;



         (b)   Any commercial or industrial use which meets the
following minimum standards:



            1.   Each single commercial or industrial use
shall not create, attract or bring together a site populations that would
exceed 15 times that of the site acreage.



            2.   Each single commercial or industrial site
shall be of a size not less than three acres.



            3.   Each single commercial or industrial site
shall contain no dwellings and shall contain no more than one building per
three-acre tract of land.



            4.   The maximum ground area to be covered by a
single commercial or industrial building shall not exceed the following
minimum ratios with respect to the building site area:



 

At Least (Acres)
 
But Less Than (Acres)
 
Ratio of Site Area to First Building Area
 
First Floor Building Area (Square Feet)
 
Max. Population (15 Persons/A)



3

 

4

 

12:1

 

10,900

 

45




4

 

6

 

10:1

 

17,400

 

60




6

 

10

 

8:1

 

32,600

 

90




10

 

20

 

6:1

 

72,500

 

150




20

 

and up

 

4:1

 

218,000

 

300




 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



         (c)   The following uses are specifically prohibited in
Zone B; churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums, hotels and motels,
trailer courts, camp grounds and other places of public or semi-public
assembly.



      (4)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in§ 154.075(B), and to the general restriction contained in division
(B)(1) above, the land in zone shall be subject to Code Chapter 154.



      (5)   Zone D is subject to only the height restrictions set
forth in § 154.075(B), and to the general restrictions contained in division
(B)(1) above.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.077  ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The several zones herein established are shown on the airport
zoning map consisting of three sheets, prepared by Orlin A. Ortloff, Director
of Engineering, and dated January 9, 1974, attached hereto and made a part
hereof, which map, together with the amendments thereto as may from time to
time be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone
boundaries and other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby
adopted as part of this chapter.



   (B)   Non-conforming uses.



      (1)   The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of
any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective
date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction
or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two years thereof.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.078  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Except as specifically provided in divisions
(A)(2)(a) and (b) below, no material change shall be made in the use of land
and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, platted or otherwise
established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have
been applied for and granted by the Zoning Administrator, hereinafter
provided for.



      (2)   Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose
for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it
to conform to the regulations herein prescribed.  If the determination is in
the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.



         (a)   However, a permit for a tree or structure of less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the
horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond
a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runways except when
the tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective
zone.



         (b)   Nothing contained in this foregoing exception
shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction,
alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height
limitations established by this chapter, as set forth in § 153.04.



   (B)   Before any existing use or structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or repaired, or rebuilt within any zone established
herein, a permit must be secured authorizing the replacement, change or
repair.  No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or
creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or
tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the
effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto, or than it is when
the application for a permit is made.  Except as indicated, all applications
for a permit shall be granted.



   (C)   Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that a
nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80% torn
down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that
would allow the structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.  A nonconforming use
structure or tree shall be determined to have been abandoned when its use has
been discontinued for more than six consecutive months, or where it has been
abandoned or more than 80% thereof has either been torn down, become unusable
by physical deterioration or decay, and the conditions shall have existed for
more than six consecutive months. Whether application is made for a permit
under this section or not, the Zoning Administrator may order the owner of
the abandoned or partially destroyed nonconforming structure, at their own
expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct or equip the same in the manner
necessary to conform to the provisions of this chapter.  In the event the
owner of the nonconforming structure shall neglect or refuse to comply with
such order for ten days after receipt of written notice of the order, the
Zoning Administrator may, by appropriate legal action, proceed to have the
abandoned or partially destroyed nonconforming structure lowered, removed,
reconstructed or equipped and assess the cost and expense thereof against the
land on which the structure is or was located.  Unless an assessment is paid
within 90 days from the service of notice thereof on the owner of the land,
the sum shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date the
cost and expense is incurred until paid, and shall be collected in the same
manner as are general taxes.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.079  VARIANCES.



   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or permit the growth of any tree, or use their property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment, hereinafter provided for, for a variance from the regulations. 
The variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not be contrary
to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with
the spirit of this chapter; provided any variance so allowed may be subject
to any reasonable conditions that the Board of Adjustment may deem necessary
to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.080  HAZARD MARKINGS AND LIGHTINGS.



   (A)   The owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of the
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary the Zoning Administrator to
indicate the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the
presence of the airport hazards.  The markers and lights shall be installed,
operated and maintained at the expense of the city.



   (B)   Any permit or variance granted by the Zoning Administrator or
Board of Adjustment as the case may be, may, if the action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the
circumstances, so condition the permit or variance as to require the owner of
the structure or tree in question at his or her own expense, to install,
operate and maintain thereon the markers and lights as may be necessary to
indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.081  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   It shall be the duty of the Waseca County Planning and Zoning
Administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. 
Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Waseca County
Planning and Zoning Administrator upon a form furnished by him or her. 
Permit applications shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him
or her.  Variance applications shall be forthwith transmitted by the Waseca
County Planning and Zoning Administrator for action by the Board of
Adjustment hereinafter provided for.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.082  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members
appointed by the Waseca City-Waseca County Joint Airport Zoning Board, and
each shall serve for a term of three years and until his/her successor is
duly appointed and qualified.  Of the members first appointed, one shall be
appointed for a term of one year, two for a term of two years, and two for a
term of three years.  Upon their appointment, the members shall select a
chairperson to act at the pleasure of the Board.  Members shall be removable
by the Joint Airport Zoning Board for cause, upon written charges, after a
public hearing.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise the following
powers:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement
of this chapter;



      (2)   To hear and decide exceptions to the terms of this
chapter upon which the Board of Adjustments under the regulations may be
required to pass; and



      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance
and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this chapter.  Meetings of
the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
other times as the Board of Adjustments may determine.  The Chairperson, or
in his or her absence the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses.  All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall
be public.  The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing
to vote, indicating the fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office
of the Zoning Administrator and shall be a public record.



      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of
fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its
legal conclusions from the facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any
order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect any variation in this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 154.085  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD) is
established as a means to facilitate the development of land in an integrated
and innovative fashion, to allow for flexibility in site design, and to
result in a better quality of development than would otherwise be possible,
while being sensitive to environmental, cultural, and economic
considerations. 



   (B)   Rezoning to Planned Unit Development shall not be used merely
to circumvent the normal requirements of the zoning ordinance.  A Planned
Unit Development must provide net demonstrable benefits not otherwise
available to the community. 



   (C)   Rezoning to Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall
result in the creation of an overlay to the base zoning district with
specific requirements and standards that are unique to the planned
development.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.086  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   A  Planned Unit Development shall be subject to all applicable
standards, procedures, and regulations of this chapter and the zoning
district in which it is located, including applicable site plan review
standards contained in §§ 154.178 through 154.181, Application Reviews and
Procedures, Site Plan Review and Approval, for the individual uses within the
development, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in the approved
PUD.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.087  PLATTING REQUIREMENT.



   All land proposed for Planned Unit Development shall be platted or
replatted into one or more lots, in compliance with the applicable
requirements of Chapter 151, Subdivision Regulations. For the purposes of
this chapter, the development plan shall include the necessary information to
serve as a preliminary plat for the development. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.088  MINIMUM PROJECT SIZE.



   There shall be no minimum size limitation for a Planned Unit
Development.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.089  PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT.



   Phasing of the Planned Unit Development shall be permitted, provided
that each individual phase shall be designed and developed to exist as an
independent unit not reliant on subsequent phases to be a satisfactory
addition to the city. Additionally, the construction and provision of all
common open space and site amenities that are shown on the development plan
must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling units, if
any.  Any violation of this provision shall authorize the City Council to
hold a public hearing to review compliance of the Planned Unit Development.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.090  ADMINISTRATION.



   The regulations of the Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall
be administered as described in §§ 154.173 through 154.191, Application
Reviews and Procedures.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.091  PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
OVERLAY DISTRICT .



   (A)   Summary tables of principal, conditional or accessory land
uses. All principal, conditional and accessory uses allowed in the Planned
Unit Development District are summarized in Table 11-1. 



   (B)   Permitted principal or accessory land uses. Any use allowed in
the underlying zoning district where the Planned Unit Development is proposed
may be included as part of a PUD development plan.  In addition, other uses
of land may be permitted within the Planned Unit Development upon approval by
the City Council.  The development plan shall identify all proposed land
uses and those uses shall become permitted uses with approval of the
development plan.



   (C)   Specific development requirements. Specific development
requirements will be negotiated through the Planned Unit Development process
described in §§ 154.173 through 154.191, Application Reviews and Procedures.



   (D)   General development requirements. Development of land shall
conform to the requirements for parking and traffic circulation, landscape
design, fencing, lighting, and other considerations as specified in §
154.159, Landscaping, Screening and Fences, or as determined through the PUD
process. Signs are regulated by Chapter 152 of the City Code.



   (E)   Dimensional requirements in residential districts. Dimensional
requirements for the PUD District will be as specified in the underlying
zoning district or as modified by the City Council through the PUD process.



Table 11-1:  Summary of the Principal, Conditional and Accessory Land Uses
Permitted in the Planned Unit Development District



   P:  Permitted      C:  Conditional      --:  Not allowed



 


Land Uses

 



 

Specific Development Requirements



Principal, conditional and accessory uses permitted in the R-1 through R-4
Districts
 

P

 

§§ 154.109-154.143



Principal, conditional and accessory uses permitted in the B-1 through B-4
Districts
 

P

 

§§ 154.109-154.143



Principal, conditional and accessory uses permitted in the I-1 and I-2
Districts
 

P

 

§§ 154.109-154.143




 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.092  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN THE PUD OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   As part of Planned Unit Development approval, the City Council is
authorized to approve exceptions to the zoning controls applicable to the
zoning district in which the Planned Unit Development is located. Such
exceptions shall only be granted when it is clearly warranted to achieve the
objectives of the City of Waseca Comprehensive Plan and will result in a
development than is not otherwise possible under other zoning districts. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to provide a property owner any
right to compel the city to grant such exceptions.



   (A)   Placement of structures. More than one principal building may
be placed on a platted lot in a Planned Unit Development.  The appearance
and compatibility of individual buildings to other site elements and to
surrounding development shall be given primary consideration in reviewing and
approving the placement and spacing of structures.



   (B)   Bulk regulations.



      (1)   Building height. The City Council may authorize an
increase in building height for the purpose of promoting project integration
and additional site amenities.



      (2)   Building setbacks. The City Council may authorize a
reduction in or elimination of required yards provided that a landscaped yard
of the minimum width established for the base zoning district or greater is
maintained along the periphery of the PUD.



   (C)   Lot requirements. The City Council may authorize reductions in
the area and width of individual lots within a Planned Unit Development from
that required for the base zoning district, provided that such reductions are
compensated for by an equivalent amount of open space elsewhere in the
Planned Unit Development.  Such open space shall not include areas
designated as public or private streets or required storm ponds.



   (D)   Density bonus. The City Council may authorize up to a 10%
reduction in the minimum lot area per dwelling unit from that required by the
base zoning district for the purpose of promoting an integrated project with
a variety of housing types and additional site amenities, or to accommodate
enhancement and/or preservation of important environmental features through
careful and sensitive placement of buildings and facilities.



   (E)   Open space.



      (1)   For residential Planned Unit Developments, the
Development Plan shall provide public and/or private open space that is a
demonstrable benefit to the larger community and which likely would not have
been possible without the flexibility of this zoning district.



      (2)   The Development Plan must coordinate improvements to
open space areas concurrently with construction of permitted structures and
other required improvements within their respective phase of the Planned Unit
Development.



   (F)   Parking.



      (1)   Parking requirements. Parking requirements for all uses
within the Planned Unit Development shall be as established in §§ 154.148
through 154.169, General Development Requirements, and Parking Requirements,
Off-Street.



      (2)   Private streets. Private streets are not allowed. 
However, private driveways that serve not more than one apartment building or
not more than 12 townhouses are allowed.  Parallel parking is not allowed
along private driveways, unless adequate additional driveway width is
provided.  Private driveways must maintain a permanently and continuously
unobstructed width of 20 feet for access by emergency vehicles.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 154.095  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This section allows for the establishment of certain temporary
uses and structures of limited duration, provided that such uses or
structures do not negatively affect adjacent properties, and provided that
such uses or activities are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time
period. 



   (B)   Temporary uses and structures shall not involve the
construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure.



   (C)   The regulations of this section are not applicable to special
events that are otherwise subject to leases, permits, or other forms of
permission that are duly established between the special event organization
and the city.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.096  TABLE OF ALLOWED TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   Table 12-1 summarizes allowed temporary uses and structures and any
general or specific standards that apply.  Temporary uses or structures not
listed in the table are prohibited.



Table 12-1: Temporary Uses and Structures



 


Temporary Use or Structure

 

Allowable Duration (per site)

 

Permit Required

 

Additional Requirements





Construction dumpster
 
Until issuance of a certificate of occupancy
 
No, unless within ROW
 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Construction trailer
 
Until issuance of a certificate of occupancy
 
No, unless within ROW
 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Farmer’s market
 
180 days per calendar year
 

Zoning certificate

 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Garage or yard sales
 
Maximum of three consecutive days, three times per calendar year
 

No

 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Gravel surface parking lots
 
Until issuance of a certificate of occupancy
 

No

 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Real estate sales / model homes
 
Until 85% occupancy of the phase is reached
 

Zoning certificate

 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Seasonal agricultural or horticultural sales
 
180 days per calendar year
 

Zoning certificate

 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Seasonal retail sales
 
45 days prior to the related holiday
 

Zoning certificate

 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Temporary storage in a portable container
 
60 days per site
 

No

 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143



Temporary structures
 
None specified
 

Zoning certificate

 

§§ 154.109 - 154.143





 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.097  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   Temporary uses or structures shall:



   (A)   Obtain a zoning certificate from the Community Development
Department;



   (B)   Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the
surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare;



   (C)   Be compatible with the Principal Use on the site, if
applicable;



   (D)   Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on
nearby residential neighborhoods;



   (E)   Not include permanent alterations to the site;



   (F)   Not maintain temporary signs associated with the use or
structure after the activity ends;



   (G)   Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply
to a site or use on the site;



   (H)   Not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use
located on the property; and



   (I)   Contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use,
structure, or special event to occur, as well as adequate land to accommodate
the parking and traffic movement.   



   (J)   Comply with the sign regulations.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.098  SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR CERTAIN TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Construction dumpster. Temporary trash receptacles or
dumpsters shall comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Be located outside public rights-of-way to the extent
possible;



      (2)   Be located to the side or the rear of the site, to the
maximum extent practicable;



      (3)   Be located as far as possible from lots containing
existing development;



      (4)   Not be located within a floodplain or otherwise obstruct
drainage flow;



      (5)   Not be placed within five feet of a fire hydrant; and



      (6)   Not be placed within a required landscaping area where
it may destroy landscaped materials.



   (B)   Construction trailer. Construction trailers may be permitted
on a construction site provided that the trailer is:



      (1)   Located on the same site or in the same development as
the related construction;



      (2)   Not located within a required open space set-aside or
landscaping area; and



      (3)   Associated with development subject to a valid building
permit.



   (C)   Garage or yard sales. Garage sales may be held on residential
property by the owner or resident of that property for no more than three
consecutive days on three separate occasions per calendar year.  The hours
of operation for garage or yard sales are limited to between 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m.



   (D)   Real estate sales office/model home. One temporary real estate
sales office or model home per builder or developer shall be permitted in a
section or phase of a new residential or non-residential development,
provided that the use:



      (1)   Is located on a lot approved as part of a development
agreement;



      (2)   Is aesthetically compatible with the character of
surrounding development in terms of exterior color, predominant exterior
building materials, and landscaping;



      (3)   Is operated by a developer or builder active in the same
phase or section where the use is located; and



      (4)   Is removed or the model home is converted into a
permanent residential use once 85% occupancy in the section or phase of the
development is reached.



   (E)   Seasonal agricultural or horticultural sales. Seasonal
agricultural or horticultural sales, including the sale of such items as
Christmas trees, pumpkins, seasonal produce, flowers, potted plants and
similar agricultural or horticultural products, may be permitted in
accordance with the following standards: 



      (1)   Location.



         (a)   The property contains an area that will support
the proposed temporary sale of products without encroaching into or creating
a negative impact on existing vegetated areas, open space, landscaping,
traffic movements, or parking-space availability.



         (b)   The sale of goods shall not occur within the
public right-of-way.



         (c)   On property where the owner of the property has
provided permission for the seasonal sale of agricultural products.



      (2)   Range of goods limited. The range of goods or products
available for sale shall be limited to products obtained primarily through
farming or agricultural activities, including, but not limited to: 
pumpkins; grains and seed crops; fruits of all kinds; vegetables; nursery,
floral, ornamental, and greenhouse products; trees and forest products,
including Christmas trees and firewood; bees and beekeeping products;
seafood; and dairy products.



      (3)   Hours of operation. The hours of operation of the
seasonal sale of agricultural products shall be between the hours of 7:30
a.m. and 9:00 p.m., or the same hours of operation as a principal use on the
same lot, whichever is more restrictive.



   (F)   Seasonal retail sales. Seasonal retail sales may include items
such as fireworks that are related to a specific recognized and related
holiday or event.  Sales are permitted for up to 45 days before the holiday
or event.



   (G)   Temporary storage in a portable shipping container. Temporary
storage in a portable shipping container shall be allowed to serve a
permitted use provided it is placed on a paved surface and is, to the maximum
extent practicable, located in the side or rear yards.



   (H)   Temporary structures. Temporary structures serving public,
institutional, or recreational uses shall comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Location.



         (a)   The structure shall be located to the side or rear
of the principal structure(s) and at least five feet from any other structure.



         (b)   The structure shall be permitted within the
building envelope but not within required rights-of-way, off-street parking,
open space set-aside, or required landscaping areas.



      (2)   Standards.



         (a)   Skirting or other materials shall be used to
prevent unauthorized access underneath the structure.



         (b)   Parking shall be provided for the temporary
structure.



         (c)   The use shall not be required to be compatible
with the existing principal structure exterior colors or materials.



      (3)   Approval and duration. This use is permitted, if
approved by the Community Development Department, and may remain on the site
for no more than one year. This period may be renewed for one 365-day period,
for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request, submitted to the
Community Development Department at least 30 days prior to the expiration of
the certificate of zoning compliance.  In no event, however, shall such
extensions allow the temporary structure to remain on the site for more than
two years.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 154.101  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the regulation of
non-conforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify those
requirements, circumstances and conditions under which non-conforming
buildings, structures and uses will be operated and maintained.  The zoning
ordinance establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate
area for the location of uses that are permitted in that district.  It is
necessary and consistent with the establishment of these districts that
non-conforming buildings, structures and uses not be permitted to continue
without restriction.  Furthermore, it is the intent of this section that all
non-conforming uses shall be eventually brought into conformity.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.102  AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE.



   (A)   Legally conforming existing structures and uses in existence
on the effective date of ordinance which become non-conforming to this
chapter shall not be considered non-conforming, but instead shall be treated
as follows:



      (1)   A use which is no longer permitted because of a change
in zoning shall be considered a conforming use subject to all conditions for
such use as outlined in this chapter.



      (2)   A structure which becomes non-conforming to a required
setback or setbacks shall be viewed as a conforming structure subject to the
following:



         (a)   The existing setback or setbacks for the structure
which would otherwise be nonconforming to this chapter shall be considered
the required minimum setbacks or setbacks for that structure only on the
subject lot.



         (b)   Expansions and additions to such structures shall
meet all other requirements of this chapter with the exception of any new
minimum setback or setbacks that may be established by this subchapter. 



   (B)   With the exception of structures and uses that meet the
requirements of § 154.103, Discontinuance, any structure or use lawfully
existing upon the effective date of this chapter may not be expanded, but may
be continued—including through repair, replacement, restoration,
maintenance, or improvement—unless:



      (1)   The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a
period of more than one year; or



      (2)   Any nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire or
other peril to the extent of greater than 50% of its estimated market value,
as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, and
no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property
is damaged.  In this case, a municipality may impose reasonable conditions
upon a zoning or building permit in order to mitigate any newly created
impact on adjacent property or water body.



      (3)   When a nonconforming structure in the shoreland district
with less than 50% of the required setback from the water is destroyed by
fire or other peril to greater than 50% of its estimated market value, as
indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, the
structure setback may be increased if practicable and reasonable conditions
are placed upon a zoning or building permit to mitigate created impacts on
the adjacent property or water body.



      (4)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (3) of this
section, any nonconforming use located in the floodplain overlay district
that is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than 50% of
its market value as determined by the Community Development Department, shall
be regulated to the extent necessary to maintain eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and in no case shall be continued or re-established
in a manner that results in potential flood damage or obstructs flood flows
in the floodway.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the placing of a
structure in safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the
Building Inspector.



   (D)   No non-conforming building, structure, or use shall be moved
to another lot or to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same
was constructed or was conducted at the time of this chapter adoption unless
such movement shall bring the non- conformance into compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land
may be changed to lessen the non-conformity of use.  Once a non-conforming
structure or parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter be so
altered to increase the non-conformity.



   (F)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing
or related to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including necessary
non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not physically
extend or intensify the non-conforming use.



   (G)   Normal maintenance, necessary non-structural repairs, and
incidental alteration of a lawful non-conforming sign includes repair or
maintenance of existing lettering done without changing the form or design of
the lawful non-conforming sign.



   (H)   Alterations may be made to a building containing or related to
a lawful non-conforming residential unit when said alteration will improve
the livability thereof, provided the alteration will not increase the number
of dwelling units.  All adjoining property owners shall be provided notice
of plans to expand a non-conforming residential structure. Expansion may
occur only after completion of a 30-day notice period.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.103  DISCONTINUANCE.



   (A)   A nonconforming use shall not be reestablished after
discontinuance of the use for a period of one year or more.



   (B)   Efforts to renovate or repair the use are not considered
discontinuance, provided all appropriate permits and/or development approvals
are obtained, and provided the renovation or repair is completed within one
year from commencement of repair or renovation, and the use is re-established
within one month from the time the renovation or repairs are completed. 
Failure to complete the repairs or renovation within one year or to
reestablish the use within one month following repairs or renovation shall
constitute discontinuance, and a nonconforming use shall not be re-
established.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.104  CHANGE IN USE.



   When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any
district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be
changed to any non-conforming use.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.105  BUILDING PERMITS AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.



   Any proposed structure which will, due to an ordinance amendment,
become non-conforming but for which a building permit has been lawfully
granted prior to the effective date of a new ordinance taking effect, may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans provided construction is
started within 60 days of the effective date of the applicable ordinance, is
not abandoned for a period of more than one hundred 120 days, and continues
to completion within one year. Such structure and use shall thereafter be a
legally non-conforming structure and use.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.106  EXISTING NON-CONFORMING LOTS.



   (A)   Required merger of common ownership lots.



      (1)   Except as may otherwise be provided for in this chapter,
when a group of two or more contiguous lots or parcels of land are owned or
controlled by the same person, the following shall apply:



         (a)   If all lots are conforming to lot width, area and
frontage requirements, all lots may remain separate parcels;



         (b)   If one or more of the contiguous lots or parcels
of land do not conform to either lot width, area, or frontage requirements,
then such non-conforming lots shall not be sold or developed as a separate
parcel of land; and such non-conforming lots shall be combined with adjacent
lots or parcels under the same ownership or control so that the combination
of lots or parcels will equal one or more lots each meeting the full lot
requirements of this chapter or will lessen the existing nonconformity.



      (2)   The combination of lots shall be in accordance with
Chapter 151, Subdivisions, of the City Code.



   (B)   Vacant or redeveloped lots. With the exclusion of parcels in
the Floodplain Overlay District, legal, nonconforming vacant lots of record
may be developed for single-family detached dwellings upon approval of a
building permit under the following conditions:



      (1)   Legally established. The lot in question was legally
established in accordance with requirements of this code existing at the time
of its creation and is a separate, distinct tax parcel.



      (2)   Allowed use. Single-family residential dwellings are an
allowed use within the base zoning district.



      (3)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Sewered lots: a legal nonconforming lot having
direct access to municipal sewer, as determined by the Community Development
Department, shall be considered buildable,  provided that measurements for
lot area and lot width either meet minimum requirements or are within 66% of
the requirement of the base zoning district.



         (b)   Unsewered lots: a legal nonconforming lot not
having access to municipal sewer shall be considered unbuildable.



      (4)   Access. The lot in question has frontage on and will
directly access an improved public street.



      (5)   Health concerns. Public health concerns (potable water
and sanitary sewer) can be adequately addressed.



      (6)   Setback and yard requirements. The setback and yard
requirements of the base zoning district can be achieved.



      (7)   Shoreland requirements. If the parcel is located within
the Shoreland Overlay District, development of the lot shall not result in
more than 25% of the lot being covered with impervious surfaces.



   (C)   Developed lots. An existing conforming use on a lot of
substandard size and/or width may be expanded or enlarged if such expansion
or enlargement meets all other provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS



§ 154.109  AGGREGATE MINING, INTERIM.



   (A)   Interim use. Aggregate mining is allowed only as an interim
land use. 



   (B)   Setback from Residential Zoning District. Any operation,
including gravel storage areas, shall be located at least 1,000 feet from a
residential district boundary or use.



   (C)   Submittal requirements. An application for an interim use
permit to conduct aggregate mining shall meet the following submittal
requirements and standards:



      (1)   A site and vicinity plan that includes the following
shall be provided:



         (a)   A description of natural features, including
wetlands, water bodies and major topographic features located on the property
and within 350 feet of the property.



         (b)   A description of the proposal, including type and
amount of material to be removed, overview of planned daily operations
including equipment and vehicles; and discussion of how the proposed
operations compare to land uses within 1,000 feet of the site.



         (c)   A description of any potential environmental
hazard due to existing or proposed land uses, including but not limited to,
soil, water, air, noise, and light.



         (d)   Grading plans showing land contours prior to
excavation, at maximum excavation, and as proposed after completion of
reclamation activities.



         (e)   Storm water management and erosion control plans. 



      (2)   An air quality plan.



      (3)   A dust management plan.  Access drives and roads within
the property shall be sprayed with dust suppressants to control fugitive
dust.  The streets used for access into the site shall also be cleaned at
appropriate intervals or as otherwise determined through the interim use
permit.



      (4)   A sound attenuation plan describing sources of sound and
indicating conformance with all applicable sound and noise regulations.  The
maximum noise level at the perimeter of the site shall comply with the limits
or standards established by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



      (5)   A vibration-dampening plan describing sources of
vibration and indicating conformance with all applicable vibration
regulations.



      (6)   A traffic plan describing the number of daily truck
trips the proposal will generate and the principal access routes to the
facility, including a description of the facility’s traffic impact on the
surrounding area.  Traffic through local residential streets shall be
prohibited unless specifically allowed through the interim use permit.



      (7)   A site reclamation plan that provides for the orderly
and continuing rehabilitation of all disturbed land.  This plan shall
illustrate:



         (a)   Proposed contours of the site after completion of
each stage of reclamation and proposed overall final site contours upon
closing of the site.  Final proposed contours shall relate to the planned
future land use for the property as designated in the city’s land use map.



         (b)   A re-vegetation plan showing the type, quantity
and location of plantings for areas where re-vegetation is proposed or
required.



         (c)   Areas designated for storage of topsoil,
overburden, mined materials or other materials to be stored or stockpiled on
the site.



         (d)   A schedule setting forth the timetable for
excavation and reclamation of the site.



         (e)   Criteria and standards that will  be  used 
to  achieve  final  rehabilitation  as  well  as intermittent slope
stabilization.



      (8)   All slopes shall be maintained in a safe manner, and
shall not exceed two feet vertically to one foot horizontally. Slopes may be
increased at the request of the proposer in conjunction with approval of the
interim use permit, provided the proposer can demonstrate through engineering
data that the slopes can and will be maintained in a safe manner and will not
have adverse impact on adjacent land uses or property.



      (9)   All operations shall be limited to the hours between
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. All other times of
operation shall be prohibited. The Council, at its discretion, may restrict
any or all operations on legal holidays.



      (10)   Security fencing (exclusive of barbed wire) shall be
installed and maintained along the perimeter of the entire property.



      (11)   No part of the reclaimed site that is designated by the
city’s land use map for uses other than open space or agriculture shall be
at an elevation lower than the minimum required for gravity connection to
planned sanitary sewer and storm sewer.



      (12)   Site reclamation shall begin after excavation of 25% of
the total area to be mined or four acres, whichever is less. Excavation and
reclamation shall occur on a phased basis.



      (13)   Security in the form of a cash escrow, letter of
credit, or performance bond shall be submitted to ensure that reclamation
improvements are completed in a timely manner according to the approved
phasing plan for the project.  The dollar amount of such security shall be
determined in conjunction with the interim use permit and shall be based on
the reclamation phasing plan and the estimated costs associated with each
phase of reclamation.



      (14)   The temporary use permit shall be valid for a period
not to exceed two years or as otherwise provided in the approved temporary
use permit.  Prior to expiration of the permit, the property owner or
operator may apply for renewal according to the procedures as set forth in
§§ 154.195 through 154.198.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.110  AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS.



   (A)   All farms in existence upon the effective date of this chapter
within the city limits shall be a Permitted Use on which the operator can
conduct an agricultural operation.  However, all regulations contained in
specific development requirements and the general development requirements
shall apply to any changes of the farming operation that would cause all or
part of the area to become more intensively used or more urban in character. 



   (B)   The City Council shall require a farm operator to secure a
rezoning and a conditional use permit to expand or intensify the operations
such that the operation becomes an industrial-type use consisting of
compounding, processing and/or packaging of products for wholesale or retail
trade.  Such rezoning must be in conformance to the land use plan. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.111  ANIMAL CLINIC.



   (A)   Short-term boarding may be provided indoors for animals being
treated. 



   (B)   Outdoor kennels are not allowed unless approved by a
conditional use permit for a kennel (see below).



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.112  BARS OR TAVERNS.



   All regulations established in Chapter 113 of the Waseca City Code
regarding alcoholic beverages shall be met.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.113  BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOMES.



   (A)   The owner shall reside in the bed and breakfast home and
manage the premises.



   (B)   The establishment shall comply at all times with all
applicable city, county, state and federal ordinances, statutes and laws.



   (C)   The only meal served to bed and breakfast guests shall be
breakfast, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.



   (D)   No cooking or cooking facilities shall be allowed or provided
in the guest rooms.



   (E)   The establishment shall be limited to four guest rooms or a
maximum guest capacity of eight.



   (F)   Each guest shall be limited to staying not more than seven
days within any 30-day period.



   (G)   The owner shall maintain a guest register showing the name,
address, motor vehicle license number and inclusive dates of visits of all
guests.



   (H)   A minimum of one off-street parking space for each guest room
and two off-street parking spaces for the resident owner shall be provided. 



   (I)   Signs shall be limited to one non-illuminated wall sign near
the entrance door not exceeding 2 square feet.



   (J)   There shall be no external vending machines.



   (K)   All trash and recycling must be contained and screened from
view from other residential properties with a fence and/or coniferous shrubs.



   (L)   The entire front yard shall be landscaped with grass or other
natural materials, with the exception of areas needed for access drives and
sidewalks to required parking areas.



   (M)   Each property shall maintain an exterior residential
appearance and character, meaning an exterior facade that is compatible with
the nearby houses, and is of an appearance that would be found in a structure
designed for and occupied by a family as a detached one- or two-family
residence.



   (N)   The minimum distance between bed-and-breakfast homes shall be
500 feet.



(`86 Code, § 9.75)  (Am. Ord. 712, passed 1-6-98; Am. Ord. 984, passed
7-17-12; Am. Ord. 1040 passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.114  BOARDING HOUSES.



   (A)   The owner shall reside in the boarding home and manage the
premises.



   (B)   The establishment shall comply at all times with all
applicable city, county, state and federal ordinances, statutes and laws.



   (C)   No cooking or cooking facilities shall be allowed or provided
in the guest rooms.



   (D)   Food service shall be provided only for those guests renting
sleeping rooms. 



   (E)   The establishment shall be limited to four guest rooms or a
maximum guest capacity of six.



   (F)   The owner shall maintain a guest register showing the name,
address, motor vehicle license number and inclusive dates of visits of all
guests.



   (G)   A minimum of one off-street parking space for each guest room
and two off-street parking spaces for the resident owner shall be provided.



   (H)   Signs shall be limited to one non-illuminated wall sign near
the entrance door not exceeding two square feet.



   (I)   All trash and recycling must be contained and screened from
view from other residential properties with a fence and/or coniferous shrubs.



   (J)   The entire front yard shall be landscaped with grass or other
natural materials, with the exception of areas needed for access drives.



   (K)   Each property shall maintain an exterior residential
appearance and character, meaning an exterior facade that is compatible with
the nearby houses, and is of an appearance that would be found in a structure
designed for and occupied by a family as a detached one- or two-family
residence.



   (L)   The minimum distance between boarding houses shall be 600 feet.



   (M)   Any conditional use permit for a boarding house shall not
transfer upon sale or transfer of the premises for which the conditional use
permit has been issued.  A prospective new owner of the premises shall
reapply for a conditional use.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.115  CAR WASHES.



   (A)   The car wash shall not be within 200 feet of a Residential
zoning district.



   (B)   The vehicle entry or exit doors shall not face directly toward
a property in a Residential zoning district.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.116  CELLULAR TELEPHONE RELAY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Commercial relay facilities for cellular telephone data are
allowed by conditional use permit in these locations by order of city
preference:



      (1)   One of the two city water towers under a lease with the
city;



      (2)   If a city water tower is certified to be not technically
feasible, the next preferred location would be an existing commercial tower;



      (3)   If options 1 and 2 are not technically feasible or
available, the third preference would be a new commercial tower in the I-1 or
I-2 zoning district.



   (B)   Setbacks.



      (1)   Towers shall not be allowed as a permitted encroachment
into the front setback area required for a principal building in the zoning
district. 



      (2)   The minimum side or rear yard setback of the base of a
tower shall be equal to the required setback of a principal building in the
zoning district. 



      (3)   Towers shall be set back 1.5 times the tower height or
150 feet, whichever is greater, from any residential principal building. 



      (4)   Towers shall be set back a distance equal to their
height plus 10 feet from any commercial or industrial building. 



      (5)   Towers shall be set back from platted public
rights-of-way and from planned public rights-of-way shown in the Waseca
Comprehensive Plan by a minimum distance equal to the required principal
structure setback in the zoning district. 



      (6)   Variance from minimum setback standards may be
considered only after an engineer certifies that the collapse of the tower
would occur within a lesser distance. 



      (7)   Setback shall be measured from the base of the tower
located nearest the property line and the property line.



   (C)   Co-location on existing conforming sites. Commercial receiving
or transmitting antennas which are co-located on existing conforming
freestanding towers or roof- mounted antennas and which do not add to the
height of the existing tower shall be reviewed according to the city site
plan approval process and shall require a building permit. Co-locations do
not require certification by a radio frequency engineer that placement on
another site is not technically feasible.



   (D)   Co-location on existing non-conforming sites. Commercial
receiving or transmitting antennas which are co-located on existing legal
non-conforming freestanding towers or roof-mounted antennas and which do not
add to the height of the existing tower shall be allowed by conditional use
permit and a building permit.



   (E)   Other requirements.



      (1)   License required.  The applicant shall present
documentation of the possession of any required license by state, federal or
local agencies.



      (2)   Nonconforming uses.  Existing transmitting and
receiving facilities at the time of adoption of this section may remain in
service. However, at such times any material change is made in the
facilities, full compliance with this section shall be required.



      (3)   Building permit.  In  addition  to  other 
permits  or  approvals  that  may  be required  under  this 
section,  a  building  permit  shall  be  required  for  the
construction of new antennas and towers upon which antennas will be placed
and shall include wind loading and strength and footing calculations prepared
by a Minnesota registered engineer whenever deemed necessary by the Building
Official.



      (4)   Co-location requirement for new antennas.  If a new
antenna support structure is to be constructed, it shall be designed so as to
accommodate a minimum of two other users including but not limited to other
cellular communication companies, local police, and fire and ambulance
companies.  Any proposals for the construction of a new commercial tower
shall include certification from a professional radio frequency engineer that
existing tower sites in the city are not technically feasible for the
application proposed.



      (5)   Height requirement.  The height of the antenna shall be
the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily as verified by an
appropriate professional.



      (6)   Sight lines. Antenna and/or towers shall be located
outside the sight lines of offices, buildings or residences to the extent
possible.



      (7)   Climbing discouraged.  Antennas, dish antennas or
towers shall be protected by a city-approved barrier to discourage climbing
by unauthorized persons.



      (8)   Illumination.  Antennas and/or towers shall not be
artificially illuminated unless required by law or governmental agency to
protect the public’s health and safety.



      (9)   Color. All antennas shall be of a neutral color and
shall not be painted with scenes or contain letters or messages which qualify
as a sign or advertising except as may be required by any state or federal
regulation.



      (10)   Abandonment. If for any reason the antenna or tower is
abandoned or the height of the antenna and/or tower can be reduced, the
antenna, tower or portions thereof must be removed or reduced in height
within three months.  To ensure compliance, the applicant must submit a
performance bond or letter of credit in an amount sufficient to cover the
removal or reduction costs. After removal or reduction, the site shall be
restored to its original or an improved state.



      (11)   Full disclosure of technical data.  An application for
a conditional use permit will not be considered complete until the applicant
fully discloses all technical data requested by the city.  Such data
includes, but is not limited to the locations, actual or planned, of other
antenna towers in the applicant’s system.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.117  CHILD CARE, DROP-IN PROGRAMS.



   A drop-in child care program must be licensed under Minnesota Rules
governing non-residential child care centers.  Refer also to use definition
under the Rules and Definitions chapter of this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.118  CONVENIENCE STORES.



   (A)   The gasoline dispensing pumps must maintain the appropriate
license from the state. 



   (B)   The lights under the gasoline area canopy must be shielded
from direct view from the public street or other properties. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.119  DAY CARE FACILITIES, CHILD, COMMERCIAL.



   (A)   Children or adults are delivered and removed daily. 



   (B)   The regulations and conditions are met for the Minnesota
Department of Public Welfare, Public Welfare Manual 11-31-30 as adopted or
amended.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.120  DRIVE-UP WINDOW SERVICE.



   (A)   Any business that dispenses merchandise through an exterior
window that customers in automobiles drive to shall provide a stacking lane
that accommodates forecast traffic and does not hinder other circulation or
parking. The following standards shall be used for the number of vehicles
accommodated in stacking lanes unless the applicant provides credible support
for an alternative number. 



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Number of Stacking Spaces





Financial institutions with drive-up tellers
 
6 spaces per window or kiosk


Financial institutions with a drive-up automatic teller machine
 
2 spaces per window or kiosk


Car wash, self-service
 
4 spaces per bay at the entrance; 1 space per bay at the exit.


Car wash, automatic
 
3 spaces per bay at the entrance door and 2 spaces per bay in the entrance
lane


Drive-through restaurant
 
4 spaces behind the menu board; 4 spaces behind the first window. 


Gas stations
 
2 spaces per pump


Other drive-up uses
 
2 spaces per window




 



   (B)   Drive-up lanes shall conform to the setbacks required for
parking lots and circulation aisles.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.121  FITNESS CENTERS.



   (A)   Fitness centers are a conditional use in the I-1 and I-2
Districts.  They are also an accessory use in those districts. 



   (B)    Fitness centers are a permitted use in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and
B-4 districts under the general “service business” category for
businesses under 5,000 square feet.  For businesses greater than 5,000
square feet, they are a permitted use in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts
under the general “service business” category.



   (C)   In the industrial districts, these conditions apply: 



      (1)   Location on the perimeter of the industrial area.



      (2)   Easy access and visibility from a collector or minor
arterial road.



      (3)   If located in a multiple-use building, proof of adequate
parking. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.122  GARAGES, RESIDENTIAL.



   Requirements for setback and height are found in the Residential zoning
districts chapter of this zoning chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.123  GROUP HOME OR RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY.



   (A)   Any residential care facility, group home or in-home day care
business for children or adults business must maintain the appropriate
license from the state. 



   (B)   Parking requirements are presented in § 154.161, Table 15-6. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.124  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   Home occupations shall be allowed as an accessory use in all
residential districts subject to the following standards:



      (1)   Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the
residence shall be used for this purpose.  If the home occupation is located
in an accessory structure, not more than 40% or 300 square feet, whichever is
less, shall be used for this purpose.



      (2)   Only articles made or originating on the premises shall
be sold on the premises, unless the articles are incidental to permitted
commercial service.



      (3)   No articles for sale shall be displayed so as to be
visible from any street.



      (4)   No person is employed other than a member of the
household residing on the premises.



      (5)   No mechanical or electrical equipment is used if the
operation of the equipment interferes unreasonably with the desired quiet
residential environment of the neighborhood or if the health and safety of
the residents is endangered.



      (6)   No outside storage of material associated with the
business shall be allowed.



      (7)   Conducting of the home occupation shall result in no
change of outside appearance of the building.



      (8)   A sign not exceeding two square feet shall be allowed on
the premises.



      (9)   The home occupations shall conform to the standards in
the State Building Code and State Fire Code.



   (B)   Home occupations allowing retail sales, minor repair services,
or employment of persons other than members of the household residing on the
premises may be permitted by conditional use permit if the following
additional conditions are met:



      (1)   The occupation does not generate more than two customer
vehicles at one time.



      (2)   The occupation must provide off-street parking.



      (3)   The operation of the home occupation, as it is apparent
to adjacent residential uses, shall be limited to between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



(`86 Code, § 9.73)  (Am. Ord. 978, passed 2-6-12; Am. Ord. 1040, passed
1-5-16)



§ 154.125  MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITIES.



   (A)   Application and review.



      (1)   Rezoning to the R-M zoning district shall be required. 



      (2)   Platting of the property according to the requirements
of Chapter 151, Subdivisions, of the Waseca Code of Ordinances shall be
required if the site is not already platted property. 



      (3)   The site plan review submittal and approval process
shall be used for the R-M District in addition to any procedures for rezoning
or platting, if applicable.   



   (B)   Site requirements.



      (1)   The area proposed for a manufactured home community
shall be at least ten acres in size.



      (2)   The site shall be platted into at least one parcel as a
condition of approval of the rezoning to R-M district. 



      (3)   A manufactured home community may be developed in two or
more phases, provided that said phases conform in all respects with the
overall manufactured home community development plan.  Occupancy shall not
be permitted until all facilities and improvements are installed and
operational for not less than 50% of the home lots within a phase, and all
conditions of the approved site plan being satisfied.



   (C)   Home lots.



      (1)   The corners of each manufactured home lot shall be
clearly marked and each lot shall be numbered. 



      (2)   The site plan shall indicate which lots are designed for
single-wide and which for double-wide manufactured homes.  Double-wide homes
may not be placed on single-wide lots but single-wide homes may be placed on
double-wide lots.   



      (3)   The manufactured home lot shall be improved to provide
an adequate placement and tie-down of the manufactured home. 



      (4)   Tie-downs or anchors shall be placed to provide a
readily accessible anchor for the manufactured home and be able to sustain a
minimum tensile strength as per manufacturer’s requirements.



      (5)   Skirting that matches the manufactured home shall be
installed to enclose the open space between the bottom of a manufactured home
floor and the grade level to provide substantial resistance to heavy winds
and to improve the appearance of the manufactured home.  Access shall be
provided for inspections and repairs on utility connections.



   (D)   Streets and sidewalks.



      (1)   Each manufactured home lot shall abut a public or
private street. 



      (2)   The internal street system shall have at least two
connections to the adjacent or planned public street system. 



      (3)   Street alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted
to topography and suitable for moving manufactured home segments. 



      (4)   Streets shall be paved and have concrete curb and gutter.



      (5)   All streets shall be named and have a street sign
displaying the street name. 



      (6)   Streets shall be 30 feet wide, measured to the faces of
the curbs. 



      (7)   Each street shall include a concrete sidewalk at least 5
feet wide on one side of the street and built to city standards. 



      (8)   Parking shall be allowed on both sides of the street. 
Overnight parking shall be as regulated city-wide. 



      (9)   Dead-end streets shall not be used unless there is no
other way to develop an isthmus of land.  Such street shall be limited to
300 feet in length and shall be provided with a standard turn-around bulb.



      (10)   Street lighting shall be provided consistent with city
standards. 



      (11)   All other elements of street design shall be consistent
with city standards and reviewed for conformance by the City Engineer. 



      (12)   The owner of the manufactured home community shall be
responsible for the proper maintenance of privately-owned streets. 



   (E)   Parking.



      (1)   Each manufactured home lot shall have paved off-street
parking spaces for at least two automobiles.  Each space shall be at least
nine feet by 20 feet in size.  Parking and vehicle storage is allowed only
in designated locations. 



      (2)   No more than three motor vehicles shall be stored or
kept on any manufactured home lot. 



      (3)   Additional guest parking shall be provided at the rate
of one space for every four home lots and shall be located within 300 feet of
homes that it is intended to serve. 



      (4)   No inoperable motor vehicle shall be parked, stored or
kept outdoors on a manufactured home lot or outdoors in a manufactured home
community, except a vehicle that became inoperable when it was in the
manufactured home community, and then it shall not be parked in that
condition for a period of more than seven days.  Parking on public streets
shall be subject to city parking standards and regulations.



      (5)   Vehicles such as boats, boat trailers, travel trailers,
recreational vehicles, truck tractors and trucks larger than a “pick-up”
size shall not be parked on the street or on a home lot for more than eight
consecutive hours.  One or more locations in the manufactured home community
may be provided for the longer-term parking of such items.  Such location(s)
shall be separated from the home lots and visually screened with plantings
and fencing to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department.



      (6)   Temporary manufactured home storage may be permitted
prior to permanent placement on the manufactured home stand; such temporary
storage of a manufactured home shall not exceed eight hours, and shall not
occur on a public or private street. 



   (F)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Each home lot shall include at least one overstory
tree. 



      (2)   All parts of the manufactured home community that are
not covered by buildings, manufactured homes, parking, streets, driveways or
sidewalks shall be landscaped with a combination of turf grass, trees and
shrubs. 



      (3)   The perimeter of the manufactured home community, which
is subject to additional setback requirements, shall be planted with a
combination of overstory and understory deciduous and conifers trees and
shrubs so as to provide a visual buffer to or from adjacent land
development.  A sturdy opaque fence may be used to supplement the
plantings.  The perimeter planting plan shall be prepared by a registered
landscape architect or nurseryman.  The design shall be consistent with the
requirements of § 154.159, Landscaping, Screening and Fences, and shall be
reviewed for conformance by the Planning Director. 



   (G)   Recreation areas.



      (1)   In each manufactured home community, there shall be one
or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all community
residents. The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of
500 square feet for each home lot. No outdoor recreation area shall contain
less than 25,000 square feet.  Required recreational area shall be computed
in addition to any other common open space required elsewhere in this
chapter. Recreation areas shall be located as to be free of traffic hazards
and should be easily accessible.



      (2)   Land and improvements designated for private, on-site
recreation may be granted up to 50% credit toward the public park dedication
normally required during the platting process. Such credit shall depend on
the type and quality of the on-site recreation facilities provided and shall
be provided at the discretion of the City Council based on a recommendation
of the Park Board and Planning Commission.



   (H)   Water and sanitary sewer services.



      (1)   All manufactured homes shall be properly connected to
the city water system and sanitary sewer system.



      (2)   Public water and sewer services shall be designed and
installed consistent with city standards.



   (I)   Surface water management. A surface water management design
that conforms to the Waseca Engineering Design Standards for Stormwater
Management shall be submitted as part of the subdivision or site plan
application for review by the City Engineer.



   (J)   Storm shelters. Every manufactured home community shall have
an above- or below-grade storm shelter that shall be:



      (1)   Sized based on the estimated fully occupied population
of the manufactured home community using the occupant density recommendations
of the International Code Council and National Storm Shelter Association
standards for the design and construction of storm shelters.



      (2)   Designed by a licensed structural engineer or architect
and built in accordance with plans as approved by the Building Official;



      (3)   Designed and constructed to meet all applicable
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA);



      (4)   Located no farther than 1,320 linear feet from the
furthest manufactured home lot; and



      (5)   Accessible and usable in times of need; it is unlawful
for any required storm shelter to be used for storage purposes.



   (K)   Community management.



      (1)   The community manager shall operate the community in
compliance with this section and shall provide adequate supervision to
maintain the community, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a
clean and sanitary condition.



      (2)   The manager shall notify community occupants of all
applicable provisions of this section and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this section.



      (3)   Each park shall have an office for the use of the
manager marked “Office” and the marking shall be illuminated during all
hours of darkness.



      (4)   The operator of every manufactured home community shall
maintain a registry in the office of the manufactured home park indicating
the name and address of each permanent resident. 



      (5)   A map of the manufactured home community shall be
displayed at the manufactured home park office and be illuminated during all
hours of darkness.



      (6)   No public address or loudspeaker system shall be
permitted.



      (7)   The community management shall provide for the weekly
collection and disposal of trash. 



   (L)   Non-residential uses prohibited. No part of any community
shall be used for commercial purposes, except such uses that are required for
the direct servicing and well-being of community residents and for the
management and maintenance of the community.  Nothing contained in this
section shall be deemed as prohibiting:



      (1)   The sale by an owner of a manufactured home located on a
manufactured home lot and connected to the pertinent utilities.  Any sales
of manufactured homes in place on the manufactured home lot shall not in any
way relieve any parties involved from complying with all the applicable
regulations of this chapter.



      (2)   Home occupations as allowed by this chapter.



      (3)   In-home day care. 



   (M)   Continuance of non-conformities.



      (1)   Any non-conforming manufactured home, or structure,
which existed lawfully as of January 1, 1995, and which remains nonconforming
by the terms of this chapter, and any such manufactured home, or structure,
which shall become nonconforming on January 1, 1995, or upon any subsequent
amendment to this chapter, may be continued.



      (2)   Manufactured home communities that existed lawfully on
January 1, 1995, but do not conform to the minimum requirements set forth in
this section, may be continued notwithstanding such non-conformity. 



      (3)   Any home located in such manufactured home community may
be repaired or replaced without adherence to the minimum requirements set
forth in this section provided that the number of home sites in the
manufactured home community shall not thereby be increased. 



   (N)   Construction and installation standards. Only manufactured
homes, as defined by M.S. § 327.31(6), as it may be amended from time to
time, which are constructed in compliance with the Manufactured Home Building
Code established by M.S. §§ 327.31 and 327.32, as they may be amended from
time to time, may be located in a manufactured home community.  They shall
be installed according to the provisions of Minn. Rules Chs. 1350 and 4630,
as they may be amended from time to time.



   (O)   State license required. No person, firm or corporation shall
establish, maintain, conduct or operate a manufactured home community without
first obtaining an annual license from the State Department of Health.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.126  MANUFACTURING, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, PRODUCTS OR
EMISSIONS.



   (A)   Any materials, products or emissions that are regulated by the
state or federal governments must obtain and maintain the appropriate
approvals or licenses from those jurisdictions. 



   (B)   The building(s) and its operations must conform to the
requirements of the Minnesota Building Code and the Minnesota Fire Code. 



   (C)   Reasonable assurance must be made that the public, residents
and other businesses will not be endangered. 



   (D)   City requirements must be met for site planning, plantings,
buffering, access, parking, truck docks, outdoor storage and so on. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.127  MANUFACTURING OF PRODUCTS FROM STONE, CLAY OR CONCRETE.



   (A)   Emissions into the air or water, either direct or indirect,
must be contained below levels prescribed by federal, state, watershed or
municipal jurisdictions.



   (B)   The operation must conform to city standards for surface water
management.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.128  RADIO ANTENNAS, PRIVATE.



   Private outdoor radio transmission or reception antenna and towers are
permitted as an Accessory Use in any zoning district with these conditions: 



   (A)   Height. Private radio antennas or towers that are mounted on
the ground shall not exceed 50 feet in height in residential districts and 75
feet in commercial and industrial districts. Taller heights may be allowed by
conditional use permit.  Height shall be measured from the nearby ground to
the top of the device.



   (B)   Roof-mounted antennas. The antenna may be placed on the roof
of any authorized structure.  The total height of the antenna shall not
exceed 20 feet above the peak of the roof or roof line.



   (C)   Location. The radio antenna or tower shall not be located
within a front yard setback, a required side yard, or any side yard abutting
a street.  The antenna shall be located five feet or more from rear lot
lines and shall not be located in a utility easement.



   (D)   Setbacks.



      (1)   The minimum setback shall be equal to the required
setback of a principal structure in the zoning district.  The antenna shall
be set back from the nearest residential structure a distance equal to the
fall radius plus ten feet.  Variance from minimum setback standards may be
considered only after an engineer certifies that the collapse of the tower
would occur within a lesser distance.



      (2)   Antennas shall be set back from platted public
rights-of-way and from planned public rights-of-way shown in the Waseca
Comprehensive Plan by a minimum distance equal to the required principal
structure setback in the zoning district.



   (E)   Color and content. Communication devices shall be of a neutral
color and shall not be painted with scenes or contain letters or messages
which qualify as a sign.



   (F)   Building permits. A building permit shall be required for the
installation of any private antenna or tower.  Building permit applications
shall be accompanied by a site plan and structural components data for the
communication device including details of anchoring.



   (G)   Lightning protection. Each communication device shall be
grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the
applicable state and local codes.



   (H)   Electrical code. Communication device electrical equipment and
connection shall be designed and installed in conformance with the applicable
state and local codes.



   (I)   Interference. Use or the physical presence of the
communication transmission device shall not interfere with the operation of
electronic equipment, including televisions, radios, computers, and the
like. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.129  RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY.



   See Group Home.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.130  RESIDENTIAL SPECIALTY SHOPS.



   (A)   Residential specialty shops may be allowed as conditional uses
in the R-2 district.



   (B)   Residential specialty shops shall be restricted to the
following uses:



      (1)   Antiques and collectibles shops, including rare coin and
rare book dealers;



      (2)   Art, craft and hobby shops, including instruction;



      (3)   Gifts, novelty and souvenir shops;



      (4)   Interior decorating studios;



      (5)   Jewelry shops;



      (6)   Tailoring and custom clothing shops; and



      (7)   Tea rooms, if combined with another permitted use listed
above and not occupying more than 200 square feet.  A “tea room” shall,
for purposes of this section; be defined as the serving of limited food and
beverage items that do not involve the preparation by cooking or processing
on the premises.  In determining whether to allow a tea room, the Planning
Commission and City Council shall review the proposed sale of food items to
insure that the sale is incidental to the primary use of the premises and
that such sale of food items will not itself tend to generate retail traffic,
as opposed to being complementary to the retail use.



   (C)   Performance standards for residential specialty shops shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The minimum lot area of each lot where a residential
specialty shop is established shall be 10,000 square feet.



      (2)   All trash and refuse must be contained and all refuse
receptacles shall be enclosed in opaque fencing at least six feet in
height.  Screening, in the form of shrubbery, trees or a fence, to a height
of at least five feet, shall be installed along all property lines abutting a
residential use.



      (3)   The entire front yard space shall be landscaped with
grass or other natural materials, with the exception of areas needed for
access drives.  At least 50% of the rear yard space shall be landscaped with
grass or other natural materials.



      (4)   A parking plan shall be submitted which shall be
approved only upon the terms and conditions as result in preservation of a
residential character of the property related to lot coverage and screening.



      (5)   Not more than 25% of the properties on any block shall
be occupied by the permitted nonresidential uses listed in § 154.130(B).



      (6)   Signs for each permitted specialty retail or service
business shall be limited to one sign per permitted business, having a
maximum sign area of six square feet and a height not exceeding six feet.



      (7)   Each specialty retail or service property must front on
U.S. Highway 14 or on State Highway 13 (Elm Avenue or State Street) and must
abut an established commercially zoned area.



      (8)   Each property shall maintain an exterior residential
appearance and character.  The term “residential” shall, for purposes of
this section, mean a building that has an exterior facade that is compatible
with the surrounding single-family or duplex houses.  That is,
“residential” shall mean an appearance that would be found in a structure
designed for and occupied by a family as a detached single- or double-family
residence.



      (9)   Business hours shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.



(`86 Code, § 9.76)  (Am. Ord. 648, passed 12-7-93; Am. Ord. 1040, passed
1-5-16)



§ 154.131  RESTAURANT, OUTDOOR SEATING OR DRIVE-IN SERVICE.



   (A)   Restaurants with outdoor loudspeakers, automobile service
order devices, drive-in theater, car speakers or similar devices shall not be
located within 300 feet of any residential dwelling unit. 



   (B)   The hours of operation shall be set forth as a condition of
any building permit for drive-in business.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.132  SCHOOLS, K-12, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE.



   (A)   The site plan shall provide for safe and convenient access by
bicyclists, pedestrians, auto and buses.



   (B)   Other normal requirements apply for site planning, screening,
lighting, drainage, setbacks and so on.



§ 154.133  SEXUALLY-ORIENTED USES.



   (A)   The nature of sexually-oriented uses is such that they are
recognized as having adverse secondary characteristics, particularly when
they are accessible to minors and located near residential property or
related residential uses such as schools, day-care centers, libraries or
parks.  Furthermore, the concentration of sexually-oriented uses has an
adverse effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas.  The nature of
sexually-oriented uses requires that they not be allowed within certain
zoning districts, or within minimum distances from each other or residential
uses.  Special regulation of sexually-oriented uses is necessary to ensure
that the adverse secondary effects would not contribute or enhance criminal
activity in the area of the uses nor will it contribute to the blighting or
downgrading of the surrounding property and lessening of its value.



   (B)   Sexually-oriented uses.  Sexually-oriented uses as defined in
this chapter shall be subject to the following general provisions.



      (1)   Sexually-oriented uses either principal or accessory
shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for
residential purposes.



      (2)   A sexually-oriented use which does not qualify as an
accessory use shall be classified as a sexually-oriented use-principal.



      (3)   A sexually-oriented use either principal or accessory
shall not sell or dispense 3.2 malt or intoxicating liquors nor shall it be
located in a building or on a property which contains a business that sells
or dispenses 3.2 malt or intoxicating liquors.



      (4)   No sexually-oriented use entertainment shall engage in
any activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity
or conduct in or about the sexually-oriented use establishment which is
prohibited by any ordinance of the city, the state or the United States of
America.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing or
permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or
ordinances, including but not limited to statutes or ordinances prohibiting
the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material generally, or the
exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials to minors.



      (5)   No sexually-oriented use either principal or accessory
shall be conducted in any manner that permits the perception or observation
from any property not approved as a sexually-oriented use of any materials
depicting, describing or related to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” by any visual or auditory media, including
display, decoration, sign, show window, sound transmission or other means.



      (6)   Sexually-oriented use-principal and sexually-oriented
use-accessory establishments shall prominently display a sign at the entrance
and located within two feet of the door-opening device of the
sexually-oriented use establishment or section of the establishment devoted
to adult books or materials which states:  “This business sells or
displays material containing adult themes.  Persons under age 18 years of
age shall not enter.”  The sign shall have letters at least three-eighths
inches in height and no more than two inches in height.



      (7)   No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted on the
premises of a sexually-oriented use-principal establishment.  No person
under the age of 18 shall be permitted access to material displayed or
offered for sale or rent by a sexually-oriented use-principal or accessory
establishment.



   (C)   Sexually-oriented use-principal. Sexually-oriented
use-principal, as defined in this section, shall be subject to the following
general provisions:



      (1)   Sexually-oriented use-principal, shall be located at
least 1,500 radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest part
of the building or actual leased space of the sexually-oriented use-principal
to the property line of R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoned property or property in the
PUD which is projected to be residential.



      (2)   Sexually-oriented use-principal shall be located at
least 1,500 radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest part
of the building or actual leased space of the sexually-oriented use-principal
to the property line of:



         (a)   A licensed day-care center;



         (b)   A public or private educational facility
classified for preschool, early childhood family education, special
education, pre-kindergarten, elementary, junior high or senior high;



         (c)   A public library;



         (d)   A public park; and



         (e)   Another existing sexually-oriented use-principal.



      (3)   The use shall be located within a building or actual
leased space of a building within the area allowable for sexually-oriented
use-principal uses.  Buildings or leased space intersected by a line
representing the allowable area will be considered permissible only for that
portion of the building or leased space that is within the allowable area.



      (4)   Sexually-oriented use-principal activities, as defined
by this section, shall be classified as one use.  No two sexually-oriented
uses-principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same
property.



   (D)   Sexually-oriented uses-accessory. Sexually-oriented
use-accessory shall:



      (1)   Comprise no more than 10% of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located;



      (2)   Comprise no more than 20% of the gross receipts of the
entire business operation; or



      (3)   Not involve or include any activity except the sale or
rental of merchandise.



         (a)   Sexually-oriented use-accessory shall be
restricted from and prohibit access to persons under the age of 18 by the
physical separation of the items from areas of general public access:



            1.   Movie rentals.  Display areas shall be
restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate room, the
access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons
responsible for the operation or controlled in some other effective manner
which meets with the approval of the Zoning Administrator.



            2.   Magazines. Publications classified or
qualifying as sexually-oriented uses shall not be accessible to persons under
the age of 18 and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent
display of any material other than the publication title.



         (b)   Other use.  Sexually-oriented use-accessory not
specifically cited shall comply with the intent of this section subject to
the approval of the Zoning Administrator.



         (c)   Sexually-oriented use-accessory activities shall
be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival,
theatrical or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public
where minors are admitted.



(`86 Code, § 9.79)  (Am. Ord. 727, passed 1-5-99; Am. Ord. 1040, passed
1-5-16)



§ 154.134  SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   Solar energy conversion systems shall be allowed as an Accessory Use in
any zoning district under these conditions: 



   (A)   In residential zoning districts, the device must be attached
to a Principal or Accessory structure so as to appear integral to the
structure.  That is, flat against a wall, flat against a sloped roof or
mounted at an angle on a flat roof.  Solar devices on a flat roof must be
set back so they are not visible from the public street.  Setbacks normally
applied to Accessory structures do not apply. 



   (B)   In Commercial or Industrial zoning districts, solar devices
may be mounted on a wall, a roof or on the ground.  Setbacks normally
applied to Accessory structures apply.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.135  SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.



   All private swimming pools, both above the ground and in the ground,
whirlpool spas, hot tubs and similar features that are capable of holding
water at a depth of more than 30 inches are subject to the following
standards: 



   (A)   The pool, spa or hot tub shall not be operated as a business
or private club except when allowed as a permitted home occupation.



   (B)   The pool, spa or hot tub including any related walks, paved
areas or other structures, shall not be located in a front yard, and must be
set back at least five feet from any property line.



   (C)   The pool, spa or hot tub, the rear yard or the entire property
shall be enclosed by a wall or fence or combination thereof which is at least
four feet tall with a self-closing gate capable of being secured with a lock
so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or adjacent
properties.  A cover capable of being locked but not easily penetrated when
the subject is not in use may be substituted for fencing.



   (D)   If the only access to a pool, spa or hot tub is through a
principal or accessory structure, all points of access shall be made lockable.



   (E)   Required fencing shall be of durable wood, masonry or metal,
and shall be so designed as to discourage climbing.  Building walls may
contribute to enclosure requirements.



   (F)   In the case of above-ground pools, spas or hot tubs, sides
that are vertical or slanted outward may contribute to required fencing,
provided that all points of access are controlled to prevent access by
children, including the removal of all ladders and/or stairs whenever the
pool is not in use. A cover capable of being locked but not easily penetrated
when the subject is not in use may be substituted for fencing.



   (G)   Any pool, spa or hot tub with drain must be equipped with
anti-entrapment drain covers or related safety equipment.



   (H)   Existing pools, spas or hot tubs as defined by this chapter,
shall comply with all provisions of this chapter within one year of the
effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.136  TRUCK STOPS.



   (A)   Fuel sales or bulk storage of fuel or other flammable liquids
must maintain the appropriate license from the state.



   (B)   Truck stops may include as principal uses restaurants, shower
facilities, repair and maintenance of heavy trucks, and truck drivers’
lounges. 



   (C)   Among other normal requirements, the facility must conform to
the City’s requirements for surface water management in particular. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.137  VEHICLE FUEL AND SERVICE STATIONS.



   (A)   No vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than those
used by employees or awaiting service.  No vehicle shall be parked or be
waiting service longer than 30 days.



   (B)   The exterior storage of trash, merchandise, spare parts, etc.,
not including customers’ vehicles awaiting service, shall conform to the
requirements of § 154.159, Landscaping, Screening and Fences.



   (C)   Exterior storage other than vehicles shall be limited to
service equipment and items offered for sale.  Exterior storage of items
offered for sale (merchandise) shall be within the parking setback
requirements and shall be located in containers such as the racks, metal
trays and similar structures designed to display merchandise. 



   (D)   All areas for the temporary storage of trash, recycling or
discarded parts shall be fully screened from view.  All structures and
grounds shall be maintained in an orderly, clean and safe manner.



   (E)   Lights shall be designed and placed in such a manner as to
shield the light away from the public street or another site. 



   (F)   Business activities not listed in the definition of automobile
service stations and not incidental to the business are not permitted on the
premises unless a conditional use permit is obtained.  These include but are
not limited to:



      (1)   Automatic car or truck wash;



      (2)   Rental of vehicles, equipment or trailers. 



   (G)   Gasoline dispensing pumps located at and a part of other types
of businesses shall require a conditional use permit.



(`86 Code, § 9.70) (Am. Ord. 984, passed 7-17-12; Am. Ord. 1040, passed
1-5-16)



§ 154.138  VEHICLE REPAIR, MECHANICAL.



   (A)   All repairs shall be conducted in a building. 



   (B)   No vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than those
used by customers, employees or those awaiting service.  No vehicle shall be
parked or be waiting service longer than 30 days.



   (C)   The exterior storage of trash, merchandise, spare parts, etc.,
not including customers’ vehicles awaiting service, shall conform to the
requirements of § 154.159, Landscaping, Screening and Fences.  All areas 
for the temporary storage of trash, recycling or discarded parts shall be
fully screened.  All structures and grounds shall be maintained in an
orderly, clean and safe manner.



   (D)   Exterior storage other than vehicles shall be limited to
service equipment and items offered for sale.  Exterior storage of items
offered for sale shall be within parking setback requirements and shall be
located in containers such as the racks, metal trays and similar structures
designed to display merchandise.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.139  VEHICLE REPAIR, BODY.



   (A)   All of the requirements for vehicle repair, mechanical, shall
apply.



   (B)   All damaged vehicles awaiting repair shall be screened from
view by a fence not less than 75% opaque and plantings.  Such vehicles shall
be stored in the interior side or rear yard of the site. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.140  VEHICLE SALES, NEW OR USED AUTOS, LIGHT TRUCKS, MOTORCYCLES.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be parked or displayed within a required
parking or driveway setback or buffer area. 



   (B)   All repair shall be conducted in a building;



   (C)   There shall be a standard building on the site for office or
vehicle display. 



   (D)   Unloading of vehicles must occur on-site and not in the public
road right-of-way. 



   (E)   The facility must conform to the city’s requirements for
landscaping, lighting, signs, trash handling and surface water management. 



   (F)   Permitted accessory uses include:



      (1)   Repair of automobiles, light trucks, heavy trucks,
motorcycles, boats or all-terrain vehicles;



      (2)   Car washes subject to the requirements in this chapter
for car washes;



      (3)   Rental of automobiles;



      (4)   Sale of rental automobiles. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.141  WASTE RECYCLING OR WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY.



   (A)   All activity must occur within an enclosed building.



   (B)   Any required county or state licenses must be maintained. 



   (C)   All truck maneuvering must occur off of the public streets. 



   (D)   Truck access doors shall not face a public street or a
residential use or district. 



   (E)   The site must be landscaped and screened in conformance with
§ 154.159, Landscaping, Screening and Fences.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.142  WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS IN NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to promote
safe, effective and efficient use of alternative energy sources and systems
as the technology becomes available.  The intent is also to establish
standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of wind
energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be governed within the city.  This
section shall apply to all such systems designed for the purpose of producing
electricity from wind energy.



   (B)   Application. Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) may be
allowed as an accessory conditional use in all commercial zoning districts,
except B-1, central business district, and in all industrial zoning
districts, subject to the regulations and requirements of this section. 
Applications for WECS shall be governed by the provisions of this section and
the requirements of § 154.179, Conditional Use Permit.



   (C)   Compliance with State Building Code. Standard drawings of the
structural components of the wind energy conversion system and support
structures, including base and footings, shall be provided, along with the
engineering data and calculations, to demonstrate compliance with the
structural design provisions of the State Building Code, especially
concerning wind and icing loads.  A registered engineer shall certify
drawings and engineering calculations.



   (D)   Compliance with National Electrical Code. WECS electrical
equipment and connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the
National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.



   (E)   Manufacturer warranty. The applicant shall provide
documentation or other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the WECS
has been successfully operated in atmospheric conditions similar to the
conditions in the city.  The WECS shall be warranted against any system
failures reasonably expected in severe weather operation conditions.



   (F)   Design standards.



      (1)   Height. The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be
determined in one of two ways.  In determining the height of the WECS, the
total height of the system shall be included.  System height shall be
measured from the base of the tower to the highest possible extension of the
rotor blade as follows:



         (a)   A one-foot-to one-foot ratio of the closest
property line distance to WECS base and the system height.



         (b)   A maximum system height of 200 feet.



         (c)   The shortest height of the two above-mentioned
methods shall be used in determining the maximum allowable height of a WECS
system.  The height of a WECS must also comply with FAA regulations and/or
MnDOT regulations.  All WECS shall be registered with MnDOT Aeronautics.



      (2)   Setbacks. No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors)
shall be located within or above any required front, side or rear yard
setback, and no part of the system shall be within ten feet of any property
line, whichever is greater.  WECS towers shall be setback from the closest
property line one foot for every one foot of system height.  WECS shall not
be located within 20 feet of an above ground utility line.



      (3)   Freestanding ground systems. All freestanding ground
systems shall be constructed using a monopole or lattice-tower-type
construction.  In no case shall guy wires be permitted.



      (4)   Rotor clearance. Blade-arcs created by the WECS shall
have a minimum clearance of 20 feet above the ground.



      (5)   Rotor design. The blade design and materials are to be
designed and constructed to ensure safe operation in an urban/rural area.



      (6)   Rotor safety. Each WECS shall be equipped with both a
manual and automatic speed control and braking device.



      (7)   Disconnect. A visible exterior disconnect is required,
per the National Electrical Code.



      (8)   Certification required. All WECS shall be UL-listed or
certified by an equal agency recognized by the State of Minnesota.



      (9)   Lightning protection. Each WECS shall be grounded to
protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National
Electrical Code as adopted by the city.



      (10)   Tower access. To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS
towers must comply with one of the following provisions:



         (a)   Tower-climbing apparatus shall not be located
within 12 feet of the ground.



         (b)   A locked, anti-climb device shall be installed on
the tower.



         (c)   A tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed
by a locked, protective fence at least eight feet high.



      (11)   Signs. WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two
square feet, at the base of the tower, which shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   Warning high voltage.



         (b)   Manufacturer’s name.



         (c)   Emergency phone number.



         (d)   Emergency shutdown procedures.



      (12)   Lighting. WECS shall not have affixed or attached any
lights, reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for
illumination devices required by FAA regulations.



      (13)   Electromagnetic interference. WECS shall be designed
and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.



      (14)   Noise emissions. Noises emanating from the operation of
WECS shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state pollution control
standards.



   (G)   Building permit required. A building permit shall be required
for the installation of all WECS in the city.



   (H)   Inspection. The city hereby reserves the right, upon issuing
any WECS conditional use permit, to inspect the premises on which the WECS is
located.  If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition or poses a
potential safety hazard, the owner shall, upon written notice from the city,
take expeditious action to correct the situation.  The city may require the
WECS to be shut down until safety issues are addressed and corrected if, in
the opinion of the inspector, there is an immediate threat to health or
safety.



   (I)   Abandonment. Any WECS or tower that is not used for six
successive months shall be deemed abandoned, and shall be dismantled and
removed from the property at the expense of the property owner.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.143  WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Wind turbines shall be a conditional accessory use in any residential
zoning district subject to the following:



   (A)   Applicability. These regulations apply to any property use
located in a residential zoning district and that has a rated output of
greater than 0.5 kW. 



   (B)   Number of small wind turbines allowed. One per land parcel. 



   (C)   Location. Wind energy conversion systems may be located either
in the rear yard (freestanding) or on the roof of the house or garage
(attached). 



   (D)   Minimum parcel size required. One-half acre. 



   (E)   Setback.



      (1)   Freestanding wind turbines shall be set back by a
distance equal to the height of the wind turbine from any property line or
overhead utility lines.  Height shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the top of the rotor arc.  The requirement in this section regarding
shadow flicker may dictate additional setback. 



      (2)   Guy wire anchors shall be set back at least 5 feet from
any property line. 



   (F)   Tower height.



      (1)   Freestanding systems. The tower height (including the
turbine housing but not including the rotor) shall not exceed 50 feet for 
parcels up to 0.50 acre.  The tower height shall not exceed 80 feet for
parcels greater than 0.50 acre. 



      (2)   Attached systems. The tower height (including the
turbine housing but not including the rotor) shall not exceed the height of
the building plus ten feet.



   (G)   Rotor diameter. The maximum rotor diameter for Residential
district wind turbines with a horizontal axis shall be 12 feet. 



   (H)   Wiring location. All wiring from the tower to the residence
shall be underground.



   (I)   Automatic over-speed controls. All small wind turbines shall
be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic over-speed
controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of the
residential wind energy system. 



   (J)   Interference avoidance. Wind turbines shall not be installed
in any location where they would interfere with existing residential radio,
television, wireless phone or other personal communication system
reception.  No small wind turbines shall be installed in any location along
the major axis of an existing microwave communication link where its
operation is likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the link’s
operation.



   (K)   Appearance. The small wind turbine and tower shall have a flat
finish as applied by the manufacturer. The objective is to have the equipment
as inconspicuous as practicable.



   (L)   Information to be submitted. All applications shall include
the information required for a site plan approval.  In addition, the
applicant shall submit:



      (1)   A site plan showing:



         (a)   Property lines and physical dimensions of the
subject property; 



         (b)   Location, dimensions and types of existing
structures on the property;



         (c)   Location of the proposed wind system tower,
foundations, guy anchors and associated equipment;  and



         (d)   Location all overhead utilities.



      (2)   Small wind turbine system specifications, including
manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height and tower type
(freestanding or guyed);



      (3)   Tower foundation blueprints or drawings signed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in Minnesota;



      (4)   Tower blueprint or drawing signed by a professional
engineer licensed to practice in Minnesota;



      (5)   Evidence from a certified professional that the wind
turbine will not result in shadow flicker on the windows of a nearby occupied
structure of any type for more than 30 minutes per day; or for more than one
hour per day on a public road or a residential lot. 



   (M)   Compliance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Regulations. Small wind turbines must comply with applicable FAA
regulations. 



   (N)   Insurance. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
installation of a small wind turbine, the applicant shall provide the
Community Development Department with evidence that the homeowner’s
insurance policy has been endorsed to cover damage or injury that might
result from the installation and operation of the wind turbine.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS



§ 154.148  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is established to provide regulations of general
applicability for property throughout the city, to promote the orderly
development and use of land, to protect and conserve the natural environment,
to minimize conflicts among land uses, and to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.149  APPLICABILITY.



   The regulations set forth in this subchapter apply to all structures
and all land uses, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.150  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, GENERALLY.



   These regulations supplement the requirements found elsewhere in this
code.



   (A)   All districts.



      (1)   No accessory building or structure shall be constructed
prior to or in lieu of the principal building.



      (2)   No accessory building or structure shall exceed the
height of the principal building. 



      (3)   All accessory structures shall be incidental to and
customarily associated with the principal use or structure.



      (4)   The accessory structure shall be subordinate in
“footprint,” area, extent, and purpose to the principal use or structure
served.



      (5)   In all residential districts, the design and
construction of any garage or carport shall be similar to or compatible with
the design and construction of the principal building.  The exterior
building materials, roof style and colors shall be similar to or compatible
with the principal building. 



      (6)   The accessory use or structure shall be related to the
use of the principal structure. In no case shall an accessory structure be
used as an independent residence, either permanently or temporarily, except
as provided in the following section. 



      (7)   The accessory structure shall be located on the same
land parcel as the principal use or structure except for accessory off-street
parking and loading, subject to the provisions of § 154.161, Parking
Requirements, Off-Street.



      (8)   No permanent structure (one having a frost-free footing)
shall be located in an easement unless the easement is amended or otherwise
allows such structures.  A non-permanent structure may be located in an
easement but may have to be moved if the easement-holder demands.



      (9)   “Little Free Libraries” not exceeding 2.5 square
feet of base floor area and 32 inches in height are not considered accessory
structures and shall be allowed in the front yard. 



   (B)   Residential districts.



      (1)   Accessory structures 120 square feet or larger,
including detached garages: 



         (a)   The exterior materials, color and roof pitch of
each accessory building shall be consistent with the principal building. 



         (b)   Detached garages shall not cover more than 10% of
the lot area. 



         (c)   No accessory building shall have an access door
more than 12 feet tall.



      (2)   All accessory structures are subject to the setback
requirements established for that zoning district. 



      (3)   The maximum number of accessory structures on a parcel
shall be three. This includes dwellings, garages, storage buildings, gazebos
and greenhouses but does not include decks, wind or solar energy equipment,
children’s play equipment, dog houses, chicken coops, swimming pools, hot
tubs or pergolas or similar.



      (4)   No accessory building may exceed the height of the
principal building.



      (5)   Increase in wall height.The maximum side wall height for
a detached garage in a residential district may be increased up to 20 feet,
provided that the maximum building height provision is not exceeded, and that
an additional setback of two feet is provided from side and rear lot lines
for each additional foot of side wall height over nine feet.  Side wall
height is measured from the top of the concrete slab to the top of the top
plate.



   (C)   Accessory communications towers and antennas are addressed in
§§ 154.109 through 154.143.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.151  ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS, DETACHED.



   Detached accessory dwelling units shall be permitted as a Conditional
Use in the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, subject to the following
requirements:



   (A)   The design and construction of any detached accessory dwelling
unit shall be similar to or compatible with the design and construction of
the principal building.  The exterior building materials, roof style and
colors shall be similar to or compatible with the principal building. 



   (B)   Any detached accessory dwelling unit shall be attached to a
permanent foundation that complies with the Minnesota State Building Code and
is solid for the circumference of the building. 



   (C)   The detached accessory dwelling unit shall have a minimum of
300 square feet of habitable floor area and a maximum of 700 square feet of
habitable floor area.



   (D)   The detached accessory dwelling unit shall be required to have
its own separate kitchen and bathroom facilities.



   (E)   The maximum ground coverage (footprint) of a building that
combines a garage and an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the ground
coverage (footprint) allowed for a detached garage in this code.



   (F)   If there is an accessory dwelling unit above a garage, the
maximum height of the building may be 23 feet or the height of the principal
building, whichever is less.  Refer to § 154.201, Rules of Measurement,
Building Height, for how height is measured.



   (G)   One of the dwelling units on the lot shall be owner-occupied.



   (H)   At no time shall the accessory dwelling unit be under separate
ownership from the principal structure.



   (I)   The detached accessory dwelling unit shall have the same
street address as the principal dwelling unit.  “Unit 1" shall be used as
the designation for the principal dwelling unit and “Unit 2" for the
accessory unit.



   (J)   One off-street parking space shall be provided as required for
each accessory dwelling unit.



   (K)   All accessory dwelling units shall be served by public
sanitary sewer and water.  Municipal water and sewer lines to the accessory
unit may be run from the principal building or may be connected and metered
separately.



   (L)   The detached accessory dwelling unit shall be registered with
the city’s Rental Registration Program.  As required by the Program, the
registration shall be renewed and the detached accessory dwelling unit
inspected periodically.  At the time of renewal, the property owner shall
verify in writing to the Zoning Administrator that one dwelling unit on the
property is owner-occupied.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.152  BUILDING MATERIALS, EXTERIOR.



   (A)   General. The construction and building standards in this
section pertain only to the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts and properties in
the I-1 and I-2 districts that abut State Highway 13 (State Street), County
Highway 14 (Elm Avenue), US Highway 14 and any frontage road adjacent
thereto.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
single-family or multi-family homes constructed in any commercial or
industrial zones by conditional use or expanded by conditional use.



      (1)   Metal buildings. No galvanized or unfinished steel,
galvalume or unfinished aluminum buildings (walls or roofs), except those
specifically intended to have a corrosive designed finish such as Cor-Ten
steel, shall be permitted in any zoning district except in association with
farming operations or as allowed by this section. 



      (2)   Finishes. Primary exterior building finishes shall
consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following:



         (a)   Brick;



         (b)   Natural or cultured stone;



         (c)   Decorative concrete block;



         (d)   Pre-cast concrete panels with a decorative finish;



         (e)   Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for
exterior use and wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar,
redwood or cypress;



         (f)   Curtain wall panels (non-structural, non-load
bearing), provided the panels are factory fabricated and finished with a
durable non-fade surface and their fasteners are of corrosion resistant
design;



         (g)   Glass curtain wall panels;



         (h)   Stucco;



         (i)   Fiber cement lap siding (e.g., Hardie-Plank®);



         (j)   Steel lap siding;



         (k)   Vinyl lap siding; and



         (l)   Other materials as determined by the Building
Official but not including galvanized or unfinished metal.



   (B)   Regulations. For all uses within the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4, as
well as the I-1 and 1-2 Zoning Districts, any exposed metal finish on all
buildings shall be subject to the following minimum requirements.



      (1)   At least 50% of the side of a building facing Elm Avenue
or State Highway 13 (State Street) shall be constructed with a material other
than exposed metal. 



      (2)   For structures on a corner, at least 25% of the
structure facing a secondary street shall be constructed with a material
other than exposed metal or appropriate vegetative screening such as a
combination of trees and shrubs shall be provided.



      (3)   For structures that have frontage on three streets, the
side of the structure facing the third street may be constructed entirely of
exposed metal.



      (4)   Any metal finish used in the building shall be a minimum
of 26 gauge steel.  The roof slope shall be limited to a minimum of one in
12 slope.  The mixture of materials must be coordinated into the
architectural design.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.153  BULK STORAGE OF LIQUID OR GRAIN.



   (A)   Above ground or below ground storage tanks, bins, elevators
and the like shall be regulated in accordance with applicable city, state and
federal regulations, including the applicable building codes, State Fire Code
and regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.  All necessary
federal, state and local permits and approvals shall be obtained.



   (B)   The City Council may require above ground liquid in free-state
storage tanks having a capacity of 300 gallons or more to be diked and
suitably sealed to hold a leakage capacity equal to 115% of tank capacity,
and also have State Fire Marshal approval.



   (C)   Any existing storage tank either above ground or below ground
that in the opinion of the Council constitutes a hazard to public safety
shall be discontinued. 



   (D)   No sale or bulk storage of fuel or other flammable liquid
except those directly related to an automobile service station or a truck
stop shall be located within 600 feet of a property zoned or used for
housing. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.154  CORNER SIGHT TRIANGLES.



   (A)   Corner visibility.



      (1)   On corner lots (including rural areas), nothing shall be
placed or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision
between a height of 2.5 to ten feet above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets within the shaded area of the clear sight triangle shown
below. 



      (2)    The point of the corner sight triangle shall be
measured 25 feet back from the imaginary line of the extended curb as shown
below.  If there are no curbs, the measurement will be from the point of
intersection of the pavement. 







 



   (B)   Corners less than 90 degrees. For lots with an interior angle
of less than 90 degrees at a street or railway corner, the protected corner
area is defined by a triangle created by the two corner lot lines and drawing
an imaginary line between the corner lot lines 25 feet from the corner on
each property lot line plus one foot for every ten degrees or fraction
thereof less than 90 degrees.



   (C)   Exceptions. Corner visibility standards do not apply to public
utility poles, street name markers, official traffic signs and control
devices, and fire hydrants.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.155  DRIVEWAYS AND PRIVATE INTERNAL ACCESS ROADS.



   (A)   Number, separation and width.



      (1)   The number, location and width of private access drives
or roads onto public roads may be controlled and limited by the City Council
in the interests of public safety and efficient traffic flow.



      (2)   The minimum separation between private driveways along a
public street shall be:



         (a)   Local or collector street: two times the required
side yard setback for a driveway;



         (b)   Arterial street: 50 feet;



         (c)   U-shaped driveways, any street: 50 feet between
the inside edges of the driveway surface.



      (3)   The minimum distance between the point that any private
driveway meets a public street and the nearest intersection of two public
street curb lines shall be 60 feet. 



      (4)   The maximum width for any portion of a driveway at the
property line shall be 24 feet for a residential driveway; a commercial,
industrial or institutional driveway may be 28 feet if two lanes and 36 feet
if three lanes.  The City Engineer may allow adjustments to the driveway
intersection corner radius if needed to accommodate large trucks. 



      (5)   The maximum width of a driveway when located in front of
the living portion of a house shall be 12 feet.



   (B)   Building access by fire emergency vehicles.



      (1)   Driveways shall be installed and sites shall be designed
to meet the requirements of § 503 of the Minnesota Fire Code.  Generally,
this means that a fire truck must be able to park within working distance of
a water source and still be within 150 feet of any portion of the exterior
wall of a building as measured by the length of the attack hose.  The
all-weather paved access drive shall be at least 20 feet wide and capable of
supporting the weight of the city fire truck.



      (2)   Buildings four to eight stories tall have additional
access road requirements under § 503 of the Minnesota Fire Code.



      (3)   For buildings with an automatic sprinkler system, fire
apparatus access roads need only be provided to an approved location, to the
sprinkler system fire department connection and to any secondary on-site
water supplies, per the Minnesota Fire Code.



   (C)   Driveways onto county roads. Access drives onto county roads
shall require a review by the County Engineer, who may determine the
appropriate location, size and design of the access drives and may limit the
number of access drives in the interest of public safety and efficient
traffic flow.



   (D)   Public road access required to each parcel. All lots or
parcels shall have direct adequate physical access for emergency vehicles
along the frontage of the lot or parcel from either an existing dedicated
public roadway, or a private roadway or access drive approved by the City
Council.



   (E)   Number of housing units allowed on a private internal access
road. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed to be accessed by a single
private internal circulation road or driveway is 16.  Private streets are
allowed only for multiple-family housing developments.



   (F)   Minimum length of driveways. Any driveway terminating at a
garage shall provide at least 20 feet of parking space between the garage
door and a property boundary line, a sidewalk or a private access road.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.156  EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   During the construction process, soil is highly
vulnerable to erosion by wind and water.  Eroded soil endangers water
resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic
habitat for fish and other desirable species.  Eroded soil also requires the
maintenance of sewers and ditches and the dredging of lakes and ponds.



      (2)   Consequently, the following regulations have been
adopted to safeguard water quality, reduce flooding, reduce soil erosion,
protect aquatic habitat, and protect the general safety and welfare of the
community.



   (B)   General requirements.



      (1)   City Engineer approval required before disturbance. No
land shall be disturbed until the erosion and sediment control and stormwater
management plan is approved by the City Engineer and conforms to the
standards set forth herein.



      (2)   Erosion and sedimentation control.



         (a)   Every applicant for a building permit or
subdivision approval to disturb 500 square feet of land or 120 square feet
for a building must adhere to the soil erosion and sedimentation control
standards and specifications in strict conformance to the provisions of this
section and the city’s engineering design standards for stormwater
management.



         (b)   Erosion and sediment control plans shall also be
consistent with the NPDES construction general permit, as amended, and the
filing or approval requirements of the Waseca Soil and Water Conservation
District.



      (3)   Stormwater management plan.



         (a)   Every applicant for a building permit or
subdivision approval, or a building that either increases impervious surfaces
by greater than one acre or redevelops one acre or greater of impervious
surface,  must adhere to the stormwater management standards and
specifications in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter and
the city’s engineering design standards.



         (b)   Stormwater management plans shall also be
consistent with the NPDES construction general permit, as amended, and the
filing or approval requirements of relevant watershed districts, watershed
management organizations, soil and water conservation districts or other
regulatory bodies.



         (c)   Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, the
stormwater management plan must indicate whether stormwater will be managed
on site or off site and, if on site, the general location and type of
practices.



   (C)   Master documents.



      (1)   The design of all post-construction stormwater BMPs
shall meet the requirements outlined in the city’s engineering design
standards and the NPDES construction general permit.



      (2)   The following documents are incorporated into this
section by reference: 



         (a)   The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System Permit, MN R100001 (NPDES construction general permit) issued by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, August 1, 2013, as amended.  The NPDES
general construction permit is incorporated into this chapter by reference.



         (b)   The city’s engineering design standards.  The
standards shall serve as the official guide for stormwater principles,
methods, and practices for proposed development activities.  The city’s
engineering design standards are hereby incorporated into this chapter by
reference.



   (D)   Maintenance plan and agreement. Every stormwater management
plan must also include a maintenance plan and maintenance agreement that
documents all responsibilities for operation and maintenance of all private
stormwater treatment practices.  The responsible party shall enter into a
maintenance agreement with the city that documents all responsibilities for
operation and maintenance of all private stormwater treatment practices. 
Such responsibility shall be documented in a maintenance plan and executed
through a maintenance agreement.  The maintenance agreement shall be
executed and recorded against the parcel.  The maintenance agreement and
maintenance plan shall be submitted to the city along with the stormwater
management plan.  The stormwater maintenance agreement shall be in a form
approved by the city shall describe the inspection and maintenance
obligations of this section and shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Designate the responsible party, which shall be
permanently responsible for maintenance of the structural or nonstructural
measures;



      (2)   Pass responsibility for such maintenance to successors
in title;



      (3)   Grant the city and its representatives the right of
entry for the purposes of inspecting all stormwater treatment practices;



      (4)   Allow the city the right to repair and maintain the
facility, if necessary maintenance is not performed after proper and
reasonable notice to the responsible party;



      (5)   Include a maintenance plan that contains, but is not
limited to the following:



         (a)   Identification of all structural stormwater
treatment practices.



         (b)   A schedule for regular inspection, monitoring, and
maintenance for each practice. Monitoring shall verify whether the practice
is functioning as designed and may include, but is not limited to quality,
temperature, and quantity of runoff.



         (c)   Identification of the Responsible Party for
conducting the inspection, monitoring, and maintenance for each practice.



      (6)   Identify a schedule and format for reporting compliance
with the maintenance plan to the city.



   (E)   Inspection of stormwater facility.



         (1)   Inspection programs shall be established on any
reasonable basis, including but not limited to:



         (a)   Routine inspections;



         (b)   Random inspections;



         (c)   Inspections based upon complaints or other notice
of possible violations;



         (d)   Inspection of drainage basins or areas identified
as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or
pollutants;



         (e)   Inspections of businesses or industries of a type
associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or
with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to
cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or
the NPDES permit; and



         (f)   Joint inspections with other agencies inspecting
under environmental or safety laws. 



      (2)   Inspections may include but are not limited to:



         (a)   Reviewing maintenance and repair records;



         (b)   Sampling discharges;



         (c)   Surface water;



         (d)   Groundwater;



         (e)   Material or water in drainage control facilities;
and



         (f)   Evaluating the condition of drainage control
facilities and other stormwater treatment practices.



      (3)   When any new stormwater treatment practice is installed
on private property, or when any new connection is made between private
property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer, or combined
sewer, the property owner shall grant to the city the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection.  This includes the right to enter a property when the city has a
reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or
has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance
or correction of a violation of this chapter.



      (4)   The City Engineer or designated representative shall
inspect all stormwater management facilities during construction, during the
first year of operation, and at least once every five years thereafter.  The
inspection records will be kept on file at the public works department for a
period of six years.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
obtain any necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to
the stormwater management facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes.



   (F)   Records of installation and maintenance activities. The
responsible party shall make records of the installation and of all
maintenance and repairs of the stormwater treatment practices, and shall
retain the records for at least three years.  These records shall be made
available to the city during inspection of the stormwater treatment practice
and at other reasonable times upon request.



   (G)   Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or
refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the city,
after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or
maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the stormwater
treatment practice in proper working condition.  In the event that the
stormwater treatment practice becomes a danger to public safety or public
health, the city shall notify the responsible party in writing.  Upon
receipt of that notice, the responsible party shall have thirty days to
perform maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner.  After
proper notice, the city may specially assess the owner(s) of the stormwater
treatment practice for the cost of repair work and any penalties, and the
cost of the work shall be assessed against the property and collected along
with ordinary taxes by the county.



   (H)   Enforcement. The City Engineer is authorized to cause the
provisions of this chapter to be properly enforced through the proper legal
channels.



      (1)   Notice of violation. When the city determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property.  The notice of violation shall contain:



         (a)   The name and address of the owner and applicant;



         (b)   The address when available or a description of the
land upon which the violation is occurring;



         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;



         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary
to bring the development activity into compliance with this chapter and a
time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;



         (e)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall
or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed; and



         (f)   A statement that the determination of violation
may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 15
days of services notice of violation.



      (2)   Stop work order. Persons receiving a stop work order
will be required to halt all construction activities.  This stop work order
will be in effect until the city confirms that the land disturbance activity
is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure
to address a notice of violation in a timely manner may result in civil,
criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures
authorized in this chapter. 



      (3)   Civil or criminal penalties. In addition to or as an
alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject
to prosecution.  Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
day during which the violation occurs or continues.



      (4)   Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to
restore land to its undisturbed condition.  In the event that restoration is
not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which may, after notice and
opportunity for hearing, be specially assessed against the property and
collected along with the ordinary taxes by the county.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.157  EXPLOSIVE AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS; HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   (A)   In general. No use or structure involving the manufacture,
storage, or use of explosive or flammable materials shall be operated or
occupied as to constitute a hazardous condition, or as to unreasonably
interfere with the use and enjoyment of property by any person of normal
sensitivities, or otherwise as to create a public nuisance.



   (B)   Specific standards. All uses involving the manufacture,
storage, or use of explosive or flammable materials shall comply with all
pertinent regulations, including but not limited to the Minnesota Building
Code and Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, and shall meet the requirements
identified as follows:



      (1)   Safety devices. All uses involving the manufacture,
storage, or use of explosive or flammable materials shall employ best
management practices and the provision of adequate safety devices to guard
against the hazards of fire and explosion and adequate fire-fighting and
fire-suppression devices standard in the industry.



      (2)   Explosive or blasting agents. The manufacture, storage,
or use of any explosive or blasting agent, as defined by the Uniform Fire
Code, shall be prohibited in any non- industrial zoning district.



      (3)   Flammable liquids and gases. The storage of any
flammable liquid or gas shall be subject to the requirements established
under the Uniform Fire Code and review by the State Fire Marshal.



         (a)   Distance from residential zoning districts.
Storage of flammable liquids or gases in excess of 120 gallons but not more
than 500 gallons shall be located no closer than 50 feet from the nearest
residential zoning district boundary, and if outside and above-ground, shall
be located no closer than 100 feet from the nearest residential zoning
district boundary. Storage of flammable liquids or gases in excess of five
hundred 500 gallons but not more than 2,750 gallons shall be located no
closer than 150 feet from the nearest residential zoning district boundary,
and if outside and above-ground shall be located no closer than 300 feet from
the nearest residential zoning district boundary. Storage of flammable
liquids or gases in excess of 2,750 gallons shall be located no closer than
300 feet from the nearest residential zoning district boundary.



         (b)   Decreasing minimum distance. A decrease in the
minimum setback, established above, shall only be allowed through approval of
a conditional use permit. 



   (C)   Hazardous materials.



      (1)   No use or structure involving hazardous materials shall
be operated or occupied as to constitute a hazardous condition, or as to
unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property by any person
of normal sensitivities, or otherwise as to create a public nuisance. 



      (2)   All uses shall comply with the standards governing
hazardous materials as regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.158  EXTERIOR STORAGE.



   (A)   Neat and orderly. Outdoor storage of personal property,
merchandise, products or raw materials in any districts shall be neat and
orderly.  Section § 154.159, Landscaping, Screening and Fences, describes
regulations for softening the view to such items.



   (B)   Setbacks. Outdoor storage shall conform to the requirements
for the setback of accessory structures.



   (C)   Residential districts. In residential districts, all materials
and equipment shall be stored within a building or be fully screened so as
not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following in good
order: firewood, laundry drying and recreational equipment currently being
used on the premises, and the off-street parking of passenger automobiles or
pick-up trucks.  Firewood piles in residential areas shall be neat and
orderly.  Not more than ten cords shall be stored on any property.  A cord
is 4'x4'x8'.



   (D)   Hazardous or detrimental storage. The city may require the
application for and consideration of a conditional or interim use permit for
any exterior storage if it is demonstrated that the storage is a hazard to
the public health and safety and has or may have a detrimental effect on
nearby property values, impairs scenic views or constitutes a threat to
living amenities.



(`86 Code, § 9.48) (Am. Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.159  LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND FENCES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to improve
appearances, increase the compatibility of differing land uses, reduce soil
erosion, protect water quality, provide summer cooling and winter wind
protection, and increase property values. 



   (B)   Types of development included. The requirements of this
section shall apply to all proposed commercial, industrial, multiple-family
residential, and public or semi-public developments that are required to
submit an application for site plan review.  Excluded are building additions
less than 50% of the existing floor area and parking lot expansions less than
50% of the existing parking area. Individual detached (single-family) houses
are exempt from this landscaping section except for sub-section (C), below. 
Plats that create lots for more than one detached house are subject to these
regulations, however.



   (C)   Plantings for single-family detached houses. Single-family
detached houses shall have at least one overstory tree per house, with a
minimum caliper size of 2.0 inches.



   (D)   Planting plan required. Each application for site plan review
shall include a planting plan, drawn to scale by a professional landscape
architect or nursery landscape designer, which shall address:



      (1)   Existing and proposed topography using two-foot contour
intervals, if topography is being altered.



      (2)   Existing and proposed vegetation.  The Community
Development Department may require a survey of existing trees by species that
have a diameter at four feet in height of 12 inches or greater. 



      (3)   Proposed plants shall be shown at their normal mature
crown diameter.  A table shall be included that lists the symbols,
quantities, common names, botanical names, sizes of plant material, root
specification (e.g., balled, potted, and the like) and any special planting
instructions.



      (4)   Existing and proposed site plan elements such as
buildings, parking lots, driving lanes, sidewalks, other improvements, water
bodies, streams and wetlands. 



   (E)   Plant sizes and variety.



      (1)   Existing vegetation. Existing healthy, well-formed
canopy and understory trees as well as healthy shrubs shall be credited
toward the requirements of this section, provided the vegetation is protected
before and during development of the site and maintained thereafter in a
healthy growing condition, and meets the applicable regulation. 



      (2)   Minimum plant sizes.



   Table 15-1:  Minimum Plant Sizes



 


 

Minimum Size 1

 

Notes



Deciduous canopy or shade trees

Ball and burlap

Container 
 
 

2.0" diameter

1.25" diameter
 
Multi-stem varieties:  Minimum height of 6 feet above ground level. 

All new trees shall be tethered and wrapped. 


Understory, small maturing, or ornamental trees
 
1.25" diameter
 
Multi-stem varieties:  Minimum of 4 feet in height


Conifer trees
 
6 feet tall
 
 


1All diameters are measured at a height of 4'



 



      (3)   Species variety. To curtail the spread of disease or
insect infestation in a plant species, not more than one-quarter of the
plantings may be of the same species. To help provide year-round color, both
deciduous and coniferous plants shall be used. 



      (4)   Prohibited plants.



         (a)   The following trees shall be prohibited: Box
Elder, Chinese Elm, Cottonwood, Siberian Elm, Female Ginkgo, Silver Maple,
Norway Maple, Russian olive, and Buckthorn. 



         (b)   These following trees shall not be used within 20
feet of the street edge:  aspen, apple, black locust, black walnut,
butternut, catalpa, cherry, Douglas fir, fir, juniper, larch, mulberry, plum,
poplar, spruce, willow and yew. 



      (5)   Sod. Sod shall be used in boulevard areas rather than
seed to establish turf grass. 



   (F)   Tree and woodland protection.



      (1)   Natural forest and woodland areas shall be preserved to
the extent practical, and substantial tree stands shall be incorporated into
site development as feasible.  Treed locations shall not be clear-cut if
selective cutting and grading can be used to protect and preserve portions of
the forest.  The land developer shall demonstrate that no practical
alternative exists to removing existing trees from a site.  Credit may be
given for certain trees that are preserved, and additional trees may be
required in place of major trees that are removed. 



      (2)   Tree inventory and protection required. If requested by
the Community Development Department, the applicant shall submit a tree
survey prepared by an arborist or land surveyor.  All trees with a diameter
of 12 inches or more shall be retained to the extent practical.



      (3)   Credit towards landscape requirements. Protected trees
may be used to offset the number of required new overstory trees on a
one-to-one basis provided that the protected trees meet the requirements for
new plantings. 



      (4)   Removal and replacement of protected trees. If any trees
with a diameter of 12 inches or greater are removed, they shall be replaced
with new trees that meet the minimum size requirement at the rate of one new
tree for each tree removed.  Replacement trees shall be in addition to the
normally required number of overstory trees. 



      (5)   Tree protection during construction. All protected trees
shall be fenced before grading or excavation begins.  Encroachments into the
root zones of protected trees shall be avoided.



      (6)   Exemptions. The following tree removal activities are
exempt from the standards of this section:



         (a)   Removing trees that are dead or dying based on an
inspection by an arborist;



         (b)   Removing of trees that are determined by the City
Engineer to be an immediate nuisance or threat to an existing structure,
underground utility or to the public health, safety, or welfare; and



         (c)   Removal by the city or its authorized agent of
trees on city or publicly-owned land or in public rights-of-way in accordance
with this subchapter to complete street improvement projects.



   (G)   Maintenance required. Required plantings shall be maintained
in a healthy condition in perpetuity.  Dead or diseased plants shall be
replaced. 



   (H)   General site landscaping.



      (1)   Landscape elements. Landscape design may include
existing trees or shrubs that are in good condition, turf grass, ground cover
plants, overstory trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, perennials, flowers,
ornamental grasses, berms, walls and fences.  Each site shall include a
combination of coniferous and deciduous plants and a combination of trees and
shrubs.  Overstory trees may be either deciduous or coniferous. 



      (2)   Areas of the site to be landscaped.



         (a)   All parts of each site that are not occupied by
parking, patios, driveways or other hardscape shall be planted with at least
turf grass or ground cover plants.  These locations include:   



            1.   Required setback spaces that abut a public
street;



            2.   Required setback spaces along a side yard
between the front lot line and the building;



            3.   Required setback spaces that abut a different
type of land use (e.g., commercial versus residential); and



            4.   All islands in parking lots. 



         (b)   No landscaped area may be used for parking
vehicles or the storage or display of materials, supplies or merchandise. 



      (3)   Priority of locations for plantings. The priority for
the locations to be planted with trees and shrubs is: 



         (a)   Site edges that abut a differing type or intensity
of land use; refer to division (J), below for how to plant such locations;



         (b)   The space between the public street right-of-way
and the parking lot or building;



         (c)   The setback along an interior or rear lot line; and



         (d)   Islands or peninsulas in commercial or residential
parking lots. 



      (4)   Minimum number of overstory trees required along public
streets.



Table 15-2:  Minimum Number of Overstory or Ornamental Trees Required



 


Type of Land Use

 

Minimum Number of Trees Required per 100 Linear Feet of Public Street Edge



Multiple-family residential development
 

3.0



Commercial development   
 

3.0



Business park (I-1 District)
 

3.0



General industrial (I-2 District)
 

2.0




 



         These required trees shall be planted between the front
property line and the building setback line and shall be supplemented with
shrubs at the rate shown in Table 15-3, below.  Additional overstory or
ornamental trees may be needed along other property line or within parking
lots to meet the requirements of this section.



      (5)   Minimum number of shrubs required along public streets.



Table 15-3:  Minimum Number of Shrubs Required



 


Type of Land Use

 

Minimum Number of Shrubs Required per 100 Linear Feet of Public Street Edge



Multiple-family residential development
 

20



Commercial development   
 

15



Business park (I-1 District)
 

12



General industrial (I-2 District)
 

0




 



         These required shrubs shall be planted between the front
property line and the building setback line.  Additional perennials or
annuals may be needed along other property line or within parking lots to
meet the requirements of this section.



   (I)   Parking lot screening. The following requirements for the
setback areas and interior portions of parking lots complement the general
site landscaping requirements shown in division (H) of this section.



      (1)   Perimeter landscaping requirements. The views toward
parking lots from public streets or residential areas shall be treated with
plantings and, possibly, earthen berms, fences or other methods. The priority
for planting locations shall be:



         (a)   Parking lots adjacent to housing.  See division
(J) of this section, buffers between different zoning districts or land use
intensities;



         (b)   Between the public street right-of-way and the
parking lot or the building.  Refer to division (I)(2) of this section;



         (c)   The interior of parking lots.  Refer to division
(I)(3) of this section; and



         (d)   Other parking lot edges.



      (2)   Parking lots adjacent to streets.



         (a)   Any parking lot for a commercial, industrial,
multiple-family residential, public or semi-public development adjacent to a
public street shall have a minimum planting strip equal to the required
setback along the street right-of-way;



         (b)   For residential, commercial, public or semi-public
sites, the landscaping shall be designed to soften the views of parked cars
from the street.  In a traffic safety visibility triangle, mature shrubs or
ornamental grasses shall not exceed 30 inches in height.  This division does
not apply to I-2 zone.



         (c)   Overstory trees (deciduous or coniferous) shall be
provided at a minimum rate shown in Table 15-2, Number of Overstory Trees
Required, above. 



         (d)     Screen ing materi als may includ e a combi
nation of plants, berms, raised planters, mason ry walls, or other screening
devices that meet the intent of this requirement.



Figure 15-1:  Illustration of parking lot perimeter screening







 



Figure 15-2: Perimeter landscaping required between a parking lot and a street







 



      (3)   Islands in parking lots.



         (a)   This division does not apply to the I-2 zone.
Planted islands shall be used to demarcate driving aisles and to break up
long rows of parking at the rate of one island for every 50 parking spaces. 
Landscaped islands shall have a minimum outer width of nine feet.  Plantings
in the islands shall consist of at least one overstory tree per island and
rock mulch.  Additional shrubs or other perennials may be included at the
discretion of the owner to enhance appearances.



   (J)   Landscaping between different zoning districts or land use
intensities.



      (1)   The plantings required in this division are in addition
to plantings required in division (H) of this section, general site
landscaping.



      (2)   New developments shall provide a landscaped buffer
between differing zoning districts or land uses of significantly different
intensity (i.e. low density and high density, residential and commercial,
residential and industrial, commercial and industrial, public/semi-public and
residential, and the like).  The buffer shall have the width as provided in
Table 15-1 and number of plantings as provided in Table 15-2.



2016 S-16



      (3)   No structure shall be permitted within a required buffer
other than a wall, fence, or earth berm.  Parking areas and driveways shall
not encroach upon buffer areas.  Note that the width of the required
transition buffer may exceed the width of the normal minimum required parking
or building setback.



Table 15-4:  Minimum Width and Treatment of Required Buffer Areas



 




 

Proposed Use in this Zoning District






 

R-1 or R-2 District, a School or a Public Park

 

R-3 or R-4 District

 

Any B District

 

Any I District




Adjacent to:



R-1 or R-2 District, a school or a public park

   Landscape standard
 





--

 





15'



B

 





25'



C

 





40'



D



R-3 or R-4 District

   Landscape Standard
 

15'



B

 

--

 

20'



C

 

40'



D



Any B District

   Landscape Standard
 

25'



C

 

20'



C

 

--

 

15'



B



Any I District

   Landscape Standard
 

40'



D

 

40'



D

 

15'



B

 

--




 



      (4)   Minimum planting requirements.



         (a)   For every 100 lineal feet of a required buffer
area between differing types of land uses or intensities, the following
cumulative number of plants shall be provided.



Table 15-5:  Minimum Planting Requirements



 


Required Buffer Area

 

Overstory Trees (Deciduous and Coniferous) per 100 lineal feet of buffer

 

Plus Ornamental Trees per 100 lineal feet of buffer

 

Plus Shrubs per 100 lineal feet of buffer




A

 

2

 

0

 

0




B

 

3

 

2

 

4




C

 

4

 

4

 

10




D

 

6

 

6

 

12




 



         (b)   The buffer requirement may be reduced one step
(not lower than A) if:



            1.   If there is a public street between differing
zoning districts.



            2.   The property owner on the opposite side of
the buffer line has already installed a transition buffer that meets these
requirements.



         (c)   The buffer requirement may be reduced two steps
(not lower than A) if a berm and/or an opaque fence or wall totaling at least
six feet tall is used.  In that case, any required shrubs shall be placed on
the outer side of the fence or wall with the intent of softening the
barrier. 



   (K)   Screening of storage, loading or trash collection areas.



      (1)   Intent and applicability. In addition to the other
planting requirements in this sub-section, screening shall be required in all
districts to shield the view to certain site elements from either off-site or
on-site locations.



      (2)   Items to be screened.



         (a)   The following areas shall be screened from view
from the public street or from nearby housing: 



            1.   Trash and recycling areas;



            2.   Loading and truck service areas; and



            3.   Outdoor storage areas.



         (b)   It is not the intention of this code to require
visual screening of these items in the I-2, General Industrial District, from
views between industrial sites.



      (3)   Methods of screening.



         (a)   All items to be screened shall be provided with a
visual screen consisting of fences, walls, gates, berms, approved plants or
some combination of those elements.



         (b)   Fences or walls shall be compatible with the
architectural materials and patterns of the principal structure.



         (c)   Truck dock doors on new (future) buildings shall
face away from the public street.  Wing walls shall be used to screen the
view from the public street of truck docks that are on a wall that is
perpendicular to the street.



         (d)   Outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be
screened from view from the public street or from housing by a fence or wall
at least six feet tall and 90% opaque. Plantings in the foreground shall be
used to soften the appearance of the fence or wall. 



   (L)   Fences and walls.



      (1)   Construction and maintenance, generally.



         (a)   Every fence or wall shall be constructed in a
substantial, workmanlike manner and of substantial material reasonably suited
for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used.



         (b)   Every fence or wall shall be maintained in a
condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain
in a condition of disrepair or danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or
private. Any such fence which is, or has become dangerous to the public
safety, health or welfare, is a public nuisance and the Zoning Administrator
shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof.



         (c)   Chain link fences, wherever permitted, shall be
constructed in such a manner that no barbed ends shall be at the top except
in industrial districts, or on public property for security purposes.



         (d)   That side of the fence considered to be the face
(the side opposite the post) shall face abutting property, except for farm
fences.



         (e)   No person shall construct or erect any electrical
or barbed wire fence, except for Essential Services for which security is
imperative or to contain intensively used facilities for raising animals.



         (f)   No person shall construct a fence topped with
razor wire without a conditional use permit, except the federal prison or
essential services for which security is imperative.



         (g)   No fence shall be installed in a location which
would prevent a fire hydrant from being immediately discernible or in any
manner deter or hinder the Fire Department from gaining immediate access
thereto.



         (h)   In those instances where a fence exists as an
enclosure which restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate,
identifiable collapsible section, or other such means of recognizable ingress
shall be unobstructed and a minimum of three feet in width. The location of
such ingress points shall be positioned at any point paralleling the front
lot lines, between the side lot property line and the principal structure.



         (i)   All fences shall be constructed on or inside the
boundary of the subject property, and not in the public right of way. There
is no setback requirement for fences.



      (2)   Residential district fences or walls.



         (a)   On properties zoned residential and not a farm, no
fence shall be erected or maintained more than six feet in height. 



         (b)   No fence shall be erected in any front or corner
side yard, to a height in excess of four feet.



         (c)   On corner lots in all districts, no fence or
planting in excess of 30 inches above the street center line grade shall be
permitted within a traffic sight triangle.



         (d)    If a rear lot line is shared with the side lot
line of an abutting lot, that portion of the rear lot line equal to the front
setback of the house on the abutting lot shall not be fenced to a height of
more than four feet. If the abutting lot is undeveloped, the height of the
rear lot fence shall be reduced at the normal front setback line.







 



   Figure 15-3: Fence height limitations where a rear lot line abuts a
side lot line



         (e)   Chain link fences that enclose tennis courts shall
not exceed ten feet in height.



      (3)   Non-residential district fences.



         (a)   Fences over six feet tall shall require a building
permit.



         (b)   Boundary line fences abutting residential
districts shall conform to those conditions applying to the residential
district.



         (c)   Fences for special purposes and fences differing
in construction, height, or length may be permitted in any non-residential
district by issuance of a building permit from the Community Development
Department.  Findings shall be made that the fence is necessary to protect,
buffer, or improve the premises for which the fence is intended.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.160  LIGHTING, EXTERIOR.



   (A)   Generally. In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate
an off-street parking area, sign or other structure shall be arranged so as
to deflect light away from any adjoining residential property or zone, or
from the public streets.



   (B)   Direct lighting. Direct glare, whether from floodlights or
from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding, shall be
hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. 
Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent
property or public right-of-way.  The lens of lights under canopies such as
at gasoline filling stations must be recessed flush with the ceiling or fully
shielded on their sides.



   (C)   Maximum allowable light levels. Any light or combination of
lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one-foot candle
(meter reading) as measured from the centerline of the street.  Any light or
combination of lights which cast light on residential property shall not
exceed 0.4 foot-candles (meter reading) as measured from the property.



(`86 Code, § 9.50) (Am. Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.161  PARKING REQUIREMENTS, OFF-STREET.



   (A)   General parking requirements in Chapter 71. Refer to Chapter
71 of the City Code, Parking Rules, for regulations regarding on-street
parking including general prohibitions; parking of manufactured homes, mobile
homes and travel trailers; direction to proceed; methods of parking; winter
parking and snow emergencies; on-street parking regulations; postal delivery
boxes; private parking lots and roads; and parking of “for sale” vehicles
on non-residential property.



   (B)   Requirements for building permits and certificates of
occupancy. Any new or enlarged building, or a change in the use of a
building, shall be required to serve those improvements or changes with
parking, loading or bicycle parking as required in this section.



   (C)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required.



      (1)   Off-street parking space requirements are established in
Table 15-6.



      (2)   For uses not listed, the off-street parking requirements
shall be established by the Community Development Department based on similar
uses and/or authoritative sources accepted by the Department.



      (3)   Parking areas shall conform to the requirements of
Minnesota State Accessibility Code, Chapter 1341.0502, in terms of the
location and design of spaces for physically-handicapped drivers.  The
number of spaces required is shown in division (F) of this section.



      (4)   An applicant for site plan approval may present parking
counts from other locations of a very similar facility that have generated
less or more parking demand than listed in Table 15-6.  The Community
Development Department will consider that evidence in its review.



      (5)   For structures containing multiple uses, parking shall
be calculated separately for each use.  Credit for shared parking is
provided in this section. 



      (6)   Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot
as the principal use, unless shared parking or off-site parking is approved
for the use.



      (7)   One parking space shall be required for each commercial
vehicle owned by and used in the operation of the land use if that vehicle(s)
is kept on the property.



      (8)   For those land uses where the parking requirement is
calculated on a square foot basis, the gross floor area of the building will
be used in the calculation.



Table 15-6:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required



 


Use

 

Minimum Standard





Residential Land Uses


1-, 2- and 3-unit buildings
 
2 off-street spaces per unit, counting the space in the driveway.


Townhouse
 
A minimum of 2 off-street spaces per dwelling unit for residents’ use
counting the private driveway plus a minimum of 0.5 off-street shared space
per dwelling unit for visitors’ use.


Apartment building
 
1.5 spaces per dwelling unit plus at least 0.5 space per unit in common for
visitors.


Accessory dwelling
 
1 per unit.


Manufactured home park
 
2 per unit.


Housing for the elderly
 
Total spaces for residents, staff and visitors: 

   Independent: 1 per unit

   Assisted or memory: 0.4 per bed

At least 35% of the spaces must be provided in a surface lot so that they can
be shared among visitors and staff.


Day care, in-home, children or adults, not overnight 
 
The standard parking requirement for the housing type.


Residential (overnight) care facility or group home
 
1 space for each non-resident service provider at the peak time; plus 1 space
per 6 residents or fraction thereof.  Council may require additional parking
based if CUP application warrants.  Spaces in the garage and driveway may be
counted toward the total. 


Business Land Uses


Animal hospitals and veterinarians
 
3 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Bank
 
3 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Bar or tavern
 
1 space per 3 seats.


Bowling alley
 
3 spaces per lane.


Coffee shop
 
6 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Contractor’s office or showroom
 
1 space per 250 square feet of office, sales or display space plus 1 space
per 3,000 square feet of storage area.


Convenience food store with gasoline pumps
 
1 per 500 square feet plus spaces at fuel pump islands.


Convention or exhibit halls
 
1 space per each 4 occupants at maximum designed capacity.


Day care center for children or adults, not in a home
 
1.5 spaces for each 10 participants plus one space per caregiver on the
maximum shift.


Discount department stores 
 
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Fitness center
 
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Funeral home
 
Spaces equal to one-third of the capacity in persons.


Grocery stores
 
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Large merchandise retail (e.g. appliances)
 
1 space per each 500 square feet.


Medical or dental clinic
 
5 spaces for each doctor or dentist plus 1 per employee.


Motel or hotel
 
1 space per each guest room plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift;
plus 75% of the normal space required for any accessory uses such as
restaurant, banquet space, meeting rooms. 


Motor vehicle service
 
4 spaces per each service bay.


Nursing home
 
1 space per 4 beds at designed capacity.


Offices
 
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Theater, auditorium, assembly halls
 
1 space per each 4 seats.

A single seat on a bench is equal to 28 inches.


Restaurant
 
1 space for every 3 seats.


Retail or service business, general

   Under 10,000 square feet

   10,000 to 100,000 square feet
 
 

4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.

3.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Shopping center
 
1 space per 300 square feet.

Grocery stores and theaters shall be calculated separately.

Restaurants and food service shall be calculated separately unless the
shopping center exceeds 20,000 square feet in size and no wait-staff is
present, and the use constitutes less than 25% of the shopping center’s
floor area.


Vehicle sales, new or used autos, light trucks, motorcycles, boats or
all-terrain vehicles
 
Sales lot:  8 per 1,000 square feet of building

Employees:  1 per employee on the maximum shift

Customers:  1 per 1,000 square feet of building


Industrial Land Uses


Manufacturing, fabrication, or processing
 
1 space per employee on the maximum shift or 1 space per 1,000 square feet,
whichever is larger.


Warehouse
 
1 space per each 2,000 square feet.


Wholesale sales, business customers only
 
1 space over 1,000 square feet for non-showroom area and 1 additional space
for each 500 square feet of showroom area.


Public and Semi-Public Land Uses


Community center
 
Parking requirement shall be based upon uses within the building.


Libraries or museums
 
1 space per 300 square feet.


Places of public assembly or religious institutions
 
1 space per each 4 seats at maximum capacity of assembly hall.

A single seat on a bench is equal to 28 inches.


School, elementary or junior high
 
2 spaces per each classroom or 1 space for each 5 seats in the primary
assembly area, whichever is greater.


School, high school or post-secondary
 
1 space per each 4 students based on building capacity, plus one space for
each two classrooms.


Other Land Uses


Land uses not listed in this table
 
Parking requirements for uses not listed above will be determined by the
Community Development Department based on similar uses and/or authoritative
sources accepted by the Department.




 



   (D)   Reductions to minimum requirements.



      (1)   Reductions. The off-street parking reductions described
in this section may be used jointly or separately except as indicated
otherwise.



      (2)   Modification request. An applicant may request a
modification of the minimum required number of parking spaces by submitting a
study of anticipated parking demand. Parking studies shall be prepared by a
professional with expertise in traffic and parking analysis.



      (3)   State Street frontage downtown. Buildings located in the
half block abutting State Street between Third Avenue North and Second Avenue
South and extending into the 300 blocks of South State Street are exempt from
any off-street parking requirements.



      (4)   Shoreland Management Overlay District. The required
minimum number of parking spaces may be reduced by 25% in the Shoreland
Management Overlay zoning district upon approval of the Community Development
Department.



   (E)   Maximum number of parking spaces allowed.



      (1)   The maximum number of parking spaces for any building or
use shall not exceed 125% of the number of spaces required by Table 15-6.



      (2)   Additional parking may be provided if it does not
increase impervious surface area beyond that which would be created by
meeting the maximum parking requirement (i.e., parking in a structure or
below a building).



      (3)   An applicant may request a modification of the maximum
allowed number of parking spaces by submitting a study of anticipated parking
demand.  Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional with expertise
in traffic and parking analysis.



      (4)   This allowance does not apply in the Shoreland Overlay
Zoning District.



   (F)   Parking for the disabled.



      (1)   Number of parking spaces required for the disabled.



Table 15-7:  Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required for the Disabled



 


Total Parking Spaces

 

Accessible Parking Spaces Required

 

“Van-Accessible” Spaces Required





1 to 25
 

1

 

1



26 to 50
 

2

 

1



51 to 75
 

3

 

1



76 to 100
 

4

 

1



101 to 150
 

5

 

1



151 to 200
 

6

 

1



201 to 300
 

7

 

2



301 to 400
 

8

 

2



401 to 500
 

9

 

2



501 to 1000
 

2% of total

 

1 in every 6 accessible spaces



Over 1000
 

20 plus 1 for every 100 over 1000

 

1 in every 6 accessible spaces





 



      (2)   Design of parking spaces for the disabled.



         (a)   Each designated space must be eight feet wide with
an adjacent 8 feet wide access aisle;



         (b)   Each eight-foot access aisle must be identified as
“no parking” either by sign or on the surface of the access aisle;



         (c)   One in six accessible spaces must be van
accessible, i.e., it must have 98 inches of vertical clearance;



         (d)   All designated spaces must be on an accessible
route located as near as possible to an accessible entrance; and



         (e)   Each space is required to have a sign with the
international symbol of accessibility, indicating that a permit is required
and notification of the maximum fine for violation under state law. 



   (G)   Shared parking.



      (1)   Shared off-street parking is allowed to provide parking
for more than one land use subject to the conditions established in this
section.



      (2)   The uses must have their highest peak demand for parking
at substantially different times of the day or week, or an adequate amount of
parking shall be available for all uses during shared hours of peak demand. 
A parking plan shall address the hours, size and mode of operation of the
respective uses.



      (3)   The minimum spaces required under a shared parking plan
shall be based on the following:



         (a)   For those uses parking at substantially different
times of the day or week, the number of spaces required for the uses that
require the most parking; and



         (b)   For those uses parking at the same hours of peak
demand, the minimum shall be 1.5 times the number of spaces required by the
use(s) that require the most parking. 



      (4)   Shared parking facilities shall be protected by a
covenant running with the land and recorded with the County in a form
approved by the City Attorney.  Such a covenant shall not be revoked without
consent of the city.  A certified copy of the recorded document shall be
provided to the Community Development Department prior to the use of the
shared parking arrangement.



   (H)   Off-site parking. Off-site parking may be allowed under the
site plan review process.  The Community Development Department  may
require the applicant to present proof of ownership of the off-site property,
a long-term lease or similar arrangement.



   (I)   Proof of parking. If it is demonstrated that the required
minimum parking is in excess of the actual demand, all of the required
parking need not be constructed initially.  The City Council may grant a
proof of parking agreement to the developer. This agreement shall describe
the required parking, demonstrate that space exists to comply with the
parking requirement and set conditions for the future construction of the
required parking, if necessary.  The agreement shall state that the
developer or future successors shall be responsible for completing parking
improvements to meet City Code requirements.  The area of future parking
shall be landscaped according to the requirements for parking areas.



   (J)   Parking area use. Required parking spaces and the circulation
aisles providing access to them shall not be used for the following:



      (1)   Storage of any kind, including of unlicensed or
inoperable motor vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles and the like;



      (2)   Display, sales, rental, or repair of motor vehicles;



      (3)   Permanent display of goods for sale; temporary or
seasonal display and sale of goods may be allowed pursuant to §§ 154.095
through 154.098, Temporary Uses and Structures. 



      (4)   Loading and unloading of vehicles.



   (K)   Design requirements.



      (1)   Site plan. All applications for site plan review shall
depict, at a measurable scale, the location and arrangement of vehicle
parking, curb cuts, driveways and walkways.  Refer also to § 154.178, Site
Plan Review, in the Application Reviews and Procedures chapter of this code.



      (2)   Access and location. Parking areas shall have access to
a public street.  Driveways shall be located to minimize interference with
traffic movement.  (See § 154.155 Driveways and Private Internal Access
Roads).



      (3)   Parking dimensions. Parking dimensions shall be
according to Table 15-8.



Table 15-8:  Minimum Parking Lot Dimensions



 

Stall Angle (degrees)
 
Stall Width
 
Stall Length
 
Aisle Width
 
Traffic Flow



45

 

9

 

22

 

14

 

One way




60

 

9

 

21

 

16

 

One way




75

 

9

 

21

 

18

 

One way




90

 

9

 

18

 

24

 

Two way




90 compact

 

8

 

16

 

24

 

Two way




Parallel

 

23

 

8

 

22

 






 



      (4)   Parking for disabled persons. The size and location of
stalls reserved for parking for disabled persons shall be as required by
applicable state regulations and as summarized in division (F) of this
section. These spaces are included in the computation for the minimum parking
space requirement.



      (5)   Turn-arounds.



         (a)   All parking areas except those serving one-family
and two-family dwellings on local streets shall be designed so that vehicles
do not have to back into the public street.



         (b)   Parking areas for one-family and two-family
dwellings with driveway access onto county or state roads shall be designed
so that vehicles do not have to back into the street.



      (6)   Surfacing.



         (a)   Off-street parking, loading and circulation areas,
except for industrial uses in the I-2 zone, shall be paved with concrete,
plant-mixed asphalt or paving blocks having the same or greater durability as
concrete or plant-mixed asphalt. 



         (b)   For developments in the I-2 zone, such pavement is
required only for parking designated for the vehicles of employees and
visitors.  Other parking or loading areas shall be paved at a minimum with a
durable gravel material and maintained in a dust-free condition.  A dust
management plan shall be required in conjunction with site plan approval.



      (7)   Walkways. Required parking areas for 6 or more vehicles
shall have walkways separated from the parking area and surfaced with
bituminous asphalt, pavers or concrete to provide access from parking areas
to the entrances of buildings.



      (8)   Drainage. All parking or paved areas shall be drained
according to the requirements of §§ 154.148 through 154.169, General
Development Requirements.



      (9)   Lighting. Required parking areas for six or more
vehicles shall provide an average horizontal illumination between 0.4 and 1.0
foot-candle. The average horizontal illumination in all parking ramps shall
be 1.0 foot-candle.  Any illumination, whether affixed to a building or
otherwise, within a lot in any residential district, shall be designed to not
beam beyond the site on which it is located.  Curb is not required for one-
and two-family dwellings.



      (10)   Curbs. A six-inch-tall, poured-in-place concrete curb
shall be provided around the periphery of all parking lots and internal
access or circulation drives except where the City Engineer determines that a
curb would impede the drainage plan.



   (L)   Surface water control and curbing.



      (1)   For any development except one- or two-family housing or
industrial uses in the I-2 zone, the entire perimeter of any parking or
loading area shall have concrete curbing, as required above in division
(K)(10) of this section.  Islands and peninsulas in such parking areas or
loading areas shall also have concrete curb.  Flexibility in island and
peninsula design may be permitted as part of an overall drainage plan as
approved by the City Engineer.



      (2)   Parking and loading areas shall be graded and drained in
conformance with the approved surface water management plan.



      (3)   For development in the I-2 zone, concrete curb is not
required.



   (M)   Maintenance. All off-street parking areas shall be maintained
in good repair.



   (N)   Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking is required in order to
encourage utilitarian riding.



      (1)   Secure bicycle locking hardware shall be provided near
the building entrance but where it will cause no conflicts with pedestrians.



      (2)   This requirement applies to retail buildings larger than
10,000 square feet, office or industrial buildings larger than 20,000 square
feet, convenience stores, and convenience food restaurants. 



   (O)   Off-street loading facilities.



      (1)   Loading zones. The off-street loading requirement for
commercial or industrial buildings may be satisfied by designating a loading
zone area.  This loading zone area shall be separate from any required
off-street parking area and shall not conflict with automobile circulation.



      (2)   Loading docks, berths and facilities.



         (a)   Loading docks and doors shall comply with the
screening requirements of § 154.159, Landscaping, Screening and Fences.



         (b)   A loading facility includes the dock, the berth
for the vehicle, maneuvering areas and screening walls.



         (c)   Location.



            1.   All loading berth curb cuts shall be located
at least 60 feet from the intersection of two street rights-of-way.



            2.   No loading berth shall be located less than
100 feet from any parcel that is zoned residential and used or subdivided for
residential use, or has an occupied institutional building, including but not
limited to schools, religious institutions or community centers, unless the
loading berth is entirely within a building.



            3.   Loading facilities shall not occupy the
required front yard except in the I-2 zoning district.



         (d)   Each loading berth location shall permit vehicular
access to a street in a manner that will least interfere with traffic.



         (e)   All loading facilities and access ways shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete except in the I-2 zoning district.



         (f)   Where noise from loading or unloading activity is
audible in a residential district, the activity shall terminate between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



      (3)   Accessory use. No loading berth or access drive shall be
used for the storage of goods or inoperable vehicles.  It may not be
included as a part of the space necessary to meet the off-street parking
requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.162  PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS, SUPPLEMENTARY.



   The following parking regulations apply to the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4
zoning districts as well as to housing located in non-residential zoning
districts.  These regulations supplement the off-street parking requirements
of § 154.161, Parking Requirements, Off-Street.



   (A)   General residential parking requirements.



      (1)   Off street parking of any type of vehicle shall be
provided in accordance with § 154.161 titled Parking Requirements,
Off-Street.



      (2)   No more than four vehicles or one per licensed driver
residing on the premises, whichever is more, may be parked or stored outside
on the lot. For the purpose of this clause, a vehicle must be currently
licensed and operable, have a capacity of nine or fewer passengers or be a
truck not exceeding one ton capacity.



      (3)   Exterior vehicle parking and storage shall be confined
to surfaces paved with concrete,  asphalt or pavers. All new or expanded
parking shall meet this standard. All new construction, including garages,
garage additions and parking or vehicle storage areas shall be served by an
access drive made of concrete, asphalt or pavers.



      (4)   One-, two- or three-family residences:



         (a)   Parking areas and circulation drives shall be set
back at least five feet from any side or rear lot line.



         (b)   Parking in the front yard shall not be located
between the living space of the house and the street.



         (c)   Front yard parking beyond the width of the garage
(that is, in the side yard) shall be set back from the front property line at
least ten feet.



   (B)   Parking or storage of commercial-use vehicles, inoperable
vehicles, unlicensed vehicles and vehicle parts.



      (1)   Inoperable vehicles, unlicensed vehicle or vehicle parts
shall not be stored outdoors, whether on a lot or on a street, in a
residential district.



      (2)   One commercial vehicle of Class 1, 2 or 3 may be parked
or stored outside, whether on a lot or on a street, in a residential
district. Class 1, 2 and 3 vehicles are defined by the U.S. Department of
Transportation. 



   (C)   Parking or storage of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers,
all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles and similar vehicles.



      (1)   Recreational vehicles, boats, all-terrain vehicles,
snowmobiles, special purpose trailers or other vehicles designed or used for
off-road purposes may be parked or stored in a garage or other building or
may be parked or stored outdoors as follows: 



         (a)   No more than two such vehicles, not more than one
of which is a recreational vehicle, shall be parked or stored outdoors on
each lot.  Such lot must be occupied by a principal structure, and such
parking or storage shall occur only on asphalt, concrete or pavers but not in
a space that is designated as required parking for the principal use.  A
trailer with one or more vehicles on it shall be considered one vehicle.



         (b)   Any such vehicle shall not be parked or stored
within 5 feet of a side or rear lot line.  Vehicles may be parked within the
required front setback provided vehicles are parked on an approved asphalt,
concrete or pavers and shall not be within 10 feet of the front yard property
line.



         (c)   Such vehicles shall not be parked between the
living space of the house and the street.



         (d)   Recreational vehicles shall not be used as living
or sleeping quarters for more than 14 days per year.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.163  PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS.



   The standards as found in Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s
Standards for Sewage Treatment (WPC-40) Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, Individual
Sewage Treatment Systems Standards,  are hereby adopted by reference.



(`86 Code, § 9.65) (Am. Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.164  PROHIBITED TYPES OF DWELLING UNITS.



   No basement, garage, tent, travel trailer, motor vehicle, recreational
camping vehicle, motor home or accessory building shall be used as a
dwelling, except:



   (A)   Detached accessory dwellings approved under § 154.151,
Accessory Dwelling units, Detached;



   (B)   The basement portion of a fully completed home or apartment
may be used for normal eating and sleeping purposes provided it is properly
damp-proofed, has suitable fire protection and exits and is otherwise
approved by the Building Inspector; and



   (C)   Recreational camping vehicles and travel trailers may be used
as living or sleeping quarters for up to 14 days per year total on the same
property.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.165  REFUSE.



   In all districts, trash or recycling collection areas, when provided
for any property other than townhouses and dwellings of four or less units,
shall be enclosed on at least three sides by opaque screening at least six
feet in height.  The open side of the enclosure shall not face any street or
the front yard of any abutting property, unless an opaque gate is provided
and kept closed at all times except when the trash handling area is being
accessed.



   (A)   The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping the
land free of refuse.



   (B)   Screening.  The following standards shall apply to trash or
recycling collection areas:



      (1)   The screening shall be a minimum of six feet in height;



      (2)   The screening shall have a minimum of 90% opacity; and



      (3)   If landscaping is used for the screening, the plantings
shall be evergreen and a minimum of six feet in height when planted.  A 90%
opacity level shall be obtained within two years.  Plantings shall be
replaced if they do not survive, or are damaged so as to not achieve 90%
opacity.



   (C)   Existing uses shall be required to comply with the provisions
of this section in conjunction with any expansion or additions or other site
or exterior building modifications.



(`86 Code, § 9.49) (Am. Ord. 984, passed 7-17-12; Am. Ord. 1040, passed
1-5-16)



§ 154.166  RELOCATING HOUSES OR OTHER STRUCTURES.



   (A)   The dwelling in its proposed location must be judged to be
compatible with other adjacent dwellings in terms of height and size.



   (B)   The architectural features of the dwelling and any accessory
structures must be judged to be compatible with the architectural style and
features of adjacent and nearby buildings. 



   (C)   Such features as porches, dormers, pillars and columns, window
style, entrance location, and roof pitch and style shall be considered when
determining the appropriateness of the dwelling and any accessory
structure.  This division is not intended to apply strict architectural
standards; rather, that the dwelling being moved or relocated must be
compatible with the neighborhood as interpreted by the Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   Garages and other accessory structures, whether attached or
detached, shall be located in a manner similar to those on adjacent and
nearby properties.



   (E)   A site plan with a lot survey shall be submitted showing the
final grading elevations for the proposed parcel.  The on-site grading
improvements and utility service extensions shall be completed prior to
placing the building on the lot.



   (F)   A structure moving permit must first be acquired from the city.



   (G)   The structure to be moved must be either a permitted or a
conditional use in the relevant zoning district.  If a conditional use
permit is required, the appropriate application must be made to the city.



   (H)   All required improvements and Building Code requirements shall
be met before a certificate of occupancy is granted.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.167  SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS.



   All dwellings located in any residential zoning district shall conform
to the following minimum requirements in addition to the specific
requirements applicable to the individual districts:



   (A)   Except for those in the R-M zoning district, each detached
(single-family) dwelling must be attached to a permanent foundation that
complies with the Minnesota State Building Code and is solid for the
circumference of the building.



   (B)   All dwellings shall have a minimum width and depth of 20 feet,
exclusive of porches, entryways or attached storage sheds.



   (C)   The materials and texture of exterior materials must be
compatible in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior
materials commonly used in standard residential construction.



   (D)   There must be at least one overstory tree per house.



   (E)   All dwellings shall be served by public sanitary sewer and
water. 



   (F)   Direct vehicular access to residential units from arterial
roads shall be prohibited unless no other reasonable alternative exists as
determined by the Community Development Department. 



   (G)   In addition to standards applicable to all houses in
residential districts, manufactured homes, as defined by Minnesota Statutes,
shall be built in compliance with the Minnesota Manufactured Homes Building
Code. 



   (H)   Driveways for houses that receive a building permit after the
date that this code was adopted must be paved with asphalt, concrete or
pavers.  Existing gravel driveways may remain unless there is new
construction, including expansion of an existing driveway.  Any driveway
must be set at least five feet from the side or rear lot line.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.168  UTILITIES, PRIVATE.



   Underground location required. All private utilities serving new
development, including lines for electricity, natural gas, telephone and
cable television, shall be located underground except for high-voltage
electrical lines.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.169  WETLANDS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to recognize, preserve
and protect the environmental, aesthetic and hydrologic functions of the
city’s wetlands by regulating the use of wetlands and their adjacent
properties.  These functions include, but are not limited to, sediment
control, pollution control, filtration, fish and wildlife habitat and aquifer
recharge.



   (B)   Intent. The intent of this section is to protect wetlands to
the maximum extent possible while allowing a reasonable use of the
property.  This section adopts the regulations and standards of the Wetland
Conservation Act of 1991 (WCA), Laws of Minnesota 1991, Chapter 354, as
amended, and the rules adopted pursuant to the WCA.



   (C)   Applicability. This chapter shall apply to new development or
redevelopment. New development, for the purposes of this section includes any
subdivision that creates a new lot that has no principal use on it or
construction of a principal use on an existing vacant parcel of land.
Redevelopment means removal or renovation of the principal structure such
that use of more than 50% of its market value and reconstruction on the same
property. This requirement does not apply to reconstruction due to fire, wind
or vandalism. The city may also require buffers and setbacks as part of a
variance, conditional use permit or site plan review.



   (D)   Wetland delineation. A wetland delineation must be completed
according to the most current U.S. Corps of Engineers methodology and be
completed by a qualified professional. The delineation shall be approved by
the city’s designated official prior to: property improvements, plat
approval and/or wetland permit.



   (E)   Lowest floor elevation. The lowest floor elevation of
buildings shall be a minimum of two feet above the ordinary high water level
of the wetland or the outlet elevation, whichever is higher.  If sufficient
data on known high water levels is not available, the elevation of the line
of permanent aquatic vegetation shall be used as the estimated high water
elevation.



   (F)   Retention in natural state. To the extent possible, all
wetlands, including marshlands and swamps shall be retained in their natural
state to serve as a storm water runoff basin and also as a wildlife
habitat.  Organic and other waste which would normally be disposed of at a
solid waste disposal site or which would normally be discharged into a sewage
disposal system or sewer shall not be directly or indirectly discharged to
the wetland.



   (G)   On-site sewage systems. No part of any sewage disposal system
requiring on-land or in-ground disposal of waste shall be located closer than
150 feet to the ordinary high water level unless it is proven by the
applicant that no effluent will immediately or gradually reach the wetland
because of existing physical characteristics of the site or the system.



   (H)   Buffers.



      (1)   A buffer, which shall contain a continuous dense layer
of primarily native perennial vegetation, including grasses, forbs, shrubs,
and/or trees, shall be provided adjacent to all wetlands.



      (2)   Buffer width is based on the size of the wetland, and is
measured from the delineated wetland boundary outward.  Minimum buffer width
shall be as follows:



 

Wetland Size
 

Buffer Width



0-5 acres
 

10 feet



Greater than 5
 

20 feet




 



      (3)   Permitted uses and activities within buffers are as
follows:



         (a)   Restoration of native vegetation;



         (b)   Nature preserves;



         (c)   Public boardwalks, bridges and trails;



         (d)   Ponding and drainage facilities, as required by
the city;



         (e)   Environmental monitoring or control facilities;



         (f)   Public utilities, including maintenance
activities; and



         (g)   Structures that the city determines will protect
the wetland from erosion or provide weed control.



      (4)   Buffers shall be protected by prohibiting the following
uses and activities within buffer areas:



         (a)   Placement of structures or building, except as
provided in division (H)(2) of this section;



         (b)   Paving;



         (c)   Dumping, including organic or other waste that
would normally be disposed of at a solid waste disposal site or which would
normally be discharged into a sewage disposal system or sewer;



         (d)   Yard waste disposal;



         (e)   Filling; and



         (f)   Mowing or cutting of vegetation, except when
permitted as invasive vegetation management.



      (5)   Signs for wetland buffers. All wetland buffers shall be
marked by signs placed at the buffer edge.



         (a)   Sign location. Buffer signs shall be placed at
every other lot corner or as approved by the City Engineer.  Proposed buffer
sign locations shall be shown on a grading or site plan, which shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for approval.



         (b)   Sign design. In order to ensure consistency in
buffer sign design, the developer or property owner shall order buffer signs
from the City of Waseca.  It shall be the responsibility of the developer or
property owner to install wetland buffer signs and to pay all costs
associated with construction of the signs.



         (c)   Buffer sign installation. Once obtained from the
City of Waseca, wetland buffer signs shall be installed as follows:



            1.   The sign shall be bolted or screwed to a
four-inch square treated or cedar post or green steel post installed to a
height of four feet above grade and set at least 42 inches into the ground.



            2.   The printed side of the sign shall face the
development side of the property.



   (I)   Setback from wetland buffer.



      (1)   All buildings (principal or accessory) and structures,
except as provided elsewhere in this subdivision, must be set back at minimum
of 20 feet from the outer wetland buffer line.  Exceptions to the setback
requirement include play structures, uncovered porches, decks, patio slabs,
open terraces, stairways, and walkways, which shall be allowed to extend up
to ten feet into the required buffer.



      (2)   Parking areas and driveways must be setback a minimum of
ten feet from the outer wetland buffer line.



      (3)   A wetland buffer setback is not required for overhead
utility poles and lines that are less than two feet in diameter, underground
utility lines and distribution equipment, light poles, traffic signals,
traffic regulatory signs, wetland buffer signs, mailboxes, and other
equipment that provides an essential public service.



      (4)   A wetland buffer setback is not required for fences or
retaining walls.



      (5)   An existing improvement meeting the required setback
from a wetland buffer area is considered legal nonconforming if at a later
date a new wetland delineation or implemented wetland buffer results in the
improvement being closer than the required setback from the new wetland
buffer location.



   (J)   Dedication to city. All land areas containing wetlands and the
required wetland buffer shall be dedicated as a conservation easement or
platted as an outlot and deeded to the city to become part of the stormwater
management system.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES



§ 154.173  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to identify all decision-making bodies
responsible for the review of applications, the common review requirements
for all applications, and the specific requirements and review procedures for
various application types.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.174  SUMMARY OF REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES.



   (A)   Summary table of review and decision-making bodies.



      (1)   Table 16-1 summarizes the general review and
decision-making responsibilities of the city entities that have roles in the
procedures set forth in this chapter. Other duties and responsibilities of
the entities are set forth in subsequent subsections of this chapter or
elsewhere within the Waseca City Code. The city may require any and all
review bodies to examine specific applications as deemed appropriate by the
Community Development Department or City Council.



      (2)   The city may request other boards, commissions,
government agencies, and non- government agencies to review some applications
as deemed appropriate prior to any final ruling on such applications.



Table 16-1:  Summary of the Roles of the Decision-Making and Review Bodies



      H:  Hearing (public hearing required)



      D:  Decision (responsible for the final decision)



      R:  Recommendation (responsible for review and a recommendation)



      A:  Appeal



 


Procedure

 

Development Review Committee

 

Community Development Department

 

Engineering Department

 

Planning Commission

 

Joint Airport Zoning Board

 

City Council





Comp plan amendment
 

R

 

R

 

R

 

H - R

 



 

H - D



Map or text amendment
 

R

 

R

 



 

H - R

 

H - D

 

H - D



Site plan
 



 



 



 



 



 





Review *
 

R

 

D

 

D

 



 

H - D

 

A



Variance
 

R

 

R

 

R

 

H - R

 

H - D

 

D



Conditional use permit
 

R

 

R

 

R

 

H - R

 

R

 

D



Planned unit development
 

R

 

R

 

R

 

H - R

 



 

H - D



Interim use permit
 

R

 

R

 

R

 

H - R

 



 

D



Temporary or seasonal use
 

--

 

D

 

D

 



 



 

A



Administrative adjustments
 

R

 

D

 

D

 



 



 

A



Building permit
 

--

 

D

 

R

 



 



 

A



Certificate of occupancy
 

--

 

D

 

R

 



 



 

A



Home occupation
 



 

D

 

R

 



 



 

A



Grading permit
 

--

 

R

 

D

 



 



 

A



Driveway permit
 

--

 

D

 

D

 



 



 

A



*    If no variance, conditional or interim use permit, land subdivision
or rezoning is involved.

   See Chapter 152 for sign regulations and Chapter 154 for land
subdivision regulations.   




 



   (B)   City Council. In addition to any other authority granted to
the City Council by the City Charter or state law, the City Council shall
have the following powers and duties related to this chapter:



      (1)   To enact amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, the text
of this chapter, and Zoning Map;



      (2)   To hear, review, and make decisions on all land use
applications submitted to the city; and



      (3)   To hear, review and make decision on appeals of
administrative decisions from the strict application of this Code.



   (C)   Planning Commission.



      (1)   Establishment, membership, rules and procedures. The
establishment, membership, rules and procedures for the Planning Commission
are established in Chapter 37 of the City Code.



      (2)   Powers and duties. In addition to any other authority
granted to the Planning Commission by the City Code, the Planning Commission
shall have the following additional powers and duties related to this chapter:



         (a)   Comprehensive Plan amendments, Zoning Map
amendments, and zoning text amendments.



            1.   To initiate amendments to the Comprehensive
Plan, the Official Zoning Map (rezoning of property), the text of this
chapter, or other sections of the Waseca City Code; and



            2.   To hear, review, and make recommendations to
the City Council on applications for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan,
the text of this chapter or zoning map amendments.



         (b)   Land use applications. To hear, review, and make
recommendations on the following land use applications before the city:



            1.   Variance;



            2.   Conditional use permit;



            3.   Planned unit development; and



            4.   Interim use permit.



         (c)   Other. To exercise such other powers, and perform
such other duties, as are reasonable or necessary as provided by law.



   (D)   Waseca City - Waseca County Joint Airport Zoning Board. Refer
also to § 37.10 of the Waseca City Code.



      (1)   The Joint Airport Zoning Board shall have as members two
representatives appointed by the Council and two representatives from the
county and, in addition, a chairperson elected by a majority of the members
so appointed. 



      (2)   The Joint Airport Zoning Board shall have the power to
administer and enforce airport zoning regulations applicable to the airport
hazard areas in, on or about any airport owned and controlled by the city and
the airport hazard area pertaining to the airport located outside the
territorial limits of the City pursuant to Minnesota Statutes as amended from
time to time.



   (E)   Community Development Department.



      (1)   General authorization. The Community Development
Department, under the leadership of the Community Development Director, shall
administer the provisions of this chapter as provided in this section.



      (2)   Powers and duties. In addition to the jurisdiction,
authority, and duties that may be conferred upon the Community Development
Department by other provisions of the City Code, the Community Development
Department shall have the following jurisdiction, powers, and duties under
this chapter:



         (a)   Issue occupancy, building and other permits, and
make and maintain records thereof;



         (b)   Conduct inspections of property to determine
compliance with the terms of this chapter;



         (c)   Maintain permanent and current records of this
chapter, including, but not limited to all maps and amendments, conditional
uses, variances, appeals and applications therefore; and



         (d)   Receive, file and forward all applications for
amendments, site plans, variances, conditional uses, rezonings or other
matters to the designated official bodies.



(`86 Code, § 9.23)



   (F)   Development Review Committee.



      (1)   Membership. The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall
consist of the Community Development Director, the City Engineer, the
Director of Municipal Utilities and, as necessary, the Building Inspector and
the Fire Chief.



      (2)   Powers and duties. The Development Review Committee
shall review applications as requested by the Community Development Director
and provide recommendations and advice to the Director on the review of those
applications.  The Committee may meet with applicants during those reviews.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.175  COMMON REVIEW PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Applicability. The requirements of this chapter apply to all
applications subject to review under this chapter except for compliant one-,
two- or three-family dwellings.  Those require only city staff review and
the issuance of a zoning certificate.



   (B)   Authority to file applications.



      (1)   Unless otherwise specified, applications may be
initiated by:



         (a)   The owner of the property;



         (b)   The owner’s authorized agent;



         (c)   A person with a signed purchase agreement for the
property;



         (d)   A prospective owner with written permission from
the owner; or



         (e)   The city.



      (2)   When an authorized agent files an application under this
chapter on behalf of a property owner, the agent shall provide a signed
authorization from the fee title property owner stating that the property
owner agrees to be bound by all decisions, agreements and related conditions
agreed to by such agent.



      (3)   For all applications involving multiple owners, contract
purchasers, etc., all such persons shall sign the application.



   (C)   Pre-application meeting with city staff.



      (1)   All prospective applicants shall be required to speak
with a member of the Community Development Department and, at the discretion
of the Community Development Director, other city staff or the Development
Review Committee prior to submitting an application.  The purpose of this
meeting is to review the proposal, the relevant code provisions, the required
submittals, and potential opportunities or challenges.



      (2)   Discussions that occur during a pre-application
conference are not binding on the city and do not constitute official
assurances, representations or approvals by the city or its officials on any
aspects of the plan or application discussed.



   (D)   Application submission schedule.



      (1)   Generally, complete applications for a conditional use
permit, variance, rezoning, zoning, text amendment or plat must be submitted
to the Community Development Department five weeks prior to the next meeting
of the City Planning Commission.  This allows time for application review
and refinement and newspaper publication of the notice of the required public
hearing.  The Department publishes an annual schedule of submittal dates,
Planning Commission hearing/meeting dates, and City Council meeting dates. 



      (2)   A complete application for site plan review may be
submitted at any time, as these applications are not subject to review by the
Planning Commission and City Council unless a variance is involved. 



      (3)   A specific schedule for the submission of applications
in relation to scheduled meetings of the Planning Commission and City Council
is maintained by the Community Development Department and made available to
applicants at the pre-application meeting.



   (E)   Application contents.



      (1)   The organization of applications and the number of
copies of required information to be submitted shall be determined by the
Community Development Department. 



      (2)   All applications shall include:



         (a)   A completed City of Waseca application form; there
is no application fee for a sketch plan review;



         (b)   Verification of authority to file applications;



         (c)   Supporting title information establishing
ownership interests in the property;



         (d)   All submittal requirements outlined in this
chapter for the specific application type; three large-size paper sets, one
11" x 17" paper set and one PDF set are normally required; and



         (e)   The city may require applicants to submit such
technical studies as may be necessary to enable the city to evaluate the
application. Such studies may include, but not be limited to, traffic
studies, engineering studies, environmental impact assessments, and economic
impact reports. The costs of such studies shall be borne by the applicant
with the persons or firms preparing the study approved by the city.



   (F)   There is no fee for site plan review; however, there are fees
associated with applications related to Comprehensive Plan amendments,
conditional use permits, planned unit developments, plats, rezonings,
variances, and the like.



      (1)   Determination of fees. Fees required to accompany
applications submitted under this chapter shall be in accordance with the
approved fee schedule adopted by the City Council.



      (2)   Fees to be paid. No application shall be considered
complete until all relevant fees have been paid.



      (3)   Refund of application fee. Application fees are not
refundable except when the Community Development Department determines that
an application was withdrawn prior to notice of public hearing being issued,
and any consideration or review of the application.



      (4)   Cost of special studies. If the city contracts for a
special service, such as a traffic study, to help review an application, the
applicant will be required to provide money in escrow from which the fee will
be paid.  If the city agrees, the applicant may contract directly with a
consultant for such services.



   (G)   Application acceptance.



      (1)   Complete application required. The review and
consideration of an application submitted under this section shall only occur
if such application includes all items that are required in support of the
application and is deemed complete by the Community Development Department.



      (2)   Waiver of application requirements. Except for the
required application form and the associated fee, the Community Development
Department may waive individual submittal requirements and deem an
application complete for review if it is determined that such information
will serve no purpose during the review process.  However, it is the
responsibility of the applicant to supply all information required by this
chapter, and a waiver issued by the Community Development Department shall
not eliminate the need to provide such information at a later time if it is
ultimately deemed necessary to adequately review the application. During the
review process, failure of an applicant to supply information in a timely
manner may result in denial of the application because of the city’s
inability to comply with State-mandated time deadlines.



   (H)   Deadlines for municipal action. Maximum time periods within
which the city must render a decision on an application related to zoning are
established in Minnesota Statute.  Deadlines related to a land subdivision
application are also established in Minnesota Statute.  If an application is
incomplete, city staff will notify the applicant within 15 business days
regarding which materials are missing, and the calendar for rendering a
municipal decision will start again when all requested materials have been
received. 



   (I)   Simultaneous processing of applications. Whenever two or more
forms of review and approval are required under this chapter (e.g., a
proposed rezoning and subdivision application), the applications for those
approvals may, at the discretion of the Community Development Department, be
processed simultaneously, so long as all applicable requirements are
satisfied for all applications. 



   (J)   Formal review by city staff.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Community
Development Director will prepare either a written decision (in the case of a
site plan review) or a written recommendation to the Planning Commission and
the City Council.  A copy of the review will be transmitted to the
applicant.  The Director may involve other staff and/or the Development
Review Committee in the review.  The applicant may be asked to meet with the
Director and/or other staff or the DRC.



      (2)   Before completing the written review, the Community
Development Director may consult with the applicant to negotiate revisions
and conditions of approval.  The applicant may be asked to submit a revised
partial plan set that reflects the agreed-upon changes.  There may be
additional meetings between the applicant and the city staff during this
time. 



      (3)   If during the review process it is discovered that an
additional city action or review by another agency is required, the
application may be delayed until additional information is submitted to
address the problem or additional agency review is completed.



      (4)   If a project involves only site plan review, once
updated plans are submitted to the Community Development Department, the
applicant may apply for a building permit.  If an application involves
additional applications such as a variance, conditional use permit, plat, or
rezoning, the application will proceed to the Planning Commission and then
the City Council.



   (K)   Public notice.



      (1)   Incomplete applications may not be scheduled and noticed
for a public hearing at the Planning Commission unless missing items are
submitted in time to allow the city staff to adequately review them prior to
the public hearing. Additional materials may be requested by the Community
Development Director after the notice has been mailed or published. 



      (2)   The Community Development Department will be responsible
for mailing or publishing the notice of a public hearing. 



      (3)   Content.



         (a)   A bold title referring to the content of the
notice;



         (b)   Identification of the address or location of the
property or properties subject to the application;



         (c)   Date, time, and place of the public hearing;



         (d)   Nature and scope of the application;



         (e)   Where to view the application;



         (f)   Where the public may be heard; and



         (g)   Provision for written comments.  The notice will
describe where written comments will be received prior to the public hearing.



      (4)   Timing of the notice. Unless otherwise expressly
provided in City Code or required by law, all notices required by statute or
Code shall be postmarked and/or published at least ten days prior to the
hearing at which the application will be considered.



      (5)   Type of notice required.



Table 16-2:  Notification Requirements



 


 

Posted

 

Published

 

Mailed





Comprehensive Plan amendment
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No



Conditional use permit
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Interim use permit
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Planned unit developments
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Revocation of conditional or interim use permit
 

Yes

 



 

Permittee or owner



Site plan review
 

No

 

No

 

No



Variance
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Zoning Map amendment (rezoning)
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Zoning text amendment
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No





 



   (L)   Letter of approval. Following a decision by the Council on an
application, the applicant will be notified in writing.  Following approval,
a building permit or occupancy permit may be granted. 



   (M)   Environmental review.



      (1)   No development project shall be approved prior to review
by the Community Development Department to determine the necessity for
completion of an environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) or environmental
impact statement (EIS). Procedures for EAWs and EISs are set forth in the
Minnesota Environmental Quality Review Board regulations for the
Environmental Review Program authorized by Minnesota Statutes.



      (2)   Environmental reviews (EAWs and EISs) shall be conducted
as early as practical in the processing of a development project. No decision
on granting of a permit or other approval required may be issued until the
EAW / EIS process is completed.



      (3)   At the city’s discretion, an alternative urban
areawide review (AUAR) may be used to meet environmental review requirements.



   (N)   Withdrawal of an application. A request for withdrawal of an
application shall be submitted in writing to the Community Development
Department.



   (O)   Reconsideration of land use approval applications. No
application for land use approval which has been denied by the City Council,
in whole or in part, shall be reconsidered for a period of six months from
the date of City Council action on the application, except where there is
substantial new evidence or proof of a change in conditions with respect to
such application. Before any such reconsideration, the city may require the
submission of the appropriate application fee and the application may be
considered as a new application.



   (P)   Agreements.



      (1)   The Community Development Department may require: 



         (a)   That the applicant (and property owner if
different) to indicate agreement with the city’s conditions of approval by
signing the letter of approval issued by the Department; or



         (b)   That the applicant (and property owner if
different) signs a development agreement, which runs with the land and is
recorded with the county.



      (2)   The Community Development Department may waive either of
these requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.176  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT.



   (A)   Initiation of proceedings. Proceedings for the amendment of
the Comprehensive Plan shall be initiated by one of the following:



      (1)   An owner of property or an authorized representative of
an owner;



      (2)   Recommendation of the Planning Commission; or



      (3)   Action of the City Council.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   All applications to amend the Comprehensive Plan shall
be in accordance with the common review procedures and requirements plus: 



         (a)   The names of the applicants;



         (b)   A narrative explaining the requested change the
reasons why the Comprehensive Plan should be amended;



         (c)   The existing and proposed land use and zoning
designation for all properties proposed to change (if applicable);



         (d)   A map of the properties modified to a different
land use category, showing the addresses and land uses of for adjacent
properties (if applicable); and 



         (e)   The proposed text and/or maps to be added,
amended, or deleted from the Comprehensive Plan along with documentation as
to the location of the text changes in the Comprehensive Plan, if
applicable. 



   (C)   Review.



      (1)   Planning Commission. Before any amendment is adopted,
the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing after proper
notice has been issued. Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall
adopt findings and recommendations on the proposed amendment as soon as
practical. 



      (2)   City Council. The City Council shall hold a public
hearing on the amendment. After consideration of the Planning Commission
recommendation and hearing, the City Council may adopt the amendment or any
part thereof in such form as it deems advisable. Approval of an amendment
shall require a two-thirds vote of all members of the City Council.



   (D)   Approval criteria. Recommendations and decisions on
Comprehensive Plan amendments shall be based on consideration of the
following criteria:



      (1)   Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error or
addresses the need resulting from some changing condition, trend, or fact
arising since the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the
guiding principles of the Comprehensive Plan;



      (3)   The extent to which the proposed amendment addresses a
demonstrated community need;



      (4)   Whether the proposed amendment will protect the health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the public;



      (5)   The impacts on the natural and built environments,
including air, water, noise, stormwater management, wildlife habitat, water
quality, vegetation, drainage, streets, and other engineering design or
environmental factors;



      (6)   Whether the proposed amendment is compatible with
existing and proposed uses surrounding the subject property; whether the
proposed design and land uses are appropriate for the land; and whether the
proposed amendment will maintain or improve compatibility among uses and
ensure efficient development within the city;



      (7)   Whether the proposed amendment will result in a logical,
orderly and predictable development pattern; and



      (8)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the
purpose of this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.177  ZONING MAP OR TEXT AMENDMENT.



   (A)   Purpose and scope. This section sets out the procedures to be
followed in reviewing and considering a text change to this chapter or an
amendment to the zoning map with the exception of a map amendment to a
planned unit development, which shall be subject to the procedures in this
subchapter, Application Reviews and Procedures.



   (B)   Initiation of proceedings. Proceedings for the amendment of
the text of this chapter or the zoning map shall be initiated by one of the
following:



      (1)   An owner of property or an authorized representative of
an owner; 



      (2)   Recommendation of the Planning Commission;  or



      (3)   Action of the City Council.



   (C)   Application. In addition to the common review procedures and
requirements, applications for changes to the text of this chapter or the
Zoning Map shall also include the following:



      (1)   The name of the applicant;



      (2)   A narrative explaining the requested modification and
the reasons why the changes are supported by the Comprehensive Plan;



      (3)   The legal description of all real property proposed for
change, if applicable;



      (4)   The existing and proposed land use and zoning
designations for all properties proposed for change, if applicable;



      (5)   A map of the properties to be modified to a different
zoning designation, showing the addresses and zoning designations for the
subject properties and the adjacent properties, if applicable;



      (6)   The location of the proposed text to be added, amended,
or deleted in this chapter, if applicable; and



      (7)   The proposed text to be added, amended or deleted.



   (D)   Review.



      (1)   Before any amendment is adopted, the Planning Commission
shall hold at least one public hearing after proper notice has been issued. 
Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall adopt findings and
recommendations on the proposed amendment as soon as practical. 



      (2)   The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the
amendment.  After consideration of the Planning Commission recommendation
and hearing, the City Council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof in
such form as it deems advisable. The amendment requires the approval of a
majority of all the members of the City Council.



   (E)   Approval criteria. Recommendations and decisions on zoning
amendments shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:



      (1)   Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error in the
original text or map; or



      (2)   Whether the proposed amendment addresses needs arising
from a changing condition, trend, or fact affecting the subject property and
surrounding area; or



      (3)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with
achieving the goals and objectives outlined in the Comprehensive Plan. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.178  SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Purpose and scope. The City Council declares it necessary and
appropriate to require site plan approval of certain types of development to
preserve and promote attractive, well-planned, stable urban conditions. Site
plan approval must be obtained before a building permit is issued in order to
ensure the following:



      (1)   The plan conforms to the requirements of this chapter in
terms of land use, setbacks, number of housing units, land coverage, parking
and other relevant regulations;



      (2)   A proposed project’s compatibility with the area
environment and with other existing land uses and buildings in the
surrounding area;



      (3)   The quantity, quality, utility, size, and type of a
proposed project’s required open space and proposed landscaping
improvements;



      (4)   The ability of a proposed project’s traffic
circulation system to provide for the convenient and safe internal and
external movement of vehicles and pedestrians;



      (5)   The quantity, quality, utility, size, and type of a
proposed project’s required community facilities;



      (6)   The location and adequacy of a proposed project’s
provision for drainage and utilities; and



      (7)   Security, fire protection, and life or safety issues. 



   (B)   Applicability. The site plan review requirements of this
chapter shall apply to all new construction or expansion of commercial,
industrial, multiple-family residential (three or more units in a building),
public, semi-public or institutional land uses, with these exceptions:



      (1)   The use exists in a building, and the development of the
use does not alter the building footprint, parking, traffic flow on or
off-site, grading, drainage or landscaping; 



      (2)   Proposed modifications are strictly related to the
interior of the building;



      (3)   Modifications, additions, or enlargements to a building
which do not increase the gross floor area by more than 500 square feet or
10%, whichever is less, and which do not require a variance from the
provisions of this chapter; and



      (4)   Grading or site preparation that results in minor
modifications to the existing site, as approved by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Review authority.



      (1)   The Community Development Department is authorized to
review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny site plan reviews in
accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. At the
discretion of the Community Development Director, the Development Review
Committee may provide advice on site plan reviews.  All findings and
decisions shall be final, subject to appeal to the City Council. 



      (2)   If a site plan review application involves a variance,
the application must also be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved
by the City Council. 



   (D)   Submittal requirements. Site plan reviews are exempt from
having to pay an application fee.  However, the following items are required
unless exempted by the Community Development Director.  All documents shall
be drawn to scale by a registered land surveyor, engineer, architect or other
qualified professional.  Three large-size paper sets, one 11" x 17" paper
set and one digital PDF set are required.



      (1)   General site description.



         (a)   The boundaries and dimensions shown graphically,
along with a legal description of the property.



         (b)   A vicinity map which shall include the names and
locations of any public streets, railroads, and major streams in the vicinity
of the site. 



         (c)   The present and proposed topography of the site
and adjacent areas within 50 feet by contour lines at an interval of not more
than two feet, and by use of directional arrows, the proposed flow of storm
water runoff from the site.



         (d)   Existing natural features of the site such as
wetlands, streams, major trees and wooded areas.



         (e)   Existing public streets or rights-of-way, road or
utility easements, or other reservations of land on the site.



         (f)   Other information necessary for the review of the
application as may be requested by the Community Development Director such as
a traffic impact study. 



      (2)   Site plan, landscaping plan and lighting plan.



         (a)   The location of existing and proposed structures,
with the number of dwelling units and/or non-residential floor area.



         (b)   All setback lines.  When lots are located on a
curve, the width of the lot at the building setback line shall be shown.



         (c)   Proposed street rights-of-way road or utility
easements, or other reservations of land on the site.



         (d)   Street layout and grades with centerline
elevations.



         (e)   Sidewalk or path location, width and material. 



         (f)   Proposed curb cuts, aisles, off-street parking and
loading spaces and dimensions. 



         (g)   The location, species and size of plantings.  The
location, height and material for berms, walls and fences.



         (h)   A tree preservation plan.



         (i)   The location and method of screening of outdoor
trash storage and recycling areas.



         (j)   The location and size of all proposed signs. 



         (k)   The location and height of exterior lights,
including a photometric diagram.



         (l)   Elevation views of all proposed buildings or
structures, with building materials and proposed colors noted.



         (m)   A site development staging plan, if applicable. 



         (n)   If proposing a building addition, a floor plan
with the interior dimensions for each floor. 



      (3)   Grading and drainage.



         (a)   Proposed grades showing topographic alterations,
proposed methods for managing surface water, drainage calculations and a
surface water pollution prevention plan. 



         (b)   Top of curb in front of each lot at corners and
the high side of driveways.



         (c)   Major (lowest floor) building corners.



         (d)   Lot corner elevations, building setback lines, and
a building pad layout showing hold-down elevations and finished garage
elevations, lot drainage patterns and driveway slopes. 



         (e)   Storm sewer alignment and features.



         (f)   Elevations and boundaries related to lakes,
wetlands and ponds including the ordinary high water level.



         (g)   Wetland delineation boundaries.



         (h)   Other related information as may be required by
the City Engineer.



      (4)   Public and private utilities.



         (a)   The location and size of existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within
and adjacent to the property including data such as grades, invert elevations
and locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants. 



         (b)   The location, size and purpose of all easements.



   (E)   Conditions of approval.



      (1)   These conditions must exist for the approval of a site
plan review: 



         (a)   The site plan conforms to all applicable standards
within this chapter;



         (b)   The site plan conforms to all applicable
regulations of this chapter and is consistent with the applicable policies of
the land use plan;



         (c)   The site plan is consistent with any applicable
functional or special area plans or development objectives adopted by the
City Council; and



         (d)   The site plan minimizes any adverse effects of
property in the immediate vicinity and minimizes congestion of the public
streets.



      (2)   The Community Development Department may impose
conditions on any proposed site plan and require such guarantees as it deems
necessary for the protection of the public interest and to ensure compliance
with the standards and purposes of this chapter, the applicable policies of
the land use plan, and any special land use plans adopted by the City Council.



   (F)   Modifications to an approved site plan.



      (1)   Requested amendments to a site plan may be approved or
denied by the Community Development Department unless they involve one of the
following; otherwise, they shall be reviewed as a new site plan.  At the
discretion of the Community Development Director, the Development Review
Committee may be involved in this review.



         (a)   The density of the development is to be increased
by more than 5%;



         (b)   The gross square footage of non-residential
buildings is to be increased by more than 5% or the number of building
stories is to be increased;



         (c)   Approved landscaping or open space is to be
substantially modified in the opinion of the Community Development Department;



         (d)   Drainage, streets, or other engineering design
changes will materially alter items approved in the Development Plan; and/or



         (e)   Major changes are proposed that could potentially
create an adverse impact on stormwater quality, stormwater quantity
management, or other stormwater management ordinance requirements.



      (2)   If, in the opinion of the Community Development
Department, a proposed change will substantially affect the terms of the
original approval or would result in significant adverse impacts on the
surrounding properties or the city at large, then a re-submittal of a new
development plan may be required pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   (G)   Time limit. Unless a written extension request is submitted
approved by the Community Development Department, an approved site plan shall
expire upon either:



      (1)   A new site plan for the property is submitted to and
approved by the Community Development Department; or



      (2)   A building permit has not been issued within one year
from the date of site plan approval.



   (H)   Inspection and enforcement. Prior to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy for any use not exempted above, the Community Development
Department shall conduct an inspection to determine compliance with the
conditions set forth on the approved site plan for the project. A temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued without completion of all elements on
the site plan, provided written assurance is given that all improvements will
be completed when feasible.



   (I)   Relationship to other applications. Except in those instances
specified in division (G)(2) of this section, site plan approval is required
prior to issuance of a building permit for any proposed construction or
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any proposed use.  When a site
plan is required in support of a request for conditional use permit or
variance approval, such plan shall also be subject to the requirements
established within this chapter.



   (J)   Appeal. The applicant for a site plan review may appeal the
decision of the Community Development Department to the City Council.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.179  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   (A)   Purpose and scope.



      (1)   The conditional use permit process allows the city to
impose reasonable conditions on uses that are considered permitted in a given
zoning district only when they meet pre-defined conditions.  Such conditions
are considered necessary to ensure compatibility between the proposed land
use and nearby properties.



      (2)   Approval of a conditional use at a certain location does
not mean the same conditional use can be conducted on any other parcel in
that zoning district. 



      (3)   Every application for a conditional use permit will be
individually reviewed on its own merits, and the facts surrounding the
subject property will determine the appropriateness of the proposed use. 



   (B)   Application. An application for a conditional use permit shall
conform to the common review procedures and requirements and:



      (1)   The submittal materials listed for a site plan review
except those that may be exempted by the Community Development Director;



      (2)   Any other information that may be reasonably required by
the city to evaluate the application.



   (C)   Thresholds for application review.



      (1)   If a listed conditional use falls below the following
threshold, review and approval by the Community Development Department is all
that is required before applying for a building permit:



         (a)   Five hundred (500) square feet of floor area for a
non-residential building;



         (b)   One hundred twenty (120) square feet of floor area
for a detached building related to a residence.



      (2)   Review and approval by the Planning Commission and City
Council shall be required for applications above that threshold or
applications involving properties that have not previously received a
conditional use permit.



   (D)   Conditions for approval. These conditions must be met:



      (1)   The use is allowed as a conditional use in the zoning
district and conforms to standard zoning regulations;



      (2)   The conditional use will conform to the conditions
listed in §§ 154.109 through 154.143 for the proposed use;



      (3)   The conditional use will not impede the normal and
orderly use or development of nearby property, substantially diminish nearby
property values or place an undue burden on public facilities or services; 



      (4)   The conditional use will not be detrimental to the
health, safety, morals, or welfare of the public;



      (5)   The conditional use will not result in a nuisance by
odor, noise, or light;  and



      (6)   The conditional use will not unduly affect natural
features. 



   (E)   Additional conditions. In permitting a new conditional use or
the alteration of an existing conditional use, the City Council may impose,
in addition to these standards and requirements expressly specified by this
chapter, additional conditions that the Council considers necessary to
protect the best interest of the surrounding area or community as a whole. 
These conditions may include but are not limited to:



      (1)   Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension;



      (2)   Limiting the height, size or location of buildings;



      (3)   Controlling the location and number of vehicle access
points;



      (4)   Increasing the street width;



      (5)   Increasing the number of required off street parking
spaces;



      (6)   Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs;



      (7)   Requiring additional fencing, screening, landscaping or
other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property; and



      (8)   Designating sites for open space. 



   (F)   City staff review and recommendation. The Community
Development Department is authorized to review and provide recommendations to
the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the procedures
and standards of this chapter.  At the discretion of the Community
Development Director, the Development Review Committee may provide advice on
conditional use permits. 



   (G)   Planning Commission recommendation and City Council decision.
Before any conditional use permit is approved, the Planning Commission shall
hold a public hearing and make a recommendation to the City Council.  The
Council shall consider the request(s) in light of the conditional use review
criteria listed above, and render a decision.  In approving a conditional
use, the Council may impose conditions on the approval as are deemed
appropriate to ensure compliance with the approval and to protect adjacent
properties.  Denial of any request shall be accompanied by findings of fact
as to how the request did not meet one or more of the review criteria. 



   (H)   Once a CUP is granted, a certified copy of the CUP, including
a detailed list of all approved conditions and a legal description of the
land, shall be recorded with the County Recorder or the Registrar of Titles.



   (I)   Effect of a conditional use permit approval.



      (1)   The issuance of a conditional use permit shall authorize
only the improvements approved by the City Council.



      (2)   A conditional use permit, including any conditions,
shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.



   (J)   Subsequent development. Development authorized by the
conditional use permit shall not be carried out until the applicant has
secured all other approvals required by this chapter or any other applicable
ordinances or regulations. Approval of a conditional use permit does not
imply that any related application will be approved.



   (K)   Time limits. The City Council may assign a date or event that
that will trigger the expiration of a conditional use permit if the facts
clearly warrant doing so.  Otherwise, there are no time limits on a
conditional use permit.



   (L)   Revocation of a conditional use permit. In the event that any
of the conditions set forth in the permit are violated, the City Council
shall have the authority to revoke the conditional use permit. Before the
revocation is considered, the City Council shall hold a public hearing after
proper written notice has been issued.  Following the hearing, the Council
may revoke the conditional use permit by adopting findings of fact showing
there has not been substantial compliance with the required conditions.



   (M)   Amendments to a conditional use permit. A conditional use
permit may be amended or modified only in accordance with the procedures and
standards established when originally securing the conditional use permit. A
request for a change in the conditions of approval of a conditional use
permit shall be considered an amendment and subject to the full review
procedure set forth in this division.  An additional application fee may be
required before the consideration of the amendment request. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.180  VARIANCE.



   (A)   Purpose and scope. The variance process is intended to provide
limited relief from the strict requirements of this chapter in those cases
where the reasonable conditions of a particular requirement will create
practical difficulties because of circumstances unique to the property. It is
not intended that variances be granted to allow a use not permitted by the
underlying zoning district, nor to merely remove inconveniences or financial
burdens that the requirements of this chapter may impose on property owners
in general. Variances are intended to address extraordinary, exceptional, or
unique situations that were not caused by the applicant’s act or
omission.  Variances may be allowed from restrictions placed on
non-conformities. 



   (B)   Initiation of proceedings. Variances shall be initiated by an
owner of property or an authorized representative of an owner pursuant to
authority to file applications. 



   (C)   Application.



      (1)   All applications for a variance shall be in accordance
with the common review procedures and requirements.



      (2)   In addition to the common review requirements,
applications for a variance shall also include the following:



         (a)   A narrative demonstrating that the criteria for a
variance have been met;



         (b)   A site plan of the property showing all
information necessary to allow the city to determine conformance with all
zoning provisions and to calculate the specific variance being requested
shall include but not be limited to:



            1.   Property and structure dimensions including
height;



            2.   Building elevations as deemed necessary by
the Community Development Department;



            3.   Setback dimensions/measurements including
separation between structures;



            4.   Parking and access locations, dimensions, and
paving, striping and curbing details;  and



            5.   If deemed necessary by the Community
Development Department, a survey may be required with the application in
addition to a site plan.



   (D)   Criteria for approving a variance.



      (1)   A variance may be approved only if these criteria are
met: 



         (a)   The request is in harmony with the purposes and
intent of this chapter;



         (b)   The variance is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan; and



         (c)   The applicant can demonstrate that there are
“practical difficulties” in complying with the regulation(s) in
question.  Determination of whether practical difficulties exist shall be
based on the following:



            1.   The property owner proposes to use the
property in a reasonable manner permitted by this chapter;



            2.   The plight of the land owner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner; and



            3.   The variance will maintain the essential
character of the locality. 



      (2)   Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sun light for solar energy systems.



      (3)   Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a
sufficient basis for a variance if reasonable use for the property exists
under the regulation. 



      (4)   Variances shall be granted for earth-sheltered
construction as defined in M.S. § 216C, Subd. 14, when in harmony with this
chapter.



      (5)   The City Council may impose conditions in the granting
of a variance.  Such conditions must be directly related to and bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance.



   (E)   City staff review and recommendation. The Community
Development Department is authorized to review and provide recommendations to
the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the procedures
and standards of this chapter.  At the discretion of the Community
Development Director, the Development Review Committee may provide advice on
variances. 



   (F)   Planning Commission recommendation and City Council decision.
Before any variance is approved, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing and make a recommendation to the City Council.  The Council shall
also hold a public hearing, consider the request(s) in light of the Planning
Commission’s recommendation and the variance review criteria listed above,
and render a decision.  In approving a variance, the Council may impose
conditions on the approval as are deemed appropriate to ensure compliance
with the approval and to protect adjacent properties.  Denial of any request
shall be accompanied by findings of fact as to how the request did not meet
one or more of the review criteria. 



   (G)   Effect of a variance.



      (1)   The issuance of a variance shall authorize only the
particular variation that is approved by City Council.



      (2)   A variance, including any conditions, shall run with the
land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership. 



   (H)   Subsequent development. Development authorized by the variance
shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other approvals
required by this chapter or any other applicable chapters or regulations. The
granting of a variance does not constitute, imply or guarantee the granting
of any other such required approval (i.e.: a building permit).



   (I)   Amendment. A variance may be amended or modified only in
accordance with the procedures and standards established for originally
securing the variance.  A request for a change in the conditions of approval
of a variance shall be considered an amendment and subject to the full review
procedure set forth in this subsection.  An additional application fee shall
be required before consideration of the amendment request.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.181  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Application.



      (1)   An application for rezoning to Planned Unit Development
Overlay District shall be made on the form provided by the city, shall
include the materials required for a rezoning, a site plan review and a plat
and shall include an application review fee as adopted by the City Council. 



      (2)   Additional drawings and narratives may also be required
if the PUD involves the Shoreland Overlay District, an environmental
assessment worksheet or environmental impact statement.  An application for
variance shall not be required.



   (B)   Review and approval process.



      (1)   The review of an application for rezoning to PUD Overlay
District shall follow the same process as a map or text amendment (a
rezoning).



      (2)   When the City Council adopts an ordinance rezoning
property to Planned-Unit Development Overlay District, it is approving the
rezoning, the site plan, the preliminary plat (if applicable) and instructing
city staff to draft a development agreement, proceed with the final plat (if
applicable) and subsequently issue a zoning certificate. 



   (C)   Expiration of the Approved Zoning Certificate.



      (1)   The zoning certificate associated with the rezoning to
PUD Overlay District may expire as described under § 154.321(K).



      (2)   If the approved development is not begun either in whole
or in part by the dates specified in the development agreement, that portion
of the land not substantially improved shall revert to the base zoning
district and any benefits, uses or approvals conferred by the PUD Overlay
District shall become void unless a time extension is granted by the City
Council or the PUD Overlay is amended. 



   (D)   Amendments to a Planned-Unit Development Overlay District. A
Planned Unit Development Overlay District may be amended as described in §
154.177.



   (E)   Approved plans continue. All preliminary and final development
plans approved as part of a Planned-Unit Development prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect as part of this
overlay district.  If new development in the prior Planned Unit Overlay
District is in compliance with the approved plans, the development shall be
considered in conformance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.182  INTERIM USE PERMIT.



   (A)   Purpose and scope.



      (1)   To allow a use for a brief period of time until a
permanent location is obtained or while the permanent location is under
construction.



      (2)   To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by
the City Council but with anticipated development will not be acceptable in
the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional
use allowed in the district.



      (3)   To allow a use that anticipates long-range change in an
area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan provided that
said use maintains harmony and compatibility with nearby uses and is in
keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing
uses and development.



   (B)   Specific regulations. Certain interim uses, such as aggregate
mining, are regulated in §§ 154.109 through 154.143.



   (C)   Initiation of proceedings. A request for an interim use permit
shall be initiated by an owner of property or an authorized representative
pursuant to § 154.175(B) titled, authority to file applications.



   (D)   Application. An application for an interim use permit shall
conform to the common review procedures and requirements and:



      (1)   The submittal materials listed for a site plan review
except those that may be exempted by the Community Development Director;



      (2)   Any other information that may be reasonably required by
the city to evaluate the application.



   (E)   Conditions required for approval. Approval of an interim use
permit may only be made upon a determination that an application meets the
following criteria:



      (1)   The proposed interim use is presently acceptable but is
expected to not be acceptable in the future based on the city’s
Comprehensive Plan and anticipated development; 



      (2)   The interim use will not impede the normal and orderly
use or development of nearby property, substantially diminish nearby property
values, place an undue burden on public facilities or services, or unduly
affect natural features; 



      (3)   The date, event, or change in circumstances that will
terminate the use is identified with certainty;



      (4)   The applicant has signed a consent agreement stating
that the applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user has no entitlement to
future re-approval of the interim use permit; 



      (5)   The applicant agrees to all conditions that the City
Council deems appropriate to allow the use including the requirement of
appropriate financial surety to cover the cost of removing the interim use
and any interim structures upon the expiration of the interim use permit; and



      (6)   There are no delinquent property taxes, special
assessments, interest, or city utility fees due upon the subject parcel.



   (F)   City staff review and recommendation. The Community
Development Department is authorized to review and provide recommendations to
the Planning Commission and Council.  At the discretion of the Community
Development Director, the Development Review Committee may provide advice.



   (G)   Planning Commission recommendation and City Council decision.
Before any interim use permit is approved, the Planning Commission shall hold
a public hearing and make a recommendation to the City Council.  The Council
shall consider the request(s) in light of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission and the interim use review criteria then render a decision.  In
approving an interim use permit, the Council may impose conditions on the
approval as are deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with the approval and
to protect adjacent properties.  Denial of any request shall be accompanied
by findings of fact as to how the request did not meet one or more of the
review criteria. 



   (H)   Effect of an interim use permit approval.



      (1)   An interim use permit shall authorize only the
improvements and use approved by the City Council as an interim use over the
specified timeframe.



      (2)   An interim use permit, including any conditions, shall
run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.



   (I)   Termination. An interim use shall be terminated and removed
for any of the following reasons, whichever occurs first:



      (1)   The date, event or circumstances stated in the permit;



      (2)   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was
issued;



      (3)   Upon change in the city’s zoning regulations which
renders the use nonconforming;



      (4)   The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it
is located to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective
zoning district.



   (J)   Revocation. The City Council may revoke an interim use permit
upon finding that any of the conditions set forth in the permit are violated.
Before the revocation is considered, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing.  Following the hearing, the Council may revoke the interim use
permit by adopting findings of fact showing there has not been substantial
compliance with the required conditions.



   (K)   Amendments and renewals. All requested amendments or renewals
of an existing interim use permit shall be processed in the same manner as a
new application.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.183  TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL USE PERMIT.



   (A)   Purpose and scope. Temporary or seasonal use permits are meant
for activities that have an agreed-upon ending date and are not expected to
be replaced through redevelopment as are most interim uses.



   (B)   Initiation of proceedings. A request for a temporary or
seasonal use permit shall be initiated by application of the property owner
or other person having authority to file an application.



   (C)   Application.



      (1)   All applications for a temporary or seasonal use permit
shall be in accordance with § 154.175.



      (2)   In addition to general review requirements, applications
for a temporary or seasonal use permit shall also include the following
except as exempted by the Community Development Director: 



         (a)   A narrative which includes:



            1.   A description of the proposed temporary use,
how it will function on the property, hours and dates of operation, and any
other information necessary to fully describe the request; and



            2.   An explanation of how the proposed temporary
use will meet each of the criteria set forth below.



         (b)   A sketch plan of the property showing all
information necessary to accurately depict how the proposed use will function
on the site Information required on the site plan shall include but not be
limited to:



            1.   The location of all existing and proposed
structures;



            2.   Driveways and parking areas;



            3.   Proposed storage and/or display spaces;



            4.   Natural features such as woodlands, wetlands,
shorelines, and the like; and



            5.   Proposed number of parking spaces provided or
affected. 



         (c)   Any other information that may be reasonably
required by the city to evaluate the application.



   (D)   Review criteria. A temporary or seasonal use permit shall be
issued only if the use will:



      (1)   Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the
surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare;



      (2)   Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on
the site;



      (3)   Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on
nearby residential neighborhoods;



      (4)   Not include permanent alterations to the site;



      (5)   Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that
apply to a site or use on the site;



      (6)   Not harm environmentally sensitive lands.



   (E)   Temporary or seasonal use permit review process.



      (1)   The Community Development Department will review all
temporary or seasonal use permit applications.



      (2)   Applications determined to conform to the review
criteria shall be approved with any conditions deemed necessary.  A copy of
the approved permit shall be provided to the applicant that includes all
conditions and comments. 



      (3)   Applications not conforming to the approval criteria
outlined in this section shall be denied by the Community Development
Department.  A notice of denial including the reasons shall be provided to
the applicant.



   (F)   Reasonable conditions. In approving a temporary or seasonal
use permit, the Community Development Department may impose such reasonable
conditions and requirements as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure
continued compliance with ordinance requirements.



   (G)   Effect of a temporary or seasonal use permit approval.



      (1)   The issuance of a temporary or seasonal use permit shall
authorize only the specific temporary use approved by the Community
Development Department over the specified time frame.



      (2)   A minimum of 90 days shall be required between the
expiration of a temporary or seasonal use permit and the issuance of another
permit on the same site for an identical or similar use as determined by the
Community Development Department.



   (H)   Revocation of a temporary or seasonal use permit. In the event
that any of the conditions set forth in the permit are violated, the City
Council shall have the authority to revoke the permit. Before the revocation
is considered, the City Council shall hold a public hearing after proper
written notice has been issued.  Following the hearing, the City Council may
revoke the permit by adopting findings of fact showing there has not been
substantial compliance with the required conditions.



   (I)   Appeals. The applicant for a temporary or seasonal use permit
may appeal the decision of the Community Development Department to the City
Council.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.184  ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. This purpose of this section is to provide
a way to allow minor adjustments to previously approved building setbacks or
landscape buffer widths where application of a prior dimension would create a
development that is less consistent with the Comprehensive Plan or the public
interest. 



   (B)   Authority. The Community Development Department is authorized
to review and approve, approve with conditions or deny Administrative
Adjustments to building setback or landscape buffer standards of this chapter
in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.  At the
discretion of the Community Development Director, the Development Review
Committee may provide advice on administrative adjustments. 



   (C)   Maximum adjustment. No adjustment may reduce a setback or a
landscape buffer to less than the minimum.



   (D)   Initiation. An application for an administrative adjustment
may be initiated by the property owner or other person with authority to file
an application pursuant to § 154.175(B), authority to file applications.



   (E)   Application.



      (1)   All applications for an administrative adjustment shall
be in accordance with § 154.175.



      (2)   In addition to the common review procedures and
requirements, applications for an administrative adjustment shall also
include a narrative demonstrating that the criteria for an administrative
adjustment have been met. 



   (F)   Criteria for approval of administrative adjustments. Decisions
on an administrative adjustment shall be based on consideration of these
criteria:



      (1)   The requested administrative adjustment shall not exceed
the maximum adjustment permitted by this chapter;



      (2)   The requested administrative adjustment is consistent
with the character of development in the surrounding area, and will not
result in incompatible uses;



      (3)   Any adverse impacts from the requested administrative
adjustment will be mitigated to the maximum extent practicable;



      (4)   The requested administrative adjustment is either:



         (a)   Required to compensate for some unforeseen aspect
of the site or the development that is not commonly shared by landowners in
general;



         (b)   Supportive of the purpose and intent statement of
the zoning district; or



         (c)   Proposed to save healthy existing trees. 



      (5)   The requested administrative adjustment will not
substantially interfere with the convenient and enjoyable use of adjacent
lands, and will not pose a danger to the public health or safety.



   (G)   Administrative adjustment review process.



      (1)   Upon receiving a complete application for an
administrative adjustment, the Community Development Department shall review
the plans to determine their conformance to all ordinance requirements.



      (2)   Applications determined to conform with the approval
criteria shall be approved by the Community Development Department with any
conditions deemed necessary. A notice of an administrative adjustment
approval shall be provided to the applicant which includes all conditions,
comments, and recommendations.



      (3)   Applications not conforming to the approval criteria
shall be denied by the Community Development Department.  A notice of
administrative adjustment denial including reasons for denial shall be
provided to the applicant.



   (H)   Reasonable conditions. In approving an administrative
adjustment, the Community Development Department may impose such reasonable
conditions and requirements as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure
continued compliance with ordinance requirements.



   (I)   Effect of an administrative adjustment approval.



      (1)   The approval of an administrative adjustment by the
Community Development Department does not guarantee approval of other
applications that may be required by the regulations of the city. 



      (2)   An administrative adjustment approved by the Community
Development Department, including any conditions, shall run with the land and
shall not be affected by a change in ownership.



   (J)   Amendment. An administrative adjustment may be amended,
extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards
established for originally securing the administrative adjustment.



   (K)   Appeal. The applicant for an administrative adjustment may
appeal the decision of the Community Development Department to the City
Council. 



   (L)   Conditions. The Community Development Director may impose
conditions upon the administrative adjustment to ensure that the purposes of
this chapter are achieved.



§ 154.185  BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   Once the appropriate municipal approval has been obtained for
a zoning application, a building permit may be issued. 



   (B)   The process, fees and regulations pertaining to building
permits are described in Chapter 150 of the City Code. 



   (C)   An application for a building permit may not be submitted
before the zoning application process has been completed.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.186  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes the requirement for city
approval prior to the use or occupation of new buildings or structures, or
prior to a change in use in an existing structure. Issuance of a certificate
of occupancy signifies that the building or structure complies with all code
requirements.



   (B)   Required.



      (1)   No building or structure hereafter erected or moved, or
that portion of an existing structure or building erected or moved, shall be
occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Community Development
Department stating that the building or structure complies with all
provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   No change in use of an existing building or structure
shall occur until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Community Development Department stating that the building or structure
complies with all provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Application. A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for
coincident with an application for a building permit or prior to a proposed
change in use. 



   (D)   Issuance. A certificate of occupancy will be issued within one
business day after the Community Development Department has completed a final
inspection and found the building or structure conforming to all code
requirements.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.187  HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT.



   Initiation of proceedings.



   (A)   A request for a home occupation permit shall be initiated by
application of the property owner or other person having authority to file an
application pursuant to authority to file applications.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   An application for a home occupation permit shall follow
the common review requirements.



      (2)   An application for a home occupation permit shall
include a narrative describing:



         (a)   How many employees will be working at the home
occupation site;



         (b)   What activities will be occurring in conjunction
with the home based occupation (i.e. office work, customer visits, sales,
stock storage, and the like);



         (c)   Vehicle used (e.g. will there be a vehicle(s) used
in conjunction with the business? Will the business require any non- standard
deliveries to the site? Where will customers park? and the like)



         (d)   A calculation of the square footage within
structures to be used by the home occupation; and



         (e)   A sketch plan showing in general how the home
occupation will operate on the site.  The sketch plan should show (as
applicable):



            1.   All buildings to be used by the home
occupation;



            2.   Proposed outdoor storage areas;



            3.   Proposed parking areas for vehicles and/or
customers;



            4.   Proposed sign location(s) in conformance with
sign regulations;



            5.   Any proposed alterations to buildings to
accommodate the home occupation; and



            6.   Any proposed features necessary to hide
visible evidence of the home occupation from either the public right-of-way
or adjacent properties (e.g. plantings, screening fences, and the like).



   (C)   Review criteria.



      (1)   The home occupation shall meet all of the general
requirements for home occupations.



      (2)   The home occupation shall meet the entire general
requirements specific to home occupations. 



   (D)   Home occupation review process.



      (1)   The Community Development Department will review all
home occupation permit applications.



      (2)   A copy of the approved permit shall be provided to the
applicant which includes all conditions and comments.



      (3)   Applications not conforming to the review criteria shall
be denied.  A notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant that
includes the reasons for denial.



   (E)   Reasonable conditions. In approving a home occupation permit,
the Community Development Department may impose such reasonable conditions
and requirements as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure continued
compliance with ordinance requirements.



   (F)   Effect of a home occupation permit approval.



      (1)   The issuance of a home occupation permit shall authorize
only the activities and uses approved.



      (2)   The permit shall be specific to that site and shall end
with a change in land ownership.



      (3)   The home occupation permit does not require periodic
renewal.



   (G)   Time limit.



      (1)   Failure to begin the approved home occupation within six
months of the date of approval will invalidate the permit.



      (2)   Upon written request, one extension of six months may be
granted by the Community Development Department if the applicant can show
good cause.



   (H)   Amendments. All requested amendments to a home occupation
permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.



   (I)   Appeal. The applicant for a home occupation permit may appeal
the decision of the Community Development Department to the City Council.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.188  GRADING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL PERMIT.



   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes when a grading, drainage and
erosion control permit (“grading permit”) is required, how it will be
reviewed, information required with the application and how unauthorized work
will be handled. Requiring a grading permit enables the city to protect the
public by ensuring that erosion does not endanger water resources or
unnecessarily require extra maintenance of sewers and ditches and/or the
dredging of lakes and ponds. A grading permit promotes the public welfare by
guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and
maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. 



   (B)   In general. A grading permit shall be required for
land-disturbing activity that would require the uncovering or distributing of
material in excess of any of the following measurements:



      (1)   Five thousand (5,000) square feet;



      (2)   Four hundred (400) cubic yards undeveloped land, or 40
cubic yards developed land;



      (3)   Any disturbance within 200 feet of a waterway or surface
water. 



   (C)   Exceptions.



      (1)   No grading permit is required for land disturbances
under the amounts specified above or for the following:



         (a)   Any emergency activity that is immediately
necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources; 



         (b)   General establishment of new construction lawns,
or the addition of four or fewer inches of topsoil; 



         (c)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations
conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.



      (2)   In the case of grading specific to and in conjunction
with a single building permit, a separate grading permit is not required:



         (a)   The building permit shall be reviewed and serve as
the grading permit;



         (b)   The individual lot permittee may be required to
provide a letter of credit or other security deemed acceptable by the city
with the building permit application: 



            1.   The security shall cover city costs for
street sweeping, installation, maintenance and repairs to erosion control
measures.  The bond will be in an amount as specified by the current city
ordinance for fee schedule.  Said security shall be provided prior to the
release of the grading permit; 



            2.   The security shall be released after turf is
established, inspected by the city and deemed to be approved.



   (D)   Application.



      (1)   All applications for a grading permit shall be in
accordance with the common review requirements.



      (2)   In addition to general review requirements, applications
for a grading permit shall also include the following except as exempted by
the City Engineer: 



         (a)   Each application shall bear the name(s) and
address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm
retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant’s
principal contact at such firm; 



         (b)   A grading, drainage and erosion control plan
meeting the requirements of this section.  Each application shall include
the required number of plans and other required materials as specified by the
Engineering Department;



         (c)   The application form shall include a statement by
the applicant that any land clearing, construction, or development involving
the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the approved grading,
drainage and erosion control plan; 



         (d)   The permittee will be required to file with the
City of Waseca an irrevocable, automatically renewing letter of credit, or
other improvement security in the amount specified by the current Ccty
ordinance for fee schedule. This security may be in addition to the required
non-refundable filing fee as specified by city ordinance, which shall be
submitted under separate payment; 



         (e)   The security shall cover all costs of engineering
and inspection, site improvements, street sweeping, repairs to erosion
control measures, and maintenance of improvements for such period as
specified by the city.  Said security shall be provided prior to the release
of the grading permit. Security shall be released after final stabilization
is complete, erosion control measures have been removed and their removal
area inspected by the city and deemed to be approved.



      (3)   The city requires complete application at least 5
business days prior to the desired grading permit release date. 



   (E)   Review criteria. Approval of a grading permit shall be based
on: 



      (1)   Whether the proposed grading permit is consistent with
all the requirements of this section and any other city code requirements;



      (2)   Whether the proposed grading permit is in compliance
with all engineering standards adopted by the city;



      (3)   Whether the proposed grading permit is in compliance
with any previous approvals for the facility (e.g. grading for additional
parking previously approved by a conditional use permit).



   (F)   Review process.



      (1)   The Engineering Department shall review all grading
permit applications.



      (2)   Applications determined to conform to the review
criteria shall be approved by the Engineering Department with any conditions
deemed necessary.  A copy of the approved permit including all conditions
and comments shall be provided to the applicant.



      (3)   Applications not conforming to the approval criteria
outlined in this section shall be denied by the Engineering Department.  A
notice of denial including the reasons shall be provided to the applicant.



   (G)   Reasonable conditions. In approving a grading permit, the
Engineering Department may impose such reasonable conditions and requirements
as it deems appropriate to ensure continued compliance with the grading
permit review criteria and other city ordinances. 



   (H)   Effect of grading permit approval. The issuance of a grading
permit shall authorize only the changes approved by the Engineering
Department as depicted by the application. 



   (I)   Time limit.



      (1)   Failure to complete the authorized grading within six
months of the date of approval will invalidate the permit.



      (2)   Upon written request, one extension of six months may be
granted by the Engineering Department if the applicant can show good cause.



   (J)   Amendments. All requested amendments to an existing grading
permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.



   (K)   Unauthorized work. Work done without the authorization of a
permit and/or found to be out of conformance with approved plans shall be
halted and subject to the remedies and penalties described in this chapter.
Driveways or parking lots being built out of conformance shall be brought
into conformance.



   (L)   Appeal. The applicant for a grading permit may appeal the
decision of the Engineering Department to the City Council. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.189  DRIVEWAY PERMIT.



   (A)   Purpose. Driveway permits allow the city to inspect work done
in the public road right-of-way, protect the public by setting and enforcing
construction standards, and ensure proper pavement construction.



   (B)   Initiation of proceedings. A request for a driveway permit
shall be initiated by application of the property owner or other person
having authority to file an application pursuant to authority to file
applications.



   (C)   In general. A driveway permit shall be required for the
initial construction, reconstruction of reconfiguration of any driveway that
will cross into a public road right-of-way and that was not approved as part
of a site plan or a preliminary plat. 



   (D)   Application.



      (1)   All applications for a driveway permit shall be in
accordance with the common review requirements and be on the form provided by
the Engineering Department. 



      (2)   In addition to general review requirements, applications
for a driveway permit shall also include the following except as exempted by
the Engineering Department: 



         (a)   A site plan (or certified site survey if required
by the Engineering Department) at a scale and in quantities deemed necessary
by the Engineering Department showing lot  dimensions and the lot area in
square feet; 



         (b)   A site plan (or certified site survey if required
by the Engineering Department) at a scale and in quantities deemed necessary
by the Engineering Department showing lot  dimensions and the lot area in
square feet; 



         (c)   Location of all existing buildings, landscaping,
screening and natural features as directed by the Engineering Department
(including but not limited to woodlands, wetlands, shorelines, and individual
trees which may be impacted by the proposed driveway or parking lot
construction);



         (d)   Location of the existing driveway (if applicable),
the proposed driveway and the square footage of each;



         (e)   Location of existing public sidewalks and trails;



         (f)   Calculation of the existing and proposed
impervious surface coverage on the lot;



         (g)   Identify existing and proposed curb types
specifically calling out proposed changes to existing facilities.



   (E)   Review criteria. Approval of a driveway permit shall be based
on: 



      (1)   Whether the proposed driveway permit is consistent with
all the requirements of this chapter and any other city code requirements;



      (2)   Whether the proposed driveway permit is in compliance
with all engineering standards adopted by the city;



      (3)   Whether the proposed driveway permit is in compliance
with any previous approvals for the facility (e.g. Adding parking as
previously approved by a conditional use permit).



   (F)   Driveway permit review process.



      (1)   The Engineering Department shall review all driveway
permit applications.



      (2)   Applications determined to conform to the review
criteria shall be approved by the Engineering Department with any conditions
deemed necessary.  A copy of the approved permit with all conditions and
comments shall be provided to the applicant.



      (3)   Applications not conforming to the review criteria shall
be denied by the Engineering Department.  A notice of denial including
reasons shall be provided to the applicant. 



   (G)   Reasonable conditions. In approving a driveway permit, the
Engineering Department may impose such reasonable conditions and requirements
as it deems necessary and appropriate to ensure continued compliance with the
driveway permit review criteria.



   (H)   Effect of driveway permit approval. The issuance of a driveway
permit shall authorize only the changes approved by the Engineering
Department as depicted by the application materials.



   (I)   Time limit.



      (1)   Failure to complete driveway or parking lot improvements
within six months of the date of approval will invalidate the permit.



      (2)   Upon written request, one extension of six months may be
granted by the Engineering Department if the applicant can show good cause.



   (J)   Amendments. All requested amendments to an existing driveway
permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.



   (K)   Unauthorized work. Work done without the authorization of a
permit and/or found to be out of conformance with approved plans shall be
halted and subject to the remedies and penalties described in this chapter. 
Driveways or parking lots being built out of conformance shall be brought
into conformance. 



   (L)   Appeal. The applicant for a grading permit may appeal the
decision of the Engineering Department to the City Council.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.190  PLAT.



   Procedures for land divisions are presented in Chapter 151 of the
Waseca City Code.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.191  SIGN PERMIT.



   Procedures for sign permits are presented in Chapter 152 of the Waseca
City Code.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



RULES AND DEFINITIONS



§ 154.196  GENERAL RULES FOR INTERPRETATION.



   The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted
in accordance with the following rules of construction.



   (A)   Meanings and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and
expressions contained in this chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with
the general purposes set forth in §§ 154.001 through 154.009, General
Provisions, and the specific purpose statements set forth throughout this
chapter. When a specific section of these regulations gives a different
meaning than the general definition provided in this article, the specific
section’s meaning and application of the term shall control.



   (B)   Headings, illustrations, and text. In the event of a conflict
or inconsistency between the text of this chapter and any heading, caption,
figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control. Graphics and
other illustrations are provided for informational purposes only and should
not be relied upon as a complete and accurate description of all applicable
regulations or requirements.



   (C)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated,
lists of items or examples that use terms such as “for example,”
“including,” and “such as,” or similar language are intended to
provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities.



   (D)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a
deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday
observed by the city, the deadline or required date of action shall be the
next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the city.
References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.



   (E)   References to other regulations/publications. Whenever
reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation or
document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of
such regulation, resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document,
unless otherwise specifically stated.



   (F)   Delegation of authority. Any act authorized by this chapter to
be carried out by a specific official or department of the city may be
carried out by a professional-level designee of such official or department.



   (G)   Technical and non-technical terms. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.



   (H)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies,
and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Waseca,
unless otherwise indicated.



   (I)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words “shall,”
“must,” and “will” are mandatory in nature, establishing an
obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words
“may” and “should” are permissive in nature.



   (J)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the
contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:



      (1)   “And” indicates that all connected items,
conditions, provisions or events apply; and



      (2)   “Or” indicates that one or more of the connected
items, conditions, provisions, or events apply.



   (K)   Tenses, plurals, and gender.



      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.



      (2)   Words used in the singular number include the plural
number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context
of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.



      (3)   Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine
gender, and vice versa.



   (L)   Terms not defined. If a term used in this chapter is not
defined in this chapter, the Community Development Department shall have the
authority to provide a definition based upon the definitions used in accepted
sources including but not limited to:  A Planners Dictionary, A Glossary of
Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms: A Survey of Zoning Definitions, or
any standard dictionary.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.197  COMMON DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.



   The following regulations shall apply in all base zoning districts:



   (A)   Building within public easements prohibited. No permanent
structure shall be built in an easement dedicated for a public purpose unless
authorized by an amendment to the easement or a license agreement issued by
the Community Development Department. 



   (B)   Outlots. No building permit or grading permit can be issued
for a parcel of land designated in a plat as an outlot unless specifically
authorized by the City Council.



   (C)   Principal buildings on a parcel. Normally, only one principal
building is allowed on each land parcel.  However, more than one principal
building may be allowed on a platted lot if:



      (1)   The buildings are closely equivalent in size and
importance; and



      (2)   They are all approved and remain under the same
ownership; or



      (3)   The parcel is platted as a common interest community per
M.S. § 515B.2-1101. 



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.198  LOT AND PARCEL CONTROLS.



   (A)   Zoning lots. No part of an existing zoning lot shall be used
as a separate zoning lot or for the use of another zoning lot, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Minimum lot area. Lot area requirements shall be as specified
in the applicable zoning district in which a zoning lot is located. No yard
or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in
size or area below the minimum requirements identified within this chapter.



   (C)   Street frontage. Each lot shall have frontage on a public
street at a width satisfying the requirements specified for each zoning
district. In the case of a condominium, unified shopping center, or planned
unit development, the entire site shall be considered one zoning lot.



   (D)   Common yard and height requirements. In general:



      (1)   Unless otherwise authorized by variance, administrative
adjustment or PUD, no lot, yard, or other open space shall be reduced in area
or dimension so as to make such lot, yard, or open space less than the
minimum required by this chapter; and if the existing yard or other open
space as existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further
reduced.



      (2)   A yard or other open area required about a building
shall not be included as part of a yard or other open space for another
building.



   (E)   Division of a zoning lot. No zoning lot shall be divided into
two or more zoning lots unless all zoning lots resulting from such division
conform to all applicable regulations of this chapter.



   (F)   Existing lots.



      (1)   A lot or parcel of land in a residential district which
was of record as a separate lot or parcel in the Office of the County
Recorder or Registrar of Titles on or before the date of adoption of this
chapter may be used for single-family detached dwelling purposes provided the
area and width are within 66% of the minimum requirements of this chapter and
provided that it can be demonstrated that safe and adequate sewage treatment
systems can be installed to serve the permanent dwelling. 



      (2)   In the Shoreland Overlay Zoning District, lots of record
in the Office of the County Recorder on the date of enactment of local
shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of §§ 154.110 through
154.126, Shoreland Overlay District, may be allowed as building sites without
variances from lot size requirements provided:



         (a)   The use is permitted in the zoning district;



         (b)   The lot has been in separate ownership from
abutting lands at all times since it became substandard;



         (c)   The lot was created compliant with official
controls in effect at the time;



         (d)   Sewage treatment and setback requirements of this
chapter are met; and



         (e)   Impervious surface coverage does not exceed 25% of
the lot.



      (3)   In the Shoreland Overlay Zoning District, a group of two
or more contiguous lots of record under a common ownership, an individual lot
must be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purpose of sale or
development, if it meets the following requirements:



         (a)   The lot must be at least 66% of the dimensional
standard for lot width and lot size for the shoreland classification
consistent with Minn. Rules, Ch. 6120;



         (b)   The lot must be connected to safe and adequate
sewage treatment;



         (c)   Impervious surface coverage must not exceed 25% of
each lot; and



         (d)   Development of the lot must be consistent with an
adopted comprehensive plan.



      (4)   A lot subject to division (C) of this section, not
meeting the requirements of division (C) must be combined with the one or
more contiguous lots so they equal one or more conforming lots as much as
possible.



      (5)   Notwithstanding division (C) of this section, contiguous
non-conforming lots of record in shoreland areas under a common ownership
must be able to be sold individually if each lot contained a habitable
dwelling at the time the lots came under common ownership and the lots are
connected to safe and adequate sewage treatment.



      (6)   In the Shoreland Overlay Zoning District, when
evaluating variances, zoning and building permit applications or conditional
use requests, the zoning authority shall require the property owner to
address, when appropriate, storm water runoff, impervious surfaces, increased
setback, wetland restoration, vegetative buffers, sewage treatment and water
supply, and other conservation actions.



      (7)   A portion of a conforming lot may be separated from an
existing parcel as long as the remainder of the existing parcel meets the lot
size and sewage treatment requirements of the zoning district for a new lot
and the newly created parcel is combined with an adjacent parcel.



(`86 Code, § 9.14)  (Am. Ord. 632, passed 12-15-92; Am. Ord. 983, passed
7-17-12)



   (G)   Corner lots. On a corner lot, one of the lot lines that abuts
the street shall be considered a front lot line and the other shall be
considered a corner side lot line. Establishment of the front lot line shall
be based on the orientation of the existing or proposed building.



   (H)   Through lots. On a through lot, both lot lines that abut the
street shall be considered front lot lines. The required front setback shall
be provided and maintained along each front lot line.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.199  ENCROACHMENTS ALLOWED INTO REQUIRED SETBACK AREAS.



   The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on setback
and height requirements except as provided in this chapter.



   (A)   In any yard:  off-street open parking spaces, flues, leaders,
sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves, gutters, awnings, patios and open
terraces that do not rise more than one foot above the ground, service
station pump islands, open canopies between principal and accessory
buildings, steps, access ramps for handicapped persons, chimneys, antennas
mounted on buildings, flag poles, posts, mail boxes, “Little Free
Libraries,”  ornamental features, open fire escapes, sidewalks and fences
and all other similar devices incidental and appurtenant to the principal
structure except as hereinafter amended.



   (B)   Decks are also exempted from the rear yard setback
requirements except that a deck may not be located closer than 20 feet from
the rear property line.



   (C)   Balconies, eaves and extensions of decks eight feet above
grade shall not extend over minimum side setback lines or over driveways,
however, encroachments on the front and rear yard setbacks are permitted as
follows:



      (1)   Front yard setback:  extension equal to 10% of the
minimum front setback required for the underlying zoning district.



      (2)   Rear yard setback: minimum setback of 20 feet from the
rear property line.



   (D)   Unenclosed or open sided porches and decks may extend into the
front yard setback of any residential district a distance equal to 50% of the
setback or ten feet, whichever is less.  Rails, roofs and porch posts shall
be permitted.  Porches may be screened, however, no walls shall be
permitted. 



(`86 Code, § 9.56)  (Ord. 700, passed 7-15-97; Am. Ord. 942, passed 7-1-08;
Am. Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.200  HEIGHT LIMITS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   In general. The total height of any structure shall not exceed
the maximum height limit established for the applicable zoning district
unless expressly stated otherwise in this chapter.



   (B)   Exceptions. Height limits shall not apply to chimneys, church
spires, belfries, cooling towers, cupolas and domes which do not contain
useable space, elevator penthouses, fire escapes or roof access stairways,
flag poles, mechanical equipment required to operate and maintain the
building, monuments, parapet walls extending not more than three feet above
the limiting height of the building, rooftop dish antennas, skylights, water
towers, wind electrical generators, telecommunication towers or similar
appurtenances, provided:



      (1)   The appurtenance does not interfere with Federal
Aviation Regulations, Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace;



      (2)   The appurtenance does not extend more than 25 feet above
the maximum permitted building height, except as specifically allowed by this
chapter;



      (3)   The appurtenance does not exceed a maximum height of 200
feet above grade;



      (4)   The appurtenance is not constructed for the purpose of
providing additional floor area in the building; and



      (5)   The appurtenance complies with the screening
requirements for mechanical equipment and appurtenances in this chapter.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.201  RULES OF MEASUREMENT.



   (A)   Measurements, generally.



      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to clarify the
rules of measurement and exemptions that apply to all principal and accessory
uses allowed in this chapter. These standards may be modified by other
applicable sections of this chapter.



      (2)   Distance measurements, generally. Unless stated
otherwise, all distances are in feet or square feet.  Unless otherwise
expressly stated, distances specified in this chapter are to be measured as
the length of an imaginary straight line joining those points.



      (3)   Lots.



         (a)   Average lot size. The mean lot size for all lots
being platted.



         (b)   Average lot width. The mean lot width for all lots
being platted.



         (c)   Lot area. The amount of land area, measured
horizontally, included within the lines of a lot. Lands located within any
private easements shall be included within the lot area. Public rights-of-way
and areas below the ordinary high-water (OHW) mark for water features are not
to be included in calculating lot area, except where specifically allowed by
this chapter. The terms “lot size” and “lot area” shall be
interchangeable.



         (d)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall be calculated as
the total horizontal surface area of impervious surface on a given lot.



         (e)    Lot depth. Lot depth shall be determined by a
straight line connecting the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint
of the rear lot line, or to the rear most point of  the lot when there is no
rear lot line (see Figure 17-1 for examples).







 



         (f)   Lot or street frontage. In the case of a building
lot abutting upon only one street, the frontage line is the line parallel to
and common with the right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot, that part of
the building lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be
considered the frontage line. For the purpose of determining yard
requirements on corner lots and double frontage lots, all sides of a lot
adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided
as required in this chapter.



         (g)   Lot line (see figure 17-2 for examples).



            1.   Corner side lot line. The corner side lot
line is a side lot line that abuts a street or other right- of-way.



            2.   Front lot line. The front lot line is the
line connecting the two side lot lines along the edge of the street that
provides a lot’s street address or that opposes the primary entrance of a
building.



            3.   Rear lot line. The rear lot line is the line
connecting the two side lot lines along the edge of the lot opposite from the
front line.



            4.   Side lot line.  The side lot line is the lot
line connecting the front and rear lot lines regardless of whether it abuts a
right-of-way or another lot line.



   Figure 17-2: Yards, lot lines and building lines







 



         (h)   Lot types.



            1.   Base lot. A contiguous parcel of land in
identical ownership throughout, bounded by other lots or streets, and used or
set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings or other
definite purpose. References to “lot” within this chapter are synonymous
with “base lot”.



            2.   Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection
of two or more streets (other than alleys), regardless of whether or not such
streets intersect at right angles.



            3.   Cul-de-sac lot. A lot located on the head or
turnaround of a cul-de-sac with side lot lines on a tangent to the arc of the
right-of-way.



            4.   Double frontage lot. A lot other than a
corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley.



            5.   Flag lot. An “L-shaped” lot on which the
front lot line is narrower than the minimum required and is narrower than the
portion of the lot that does not abut the public street. 



            6.   Interior lot. A lot other than a corner lot
with only one frontage on a street other than an alley.



            7.   Unit lot. A specialized lot created within a
base lot simply for the purpose of defining ownership for certain multi
family dwelling types.



   Figure 17-3:  Types of lots







 



         (i)   Lot width.



            1.   Lot width shall be determined by a straight
line connecting the endpoints determined by the intersection of the side lot
lines and the required front yard setback.



            2.     The width of a corner lot shall be calcula
ted from the side with the least frontage on a right-of -way.







 



      Figure 17-4: The gray lines in Figure 17-4 run along the required
front yard setbacks. The width of a lot is determined by a straight line
connecting the points where the front setback line intersects the side lot
lines. In the case of Example C, a corner lot with a front and a corner-side
setback, the width is measured along the narrower street because the front
lot is defined as being along the narrower side.



   (B)   General lot requirements.



      (1)   Construction of more than one principal structure on a
platted lot. Whenever any land is subdivided, a building permit for the
construction of a building or other principal structure (excluding buildings
under common ownership or unified control) shall not be issued unless the
land is subdivided in accordance with the procedures and standards of this
chapter.



      (2)   Any newly annexed, unplatted property shall be platted
in accordance with the provisions and standards of this chapter before it is
developed. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “developed” is
defined as any construction activity requiring the installation of public
improvements or any construction activity requiring a building permit except
for: decks, driveways, fences, accessory structures less than 700 square feet
in area, residential additions greater than 1,500 square feet in floor area,
and commercial or industrial expansion less than 10,000 square feet in floor
area.



      (3)   Lots divided by zoning district lines. Whenever a single
lot is located within two or more different zoning districts, each portion of
that lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to the district
in which it is located.



   (C)   Required yards.



      (1)   Definitions that pertain to measurements.



         (a)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE YARD.  The minimum yard
requirement between a lot line and an allowable accessory structure.



         (b)   BUILDING LINE.  A line formed by the face of a
building which is used to establish the yards around a building or structure.



         (c)   BUILD-TO LINE.  A line with which the majority of
an exterior wall of a building is required to coincide.



         (d)   RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW).  Land dedicated, deeded,
used, or to be used for a street, road, alley, pedestrian way, crosswalk,
bikeway, drainage facility, or other public uses, wherein the owner gives up
rights to the land so long as it is being or will be used for the dedicated
purpose.



         (e)   SETBACK LINE.  A line located at the inside edge
of a required front, side, or rear yard. Exterior building walls may not
encroach into the required yard beyond the building setback line. Portions of
a building, (e.g., an overhang, eave, entry stairs, bay windows, foundation
planters, and the like) may encroach into a required yard as allowed in
allowable yard encroachments.



         (f)   YARD.  A required open area unoccupied and
unobstructed by any building or by any structure or portion of a structure
except as allowed by this chapter. Fences, walls, and incidental structures
(e.g., flagpoles, birdhouses or feeders, clothesline posts, and the like) may
be permitted within a yard provided the structures do not interfere with
corner visibility.



         (g)   YARD TYPES.



            1.   CORNER SIDE YARD.  A side yard extending
between the front and rear lot lines parallel to an abutting street or
right-of-way.



            2.   FRONT YARD.  A yard extending between side
lot lines across the front of a lot between the front lot line and the front
building line.



            3.   REAR YARD.  A yard extending across the rear
of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear building line. In the case
of double frontage lots, there is no rear yard, and the requirements for the
front yard shall apply to the front and rear.



            4.   SIDE YARD.  A yard extending from the front
building line to rear building line. In the case of double frontage lots, the
side yard extends from the front building line to the opposing building line
associated with the other yard.



            5.   ZERO SIDE LOT LINE.  A condition where no
side yard is provided between two or more distinct dwelling units sharing a
party wall (e.g., townhouse, duplex, attached residential, and the like).



   (D)   Front setback in the R-1 and R-2 Districts. The front setback
in the R-1 and R-2 Districts shall be a build-to line.  All other setbacks
shall be minimum setbacks. 



   (E)   Bulk.



      (1)   Building coverage. Building coverage is a measure of
intensity of a use of land that represents the portion of a site that is
covered by building footprint, as well as attached porches, decks, and
balconies. Building coverage does not include driveways, streets, sidewalks,
and any other areas covered by an impervious surface material, including
areas of outdoor storage. 



      (2)   Building size. Building size is the total floor area
located inside exterior walls and covered by a roof.



      (3)   District size. The minimum size, in acres, of a base or
overlay zoning district, including streets, rights-of-way, and open space
areas, but excluding unbuildable lands.



      (4)   Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, and excluding the
following:



         (a)   Attic areas with a headroom of less than seven
feet;



         (b)   Unenclosed stairs or fire escapes;



         (c)   Elevator structures;



         (d)   Cooling towers;



         (e)   Areas devoted to machinery and equipment for air
conditioning, ventilation, heating, and other similar building service needs;



         (f)   Structured parking; and



         (g)   Basement space not used for retailing activities,
the production or processing of goods, or for business or professional
offices.



   (F)   Height.



      (1)   Building height. The vertical distance from the natural
grade measured either at the curb level or at a point ten feet away from the
front center of the structure or building, whichever is closer, to the top of
the highest point of the roof on a flat or shed roof, the deck line on a
mansard roof, or to the uppermost point of all other roof types.



      (2)   Building story.



         (a)   The space between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the next floor above it; or if there is no floor above it, the
space between the floor surface and the top of the ceiling joists or roof
rafters above it.  Typically, story height in a residential structure is
nine feet per story, and story height in a non-residential structure is 12
feet per story.



         (b)   If the finished floor level directly above a
basement or cellar or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above
the grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is
more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement,
cellar, or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story.



      (3)   Fence and wall height. Fence and wall heights are to be
measured from the adjoining average grade. In the case of grade separation
such as the division of properties by a retaining wall, the height shall be
determined on the basis of measurement from the average point between the
highest and lowest grade.



      (4)   Garage side wall height.  The height of a garage side
wall is measured from the top of the concrete slab to the top of the top
plate.



      (5)   Grade. Grade means the level of the finished ground
surface immediately adjacent to the exterior walls of a building.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16)



§ 154.202  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY.  A use, activity, structure, or part of a structure that is
subordinate and incidental to the main activity or structure on the site.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE.  A structure or portion of a structure
subordinate to and serving the principle use structure on the same lot and
customarily incidental hereto.



   ADULT USES.  Includes adult bookstores, adult motion picture theatres,
adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult massage parlors, adult steam
room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult
rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult
novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios,
adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises,
enterprises, establishments, businesses, or places open to some or all
members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction, or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” which are capable of being
seen  by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined
by M.S. § 617.241 are not included.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



         (a)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct
physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the
context of sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented
acts or conduct:  anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, picquerism, sapphism, and
zooerasty.



         (b)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of
sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence.



         (c)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation.



         (d)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast.



         (e)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of
whom are nude, clad in undergarments, or in sexually revealing costumes; and
who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding, or other physical restraint of any such persons.



         (f)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other
sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being.



         (g)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal,
or anal irrigation.



   ADULT USE, ACCESSORY.  The offering of goods and/or services which are
classified as adult uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the
primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment.
Examples of such items include adult magazines, adult movies, adult
novelties, and the like.



   ADULT USE, PRINCIPAL.  The offering of goods and/or services which are
classified as adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or
establishment and include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Adult use body painting studio - an establishment or
business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when
such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of “specified anatomical
areas”.



      (2)   Adult use bookstore - a building or portion of a
building used for the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed
matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture
film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public
generally but only to one or more classes of the public excluding any minor
by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant portion of such items
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.



      (3)   Adult use cabaret - a building or portion of a building
used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or
portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such dancing or
other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the presentation, display, depiction, or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (4)   Adult use companionship establishment - a companionship
establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the
service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (5)   Adult use conversation/rap parlor - a conversation/rap
parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service
of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (6)   Adult use health/sport club - a health/sport club which
excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.



      (7)   Adult use hotel/motel - adult hotel/motel means a hotel
or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and
wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (8)   Adult use massage parlor/health club - a massage parlor
or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides
the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.



      (9)   Adult use mini-motion picture theatre - a building or
portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for
presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
therein.



      (10)   Adult use modeling studio - an establishment whose
major business is the provision to customers of figure models who are so
provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers and who engage in “specified sexual
activities” or display “specified anatomical areas” while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed,
or otherwise depicted by such customers.



      (11)   Adult use motion picture arcade - any place to which
the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image- producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.



      (12)   Adult use motion picture theatre - a building or
portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for
presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
therein.



      (13)   Adult use novelty business - a business which has, as a
principal activity, the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or
devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.



      (14)   Adult sauna - a sauna which excludes minors by reason
of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing; utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (15)   Adult steam room/bathhouse facility - a building or
portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing; utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if such building
or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service
provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.



   AGRICULTURE.  The use of land for the growing and/or production of
field crops, livestock and livestock products for the production of income,
including, but not limited to the following:



      (1)   Field crops, including barley, soy beans, corn, hay,
oats, potatoes, rye, sorghum and sunflowers;



      (2)   Livestock, including dairy and beef cattle, goats,
horses, sheep, hogs, poultry, game birds and other animals including dogs,
ponies, deer, rabbits and mink; and



      (3)   Livestock products, including milk, butter, cheese,
eggs, meat, fur and honey.



   AIRPORT.  The Waseca Municipal Airport located in the east half of
Section 14, Township 107 north, Range 23 West of the 5th Principal Meridian.



   AIRPORT ELEVATION.  The established elevation of the highest point on
the usable landing area which elevation is established to be 1,126 feet above
mean sea level.



   AIRPORT HAZARD.  Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs
the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of
aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land which
is hazardous to persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.



   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way that provides secondary access to
abutting property.



   ANIMAL CLINIC.  A business for the veterinary care of domestic pets
that may include indoor boarding of animals being treated.



   APARTMENT BUILDING.  A building that contains several dwellings that
each has access from an interior hallway rather than a door on the exterior
of the building.  Each dwelling in an apartment building is designed for
habitation by one household and is equipped with its own cooking and bathing
facilities.



   APPURTENANCE.  The visible, functional, or ornamental objects
accessory to, and part of a building, such as chimneys, fire escapes, open
decks, stoops, steps, open porches, bay windows, roof overhangs, awnings,
solar energy systems and similar features.



   ASSEMBLY HALL.  A building in which people participate in or hold
meetings, religious services, lectures, civic activities and other similar
activities.



   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY.  A multiple-family structure that includes a
special combination of housing, supportive services, personalized assistance,
and health care designed to respond to the individual needs of people who
need help with activities of daily living but where the emphasis of the
facility remains residential. Residents of assisted living facilities do not
require hospitalization or skilled or intermediate nursing care associated
with nursing home facilities, but do, because of their advanced age, require
assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet,
financial management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an emergency,
or medication prescribed for self-administration.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - MAJOR.  General repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning engines, motor vehicles or trailers; body repair and painting,
vehicle steam cleaning, frame and/or unibody straightening and repair,
sandblasting and/or steam cleaning, undercoating or rust proofing, upholstery
work.  This business performs structural and cosmetic repairs to autos,
light trucks, and equipment of 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and less. 



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - MINOR.  A business that performs mechanical and
electrical repairs to autos, light trucks, and equipment 9,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight and less. Allowed activities include minor repairs, incidental
body and fender work, glass replacement, minor painting and upholstering,
tune ups and adjustments, replacement of parts (excluding body and frame),
rebuilding of parts or components when installation is available, wheel
alignment and balancing, tire repair, radiator repair, washing, cleaning, and
polishing, but specifically excluding any operation specified or implied
under the definition of “Automobile Repair - Major”.



   BAR or TAVERN.  A business, other than a bottle club, that derives
more than 50% of its revenue through the sale of alcohol. 



   BASEMENT.  Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level.



   BED AND BREAKFAST HOME.  A private residence, generally a
single-family residence, engaged in renting one or more dwelling rooms on a
daily basis to tourists, vacationers and business people, where provision of
meals is limited to breakfast for guests only.



   BERM.  An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site,
screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.  The most effective and practicable means
of erosion prevention and sediment control, and water quality management
practices that are the most effective and practicable means of to control,
prevent, and minimize degradation of surface water, including avoidance of
impacts, construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are
exposed, prohibitions, pollution prevention through good housekeeping, and
other management practices published by state or designated area-wide
planning agencies. 



   BLUFF.  A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment,
where part or all of the feature is in a shoreland area, where the slope
rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the water body,
where the grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or
more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater, and where
the slope drains toward the water body. 



      (1)   TOE OF BLUFF.  The point on a bluff where there is, as
visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to
steeper slope above.  If no break in the slope is apparent, the toe of bluff
shall be determined to be the lower end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the
ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%. 



      (2)   TOP OF BLUFF.  The point on a bluff where there is, as
visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to
steeper slope above.  If no break in the slope is apparent, the Top of Bluff
shall be determined to be the upper end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the
ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.



      (3)   BLUFF IMPACT ZONE.  A bluff and land located within 20
feet from the top of a bluff.



   BOARDER.  A person who regularly receives lodging with or without
meals at another’s home for pay or services.



   BOARDING HOUSE.  A building other than a hotel where, for compensation
and by pre- arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are
provided to one or more people, not of the principal family therein, pursuant
to previous arrangements and not to anyone who may apply, but not including a
building providing these services for more than six persons. 



   BOATHOUSE.  A structure used solely for the storage of boats or
boating equipment.



   BUILDABLE AREA.  The portion of a lot remaining after required yards
have been provided.



   BUILDING.  A structure with a roof, intended for shelter, housing,
business, or enclosure. 



   BUILDING FRONT FACADE.  A building elevation which fronts on a public
street, public parking lot, private parking lot available to the general
public, or pedestrian walk where customer access to a structure is available.



   BUILDING LINE.  A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any
story level of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or
any part of the building is set back from the right-of-way line.  In a
shoreland management area, the BUILDING LINE is also a line parallel to the
ordinary high water level at the required setback beyond which a structure
may not extend. 



   BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION.  A city application form accompanied by
drawings that depict the construction details for one or more proposed
structures.  Such drawings must conform to the Minnesota Building Code,
Electrical Code and Plumbing Code.  May also include a drawing showing the
location of the building on the site and on-site improvements such as grading
and drainage. 



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot.



   BUSINESS.  Any establishment, occupation, employment, or enterprise
where merchandise is manufactured, exhibited, or sold, or where services are
offered for compensation.



   BUSINESS DAY.  A day on which City Hall is open.



   BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES.  Establishments that engage primarily in
rendering services to businesses including but not limited to copy shops,
printing services, package and postal services, photo processing, janitorial
services, and similar operations.



   CALIPER.  A horticultural method of measuring the diameter of a tree
trunk for the purpose of determining size. The caliper inches of a tree shall
be determined by measuring the tree’s diameter four feet, six inches from
the ground.



   CEMETERY.  Land used or intended to be used for burying the remains of
human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of the
cemetery.



   CHILD CARE DROP-IN PROGRAM.  As defined in M.S. § 245A.02, “drop-in
child care program” means a non-residential program of child care in which
children participate on a onetime only or occasional basis up to a maximum of
90 hours per child, per month. 



   CHURCH.  See PLACE OF PUBLIC WORSHIP.



   CLEAR-CUTTING.  The removal of an entire stand of trees.



   CLEARING.  Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   CONVENIENCE STORE.  A retail store not more than 8,000 square feet in
area that generally carries a reduced inventory of items such as dairy
products, snack foods, minor automobile items, groceries, magazines, and the
like. A CONVENIENCE STORE usually includes auto fuel sales but not vehicle
repair.  A car wash may be allowed as an accessory use. 



   CREMATORY.  A facility containing furnaces for the reduction of dead
bodies to ashes by fire.



   DAY CARE OF NON-RESIDENTIAL CARE PROGRAM.  Care, supervision,
rehabilitation, training or habilitation of a person provided outside the
person’s own home and provided for fewer than 24 hours a day, including
adult day care programs.  NON-RESIDENTIAL CARE PROGRAMS include home and
community-based services and semi-independent living services for persons
with developmental disabilities that are provided in or outside of a
person’s own home. 



   DECK.  A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached
railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally
related to a principal use or site at any point extending above grade.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to real estate, including but not
limited to construction or reconstruction of buildings, installing
manufactured homes or travel trailers, installing utilities, construction of
roads or bridges, erection of levees, walls, or fences, drilling, mining,
filling, dredging, and storage of materials.



   DISTRICT, ZONING.  An area delineated on the official zoning map that
sets forth standards and guidelines for all development within the prescribed
zoning district.



   DRIVE-IN.  Any use where products and/or services are provided to the
customer under conditions where the customer does not have to leave the car
or where service to the automobile occupants is offered regardless of whether
service is also provided within a building.



   DRIVE-UP WINDOW SERVICE.  A building opening, including windows,
doors, or mechanical devices, through which occupants of a motor vehicle
receive or obtain a product or service.



   DROP-IN CHILD CARE PROGRAM.  As defined in M.S. § 245A.02, DROP-IN
CHILD CARE PROGRAM means a non-residential program of child care in which
children participate on a onetime only or occasional basis up to a maximum of
90 hours per child, per month.



   DWELLING.  A building or portion thereof designated for residential
occupancy, including one-family, two-family, multiple family dwellings and
group homes, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses or nursing
homes. 



   DWELLING, ATTACHED.  A structure intended for occupancy by more than
one family, including duplexes, townhomes, multi-family dwellings and
apartments.  Accessory dwelling units as defined and permitted by this
chapter are incidental to a principal dwelling unit and are not considered to
be attached dwellings.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A building designed with 3or more dwelling
units exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other but sharing hallways and main entrances and exits.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A building designed for occupancy by one
household.  Must be attached to a foundation that extends below the frost
line; must have sides made of wood, brick, stone, concrete, glass, and/or
composite materials; and must conform to the standards of the Minnesota State
Building Code.  May be constructed on-site or may be constructed in modules
off-site and assembled on-site.  Also known as a “detached dwelling”. 
Includes “modular home” but not “manufactured home” or “mobile
home”.  Does not include a structure subject to the requirements of the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (HUD
Code) or the Manufactured Home Building Code. 



   DWELLING, TWO- OR THREE-FAMILY.  A building designed for occupancy by
two or three households but otherwise conforming to the definition of
single-family dwelling.  May be platted into separate ownership tracts as a
zero-lot-line dwelling or through the provisions of the Minnesota Common
Interest Community Act. 



   DWELLING UNIT.  An area within a structure designed and constructed to
be occupied by one family which includes permanent provisions for living,
cooking, and sanitation. Dwelling unit does not include hotels, motels, group
residential facilities, correctional facilities, nursing/convalescent home,
rehabilitation centers, or other structures designed for transient residence.



   EARTH-SHELTERED BUILDING.  A building constructed so that 50% or more
of the completed structure is covered with earth.  Earth covering is
measured from the lowest level of livable space in residential units and of
usable space in nonresidential buildings.  An EARTH SHELTERED BUILDING is a
complete structure that does not serve just as a foundation or substructure
for above-ground construction.  A partially completed building shall not be
considered an EARTH SHELTERED BUILDING. 



   EROSION.  Any process that wears away the surface of the land. 



   EROSION CONTROL.  Refers to methods employed to prevent erosion.
Examples include soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading,
temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES.  Public or private utility systems for sewage,
water, gas, electricity; voice, television and digital communications
systems. These services include underground, surface, and overhead systems
and all accessories thereto such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains,
vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations,
hydrants, and other similar features necessary for  the function of the
essential service. Wireless radio frequency reception and transmission
antennas and support structures shall not be considered an ESSENTIAL SERVICE.



   EXTRACTIVE USE.  The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of
sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat
not regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51.



   FAMILY.  Two or more people related to one another by blood, marriage,
domestic partnership, adoption or legal guardianship (including foster
children) that share a household, kitchen facilities and entrances to a
single dwelling unit.



   FARM.  A site used for agriculture.  See AGRICULTURE, above. 



   FENCE.  A tangible barrier constructed of any allowable material
erected for the purpose of providing a boundary or as a means of protection,
or to prevent uncontrolled access, or for decorative purposes (such as an
ornamental gate or ornamental gates), or to screen from viewers in or on
adjoining properties and streets, materials stored and operations conducted
behind it.



   FILLING.  The act of depositing any rock, soil, gravel, sand, or other
material so as to change the natural grade of the land; and/or to fill or
partly fill a water body, watercourse, or wetland.



   FINAL GRADE.  Excavation or fill of material to final plan elevation.
Final grade completed as part of individual site development.



   FINAL STABILIZATION.



      (1)   All soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas)
perennial vegetative cover with a minimum density of 70% of approved
vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and
areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures have been employed.



      (2)   For individual lots in residential construction by
either:  (a) The homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified
above, or (b) the homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization including
perimeter controls for an individual lot prior to occupation of the home by
the homeowner and information the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of,
final stabilization.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves,
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source. 



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the flood plain outside of the
floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used
in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Waseca.



   FLOOD PLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see FLOOD). 



   FLOOD PROFILE.  A graph or a longitudinal plot of water surface
elevations of a flood event along a reach of a stream or river.



   FLOOD-PROOFING.  Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOOD, REGIONAL.  A flood which is representative of large floods
known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic
of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of
the 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term
“base flood” used in the Flood Insurance Study.



   FLOODWAY.  The bed of wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse
and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required
to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



   FLOOR AREA.  The sum of the gross square footage of a building
measured inside its exterior walls.



   FLOOR AREA - FINISHED.  To qualify as finished floor area, the space
shall be at or above the finished exterior grade, or in the case of lower
levels, no less than 42 inches below such grade; must have heat; flooring
such as carpet, vinyl, tile, wood or other similar floor covering; a ceiling
and walls covered with gypsum board, plaster, or wood which is stained,
painted or covered with other residential wall/ceiling covering prior to
occupancy. Basements that are neither “look out” or “walk out” levels
may be finished, but shall not be counted towards a minimum finished square
footage calculation.



   FUNERAL HOME.  A business that provides human funeral services,
including embalming and memorial services. Crematories and mortuaries are
accessory uses to a funeral home.



   GARAGE.  An attached or detached accessory structure for the purpose
of parking vehicles.



   GARAGE SALE.  The sale of miscellaneous used items commonly associated
with residential use. GARAGE SALES shall not be for the sale of primarily a
single commodity. The term GARAGE SALE includes “sidewalk sale,” “yard
sale,” “basement sale,” and “estate sale”.



   GRADING.  Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.



   GREENHOUSE.  A structure, primarily of glass, in which temperature and
humidity can be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants.



   GROUP HOME. 



      (1)   A publicly- or privately-owned detached residential
building, whether licensed by the State or not, in which unrelated
individuals, possibly including their children, reside up to 24 hours per day
and share facilities for cooking and laundry, for the purpose of
rehabilitation or treatment.  A GROUP HOME is the same as an overnight care
facility. 



      (2)   This term does not include any type of residential or
non-residential facility for persons convicted of crimes, or for persons
accused of crimes who are diverted to the facility before conviction; nor
does it include a residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat
juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of
criminal statutes relating to sex offenses.



   HEIGHT.  The purpose of determining the height limits in all airport
zones, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.



   HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITE.  Any area, place, building, structure,
lands, districts, or other objects, which have been duly designated heritage
preservation sites by this Commission and the City Council.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by the
resident thereof; provided that the use is limited in extent and incidental
and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and
does not change its character. 



   HOSPITAL.  A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical
services for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient basis,
including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment,
diagnostic services, training, research, and administration, and services to
patients, employees, or visitors.



   HOTEL or MOTEL.  HOTEL and MOTEL are synonymous uses. A HOTEL or MOTEL
means a building or group of buildings in which sleeping accommodations are
offered to the public and intended primarily for rental for temporary
occupation by persons on an overnight basis, not including bed and breakfast
establishments or a rooming house. Such uses may include microwaves and
refrigerators for each guest unit.



   HOUSE PAD.  A buildable area of a residential lot graded to the hold
down elevation.  If the lowest floor of the structure is placed on fill, the
house pad shall be constructed with engineered fill.



   HOUSEHOLD.  Any number of individuals living together on the premises
as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding house, lodging house or hotel as defined herein.  A family is a
HOUSEHOLD but not every HOUSEHOLD is a family.



   HOUSING WITH SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT. 



      (1)   As defined under M.S. Chapter 144D, an establishment
providing sleeping accommodations to one or more adult residents, at least
80% of which are 55 years of age or older, and offering or providing for a
fee one or more regularly scheduled health-related services or two or more
regularly scheduled supportive services, whether offered or provided directly
by the establishment or by another entity arranged for by the establishment;
or an establishment that registers under section MS § 144D.025.



      (2)   HOUSING WITH SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT does not include:



         (a)   A nursing home licensed under M.S. Chapter 144A;



         (b)   A hospital, certified boarding care home, or
supervised living facility licensed under M.S. §§ 144.50 to 144.56;



         (c)   A board and lodging establishment licensed under
M.S. Chapter 157 or 245B;



         (d)   A board and lodging establishment which serves as
a shelter for battered women or other similar purpose;



         (e)   A family adult foster care home licensed by the
Department of Human Services;



         (f)   Private homes in which the residents are related
by kinship, law, or affinity with the providers of services;



         (g)   Residential settings for persons with
developmental disabilities in which the services are licensed under Minn.
Rules, parts 9525.2100 to 9525.2140;



         (h)   A home-sharing arrangement such as when an elderly
or disabled person or single-parent family makes lodging in a private
residence available to another person in exchange for services or rent, or
both;



         (i)   A duly organized condominium, cooperative, common
interest community, or owners’ association of the foregoing where at least
80% of the units that comprise the condominium, cooperative, or common
interest community are occupied by individuals who are the owners, members,
or shareholders of the units; or



         (j)   Services for persons with developmental
disabilities that are provided under M.S. Chapter 245B.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  The area of a lot occupied by a constructed hard
surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and
causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased
rate of flow than prior to development. Examples include but are not limited
to decks with one-fourth (1/4) inch spacing or less; decks with a surface
underneath that is impervious; concrete patios; bituminous patios;
landscaping rocks over plastic liners; courts (sport and tennis); sand boxes
with liners; roofs; structures; paved driveways and other driveway surfaces
(crushed bituminous, concrete, gravel, other rock, packed dirt, and the
like); landscape beds with linings; and concrete sidewalks. Exceptions
include the following topics:  wood decks with one-fourth (1/4) inch spacing
or more with pervious material underneath the deck; driveway and sidewalks
constructed of pavers provided proof of proper installation is provided; wood
chip sidewalks; and retaining walls.



   INDUSTRIAL PRODUCT SALES.  Industrial products sales firms are
involved in the sale, rent or lease of products generally intended for
industrial or commercial users.  Sales may be wholesale or retail. 
Accessory uses may include offices, product repair, warehouses, minor
fabrication services, and repackaging of goods.  Examples include sale of
machinery, equipment, trucks, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine
parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, office
furniture and store fixtures.  INDUSTRIAL PRODUCT SALES also include
industrial equipment and vehicle rentals.  Industrial products sales shall
not include firms that are primarily engaged in retail sales to the general
public.



   INDUSTRIAL SERVICES. 



      (1)   Industrial service firms are engaged in the repair or
servicing of industrial, business or consumer machinery, equipment, products
or by-products.  Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing
centralized services for separate retail outlets.  Construction contractors,
building maintenance services and similar activities perform their work
off-site.  Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. 
Accessory uses may include offices.



      (2)   Examples include welding shops, machine shops, tool and
appliance repair, electric motor repair, enameling and plating, truck and
large equipment repair and storage, truck servicing, garbage and sanitary
services (but not disposal), solid waste transfer stations, headquarters for
building, heating, plumbing or electrical contractors, printing, publishing
and blueprinting, exterminators, janitorial and building maintenance
services, research, development and testing laboratories, trade schools,
laundry, dry cleaning and carpet cleaning plants, and photo-finishing
laboratories.  INDUSTRIAL SERVICES shall not include outdoor services or
activities for repair or salvage.



   INSTRUMENT RUNWAY.  A runway equipped or to be equipped with a
precision electronic navigation aid or landing aid or other air navigation
facilities suitable to permit the landing of aircraft by an instrument
approach under restricted visibility conditions.



   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL.  A business for boarding, breeding, raising,
grooming, selling, training or other animal husbandry for dogs, cats or other
domestic animals.



   LAND RECLAMATION.  The reclaiming of land by the importation,
depositing, or grading of soils in excess of 400 cubic yards so as to elevate
the grade.



   LANDING AREA.  The area of the airport used for the landing, taking
off or taxing of aircraft.



   LANDING STRIP.  Any grass or turf covered area of the airport
specifically designated and used for the landing and/or take-off of
aircraft.  This term shall have the same meaning throughout this chapter as
does the term “runway”. 



   LANDSCAPING / NURSERY BUSINESS.  A retail business devoted to the
growth, display, and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees; and/or landscaping
materials and services.



   LITTLE FREE LIBRARY.  A weather-resistant box with a door, used as an
informal book donation and lending device, mounted on a post and installed in
a yard. 



   LODGING ROOM.  A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but
without cooking facilities. In a suite or rooms without cooking facilities,
each room which provides sleeping accommodation shall be counted as one
LODGING ROOM. 



   LOT.  Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under the
provisions of this zoning regulation, having not less than the minimum area
required by this zoning ordinance for a building site in the district in
which such lot is situated and having its principal frontage on a street or a
proposed street approved by the Council.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  A boundary of a recorded land parcel that runs along
an existing or dedicated public street but not an alley.  If the lot is at
the intersection of two streets, the shorter of the two exterior lot lines is
the front lot line. 



   LOT OF RECORD.  A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise
legally described, as of the effective date of this chapter, or approved by
the city as a lot subsequent to such date and which is occupied by or
intended for occupancy by one principal building or principal use together
with any accessory buildings and such open spaces as required by this chapter
and having its principal frontage upon a street.



   LOT, SUBSTANDARD.  A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder upon or prior to the effective
date of this chapter which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure
setbacks or other dimensional standards of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME.  A structure transportable in one or more
sections which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or
40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more
square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained in it, and which complies with the Manufactured
Home Building Code. 



   MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY.  A contiguous parcel of land which has
been designed and developed for the placement of manufactured homes on a
permanent basis. 



   MARQUEE.  Any permanent roof like structure projecting beyond a
theater building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that
building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the
weather.



   MEAN GROUND LEVEL.  The elevation established for the purpose of
regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. Grade shall be
the mean level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior
walls of the buildings.



   METES AND BOUNDS.  A method of property description by means of their
direction and distance from an easily identifiable point.



   MOBILE HOME.  See MANUFACTURED HOME. 



   MODULAR HOME.  A non-mobile housing unit that is basically fabricated
at a central factory and transported to a building site where final
installations are made, permanently affixing the module to the site.



   MOTOR HOME.  A motor vehicle designed to provide temporary living
quarters. A motor home has a living unit built into, integral to, or
permanently or temporarily attached to the chassis of a motor vehicle.  This
includes a sleeping unit added to the bed of a pick-up truck.  MOTOR HOME is
also defined in M.S. § 168.002, Subd. 17. 



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES).  The program
for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and
enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (§§ 301, 318, 402, and 405) and
United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, §§ 1317, 1328, 1342,
and 1345.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate map or after December 31,
1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 



   NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.  A structure or building, the
size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to January 15, 2016,
or on the effective date of any amendment to this chapter, but that fails by
reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to the requirements of this
chapter.



   NON-CONFORMING USE.  Any use lawfully being made of any land,
building, or structure not otherwise abandoned, existing on January 15, 2016,
or on the effective date of any amendment of this chapter, that does not
comply with the use regulations of this chapter or the amendment.



   NURSING HOME.  A facility that provides nursing services and custodial
care on a 24-hour basis for two or more unrelated individuals outside of
their homes, who for reasons of illness, physical infirmity or advanced age,
require such services, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar
institutions. 



   OBSTRUCTION.  (in relation to flood plains):  Any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel
modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill,
structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel,
watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard, or change
the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water.



   OFFICE.  A building that provides work space for professional,
financial, administrative, clerical, and similar services.  Also known as an
“office building”.



   ON-SITE WASTE WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.  A septic tank and soil
absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system.



   OPEN SPACE.  An area on a lot not occupied by any structure or
impervious surface.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER.  The boundary of public waters which may include
wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which
has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon
the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool. 



   OUTDOOR STORAGE.  The keeping, in an un-roofed area, of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than
twenty-four hours. This shall not include the display of vehicles for sale in
a new or used car sales lot. Such activities may be the principal use of the
land or as an accessory use to another principal use.



   OVERNIGHT CARE FACILITY.  See GROUP HOME. 



   PARK.  Land and related buildings owned by the government for public
recreation. 



   PARKING.  The act of keeping a passenger vehicle as defined herein on
an approved parking space, properly surfaced, for a temporary period of time.



   PARKING ISLAND.  Landscaped areas within parking lots used to separate
parking areas and to soften the overall visual impact of a large parking area
from adjacent properties.



   PAVED.  A parking space or storage space which is surfaced with only
the following materials:  Asphalt, concrete, and natural or man-made paving
stones such as brick, granite, or concrete pavers, provided such pavers have
a flat surface area of no less than nine square inches.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD.  Criterion established to control and limit the
impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. The term
PERFORMANCE STANDARD shall be synonymous with “finishing standard”.



   PERMANENT COVER.  Final site stabilization. Examples include grass,
gravel, asphalt, and concrete.



   PERMITTED USE.  A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and performance standards (if any) of such districts.



   PERSON.  Includes any individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies. 



   PERSONAL SERVICES.  Establishments that primarily engage in providing
services generally involving the care of the person or person’s
possessions. Personal services may include but are not limited to:  laundry
and dry-cleaning services, barber shops, beauty salons, health and fitness
studios, music schools, informational and instructional services, tanning
salons, and portrait studios.



   PLACE OF PUBLIC WORSHIP.  A building, together with its accessory
buildings and uses, where people regularly assemble for religious worship and
which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained
and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 



   PUBLIC WATERS.  Any waters as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 15,
15a.



   REACH. (in relation to flood plains):  A hydraulic engineering term to
describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural
or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river
between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a
REACH.



   RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE.  As defined in M.S. § 327.14, Subd. 7,
(a) any vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used
as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses; (b) any
structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation; (c) any portable, temporary
dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and vacation, constructed as an
integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; and (d) any folding structure,
mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation, and vacation use. 
See also “Motor Home”. 



   RECYCLING AND SALVAGE CENTER.  A facility engaged solely in the
storage, processing, resale, or reuse of recyclable and recovered materials. 



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEY.  A survey map of registered land designed to
simplify a complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same
into a tract or tracts by registered land survey number.  (M.S. § 508.47)



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the
elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused
by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.



   RESIDENTIAL CARE PROGRAM OR FACILITY.



      (1)   A program that provides 24-hours-per-day care,
supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education,
habilitation, or treatment outside a person’s own home, including a program
in an intermediate care facility for four or more persons with developmental
disabilities.  Residential programs include home and community-based
services for persons with developmental disabilities that are provided in or
outside of a person’s own home. 



      (2)   This term does not include any type of residential
facility for persons convicted of crimes, or for persons accused of crimes
who are diverted to the facility before conviction; nor does it include a
residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who have
violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or have been adjudicated
delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal statutes relating
to sex offenses.



   RESIDENTIAL SPECIALTY SHOPS.  Antiques and collectibles shops,
including rare coin and rare book dealers; art, craft and hobby shops,
including instruction; gifts, novelty and souvenir shops; interior decorating
studios; jewelry shops; tailoring and custom clothing shops; and tea rooms. 



   RESTAURANT.  A business where meals or prepared food, including
beverages and confections, are served to customers for consumption on or off
the premises. Such a facility may include indoor and outdoor seating and/or
drive through services.  At least 50% of the gross revenue shall be obtained
directly through the sale of food. 



   RESTAURANT, CONVENIENCE FOOD.  A restaurant in which customers place
orders at a counter and the meal is typically delivered before they sit at a
table.  These facilities often include drive-up window service. 



   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN SERVICE.  A restaurant in which customers stay in
their cars and are served food in the parking lot.  Commonly known as a
“drive-in”. 



   RETAIL BUSINESS.  An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
goods and materials to the general public not otherwise specifically defined
in code.



   ROOT ZONE.  The area inside the drip line of a tree that contains its
roots.



   RUNWAY.  Any surface of the airport which is specifically designated
and used for the landing and/or take-off of aircraft. 



   SALVAGE YARD, VEHICLE.  A business in which inoperable motor vehicles
are stored outdoors while they await dismantling, crushing or stripping for
parts. 



   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.  Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and
force main, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances
used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of
ultimate disposal.



   SEDIMENT CONTROL.  Measures and methods employed to prevent sediment
from leaving the site. Sediment control practices include but are not limited
to silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams,
subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection, and
temporary or permanent sedimentation basins.



   SELF-STORAGE FACILITY.  A building or group of buildings that contains
equal or varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled
access stalls or lockers for the storage of residential or commercial
customer’s goods or wares.



   SEMI-PUBLIC USE.  The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization
to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside
the regular constituency of the organization.



   SENIORS HOUSING.  A multiple-family structure or cluster of detached
single-family structures designed for and restricted to occupants who are at
least 55 years of age. The facility may include common areas for the
congregation of occupants for activities or meals. The facility may include
independent living, assisted living and/or memory care housing and related
facilities. 



   SETBACK.  The horizontal distance between a structure and the
perimeter of the parcel on which it is located.  A SETBACK is a minimum
distance and not the same as a build-to line, but houses along a street are
expected to match the average of adjacent houses’ front yard setbacks. 



   SHORE IMPACT ZONE.  Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
structure setback.



   SHORELAND.  Land located within the following distance from public
waters:  1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or
flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a
floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is
greater.  The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters
involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the
waters or lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner.



   SITE PLAN.  A scaled drawing that depicts existing and proposed
physical improvements including parcel boundaries, easements, topography,
natural features and nearby off-site conditions.  Usually submitted to the
city as part of an application for a land development or a building permit. 



   SKETCH PLAN.  An informal drawing, not submitted as an application,
which depicts a potential site plan or plat, used by applicants for
preliminary discussions and reviews with city staff. 



   SLOPE.  The degree of deviation of surface from the horizontal,
usually expressed in percent or degrees.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM.  A set of devices whose primary purpose is to
collect solar energy and convert and store it for useful purposes including
heating and cooling buildings or other energy-using processes, or to produce
generated power by means of any combination of collecting, transferring, or
converting solar-generated energy. 



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking
has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate
map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR,
AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of
these regulations, the term SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA is synonymous in
meaning with the phrase Area of Special Flood Hazard.



   STABILIZATION.  The exposed ground surface has been covered by
appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber blanket,
or other material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass seeding is not
STABILIZATION.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading,
excavation and filling. 



   STEEP SLOPE.  Land where agricultural activity or development is
either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness
and the site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available
county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and
construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Where specific information is not available,
steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over
horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, which are not bluffs. 



   STORM SHELTER.  An accessory building specifically designed and used
for the protection of life from weather events.



   STORM WATER.  Defined under Minn. R. 7077.0105, subd. 41(b), and
includes precipitation runoff, storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and any
other surface runoff and drainage.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PROGRAM (SWPPP).  A program for
managing and reducing storm water discharge that includes erosion prevention
measures and sediment controls that, when implemented, will decrease soil
erosion on a parcel of land and decrease off-site non-point pollution.



   STORM WATER TREATMENT PRACTICES.  Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective and practical
means of preventing or reducing point source or non-point-source pollution
inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.



   STORY. That portion of a building included beneath the upper surface of
a floor and upper surface of the floor next above, or 14 feet, whichever is
less, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or
roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar,
or unused under floor space is more than six feet above grade, more than 50%
of the total perimeter, or is more than 12 feet above grade at any point,
such basement, cellar, or unused under floor space shall be considered a
story.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of
which requires a location on a parcel of land. This includes a fixed or
movable building which can be used for residential, business, commercial, or
office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. STRUCTURE also includes,
but is not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, sheds, docks,
and similar accessory construction. The term includes recreational vehicles
and travel trailers on site for more than 180 days.  For floodplain
management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including gas or liquid
storage tanks, which are principally above ground.



   STRUCTURE, PERMANENT.  A structure that is attached to frost-free
footings. 



   SUBDIVISION.  Any real estate, wherever located, improved or
unimproved, which is divided or proposed to be divided for the purpose of
sale or lease, including sales or leases of any timeshare interest, unit in a
common interest community, or similar interest in real estate. 



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:



         (a)    Before the improvement or repair is started; or



         (b)   If the structure has been damaged, and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. 



      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure
regardless of the actual work performed. The term does not, however, include
either:



          (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



          (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as a historic structure. 



   SURFACE WATER.  All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands,
reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, and
irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or private.



   SWIMMING POOL.  A structure, whether above or below grade level,
designed to hold water more than 24 inches deep to be used for recreational
purposes.



   TEA ROOM.  The serving of limited food and beverage items that do not
involve the preparation by cooking or processing on the premises. 



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER.  Any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP. A retail establishment that derives more than
70% of its gross revenue from the sale of tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, and/or nicotine or lobelia delivery products or
devices. This includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tobacco, plants or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other
products is merely incidental.



   TOWNHOUSE.  A dwelling unit attached by party walls to other units and
oriented so that all exits open to the outdoors and having no other dwellings
directly above or below it.  Sometimes known as a row house.  Arranged in
structures having three to 12 dwelling units, which may face the same
direction or may be back-to-back.  May be for-rent or for-sale.



   TRAFFIC SIGHT TRIANGLE.  An area on the ground beginning at the
intersection of the projected curb lines of two intersecting streets, thence
25 feet along one property line, thence diagonally to a point 25 feet from
the point of beginning on the other property line, thence to the point of
beginning.



   TRASH HANDLING AND RECYCLING COLLECTION AREA.  An area designated for
the accumulation, storage and pick-up of refuse and recyclable material
associated with multi- family home sites, civic and institutional uses,
office uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses. This definition does not
include trash and recycling containers associated with single family
dwellings, or townhome units which do not utilize a communal location for
trash and recycling.



   TRAVEL TRAILER.  A unit on wheels that is designed for temporary
living quarters and designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.



   TREE, ORNAMENTAL.  A small tree that has high visual impact typically
grown for the beauty of its foliage and flowers rather than its functional
reasons.



   TREE, OVERSTORY.  A tree that has an expected height at maturity of
greater than 30 feet.



   TREE, SPECIMEN.  Any canopy tree with a DBH of 36 inches or more and
any understory or ornamental tree with a DBH of ten inches or more that is
not exempted as a specimen tree by this chapter.



   TRUCK OR FREIGHT TERMINAL.  A use where buses, trucks, and cargo are
stored, where loading and unloading is carried on regularly, and where minor
maintenance of these types of vehicles is performed.



   TRUCK STOP.  A business that specializes in selling fuel and
accessories and performing repairs for semi-tractor trailer trucks, providing
over-night parking for such trucks, and selling restaurant meals to truck
drivers.  Fuel and food services would also be available to automobiles or
light trucks and their drivers.



   UPLAND.  All lands at an elevation above the ordinary high water mark.



   USE.  The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon
is designated, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized,
or maintained, and shall include the performance of such activity as defined
by the performance standards of this chapter.



   USE, PRINCIPAL.  The main use of land or buildings as distinguished
from subordinate or accessory uses.



   UTILITIES, MAJOR.  Major utilities shall include the following:



      (1)   Public infrastructure services providing regional or
community-wide service that entail the construction of new buildings or
structures such as waste treatment plants, potable water treatment plants,
solid waste facilities, and electrical substations.



      (2)   Commercial wind energy conversion systems (public or
private).



   VARIANCE.  An exception by board action from the literal provisions of
the zoning ordinance on a case-by-case basis.



   VEGETATION, NATIVE.  Any indigenous tree, shrub, ground cover or other
plant adapted to the soil, climatic, and hydrographic conditions occurring on
the site.



   VEHICLE, EMERGENCY.  For the purpose of evaluating vehicles which may
be parked in residential areas, the term emergency vehicle shall include
ambulances, police and sheriff’s department vehicles, fire protection
vehicles, emergency towing vehicles, and other law enforcement vehicles.



   VEHICLE FUEL SALES. 



      (1)   Buildings and premises where gasoline, oils and greases,
batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at
retail (or in connection with a private operation where the general public is
excluded from use of facilities), and where in addition, the following
services may be rendered and sales made, and no other:



         (a)   “Vehicle Repair, Mechanical” as defined by
this chapter;



         (b)   Sales of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and
similar convenience goods for filling station customers, as accessory and
incidental to principal operation;



         (c)   Provision of road maps and other informational
material to customers; and



         (d)   Provision of restroom facilities.



      (2)   Uses permissible at a vehicle fuel sales establishment
do not include “Vehicle Repair, Body” as defined by this chapter, storage
of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise,
glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in fuel stations. 



   VEHICLE, LARGE COMMERCIAL.  A vehicle used for commercial purposes
which is a semi-tractor and/or semi-trailer, dump truck, or any other
commercial vehicle that does not qualify under the definition of a “small
commercial vehicle”. 



   VEHICLE, PASSENGER.  A vehicle capable of moving under its own power
which is licensed and operable for use on public roadways, and shall include
the following vehicles:  passenger automobiles, pick-up trucks and
sport-utility vehicles of less than 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight,
pick-up trucks and sport-utility vehicles of between 9,000 pounds and 13,000
pounds with no visible commercial messages, commuter vans of a capacity up to
16 persons, and motorcycles.



   VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL.



      (1)   A vehicle that is used primarily for recreational or
vacation purposes, and which is licensed and operable for use on public
roadways, whether self-propelled, carried on, or towed behind a
self-propelled vehicle.



      (2)   Operable recreational equipment that is not licensed for
used on the public roadway, but used off-road, such as all-terrain vehicles,
boats, off-road motorcycles, race vehicles, snowmobiles, or similar
equipment. Such equipment shall be properly licensed if the State of
Minnesota provides for such licensing.



      (3)   Licensed, operable trailers which may be used to tow
recreational equipment, whether such trailers are loaded or unloaded,
including utility trailers. Where a trailer is loaded with recreational
equipment, such trailer and equipment shall be considered to be one piece of
equipment for the purposes of this section.



   VEHICLE REPAIR, BODY.  Repair or replacement of the exterior body
parts or the chassis or unibody components of a motor vehicle.



   VEHICLE REPAIR, MECHANICAL.  Repair or replacement of any of the
components of a motor vehicle except body parts.  Does not include body
painting. 



   VEHICLE SALES OR RENTAL.  Businesses primarily engaged in the retail
sale of new and used-in operating condition-automobiles, noncommercial
trucks, motor homes, recreational vehicles or farm machinery; including
incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing.



   VEHICLE, SMALL COMMERCIAL.  A vehicle used primarily for commercial
purposes, including pick-up trucks and sport-utility vehicles larger than
9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, but less than 13,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight which display a commercial business message, and all other commercial
vans or trucks, regardless of commercial message which are no greater than
any of the following dimensions:  22 feet in length, eight feet in height,
and 8.5 feet in width.



   VEHICLE STORAGE.  The act of keeping a recreational or commercial
vehicle as defined herein on a parcel in an eligible storage location for an
extended period of time without regular use. 



   WATER COURSE.  A channel or depression through which water flows such
as rivers, streams, or creeks and may flow year-round or intermittently. 
Same as “waterway”.



   WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A small, above ground building or
other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls,
which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature,
reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal
structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
decks.



   WATERSHED.  The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage
system bounded peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing
drainage areas.



   WETLAND BUFFER.  An area of non-disturbed ground cover abutting a
wetland left undisturbed to filter sediment, materials, and chemicals.



   WETLANDS.



      (1)   Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic
systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land
is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this chapter, wetlands must:



         (a)   Have a predominance of hydric soils;



         (b)   Be inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of
hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions; and



         (c)   Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence
of hydrophytic vegetation.



      (2)   “A wetland” or “the wetland” means a distinct
hydrologic feature with characteristics of item (1), surrounded by
non-wetland and including all contiguous wetland types, except those
connected solely by riverine wetlands.  “Wetland area” means a portion
of a wetland or the wetland.



      (3)   Wetlands does not include public waters wetlands and
public waters unless reclassified as wetlands by the commissioner under M.S.
§ 103G.201.



      (4)   The wetland size is the area within its boundary. The
boundary must be determined according to the United States Army Corps of
Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual (January 1987). The wetland type must be
determined according to Wetlands of the United States, (1971 edition). Both
documents are incorporated by reference under part 8420.0112, items A and B.
The local government unit may seek the advice of the technical evaluation
panel as to the wetland size and type.



   WETLANDS, EXCEPTIONAL QUALITY.  Exceptional quality wetlands contain
an abundance of different plant species with dominance evenly spread among
several species.  Such wetlands may support some rare or unusual plant
species. Invasive or exotic plant species are either absent or limited to
small areas where some disturbance has occurred.  This higher level of plant
species variety generally provides high wildlife habitat value and may also
support rare wildlife species. The shorelines of exceptional quality wetlands
are natural and unaffected by erosion.  These wetlands exhibit no evidence
of significant man induced water level fluctuation.  EXCEPTIONAL QUALITY
WETLANDS provide excellent water quality protection, high aesthetic quality,
and provide excellent opportunities for educational and scientific activities
within the community.



   WETLANDS, HIGH QUALITY.  High quality wetlands are still generally in
their natural state and tend to show less evidence of adverse effects of
surrounding land uses.  Exotic and invasive plant species may be present and
species dominance may not be evenly distributed among several species,
however, a minimum of 20 different species can be found within the basin.
There tends to be little evidence of water level fluctuation due to storms
and their shorelines are stable with little evidence of erosion.  The
combination of these factors result in these wetlands being judged as
providing a greater level of water quality protection and significantly
better wildlife habitat.  They show little if any evidence of human
influences and their greater levels of species variety, wildlife habitat and
ecological stability results in higher aesthetic quality.  These
characteristics also offer opportunities for educational or scientific value
to the community.



   WETLANDS, LOW QUALITY.  Wetlands included in this category have been
substantially altered by agricultural or urban development that caused
over-nutrification, soil erosion, sedimentation, and water quality
degradation. As a result of these factors, these wetlands exhibit low levels
of plant species and a related reduction in the quality of wildlife
habitat.  These wetlands may also tend to exhibit extreme water level
fluctuations in response to storms and show evidence of shoreline erosion. 
While these wetlands do provide for water quality and serve an important role
in protecting water quality downstream, the combination of these
characteristics cause these wetlands to provide low levels of water quality
protection and to have poor aesthetic quality. They often exhibit evidence of
significant human influences and they are deemed to be of little educational
or scientific value to the community.



   WETLANDS, MEDIUM QUALITY.  Medium quality wetlands have a slightly
higher number of plant species present than low quality wetlands, often with
small pockets of indigenous species within larger areas dominated by invasive
or exotic species.  Their relatively greater species variety results in
slightly better wildlife habitat.  They exhibit evidence of relatively less
fluctuation in water level in response to storms and less evidence of
shoreline erosion. As a result of these characteristics, these wetlands
provide somewhat better water quality protection.  They also exhibit
relatively less evidence of human influences and therefore, tend to be of a
higher aesthetic quality.  These wetlands are still judged to be of limited
educational or scientific value to the community.



   WHOLESALE SALES.  Business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to
retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business
users; or to other wholesalers. Wholesale establishment does not include
contractor’s materials or office or retail sales of business
supplies/office equipment.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM.  A wind-driven machine that converts
wind energy into electrical power for the primary purpose of resale or
off-site use.



   YARD, FRONT.  That part of the property between the front lot line and
the principal building.



   ZERO LOT LINE DWELLING.  A dwelling unit, either contiguous to another
or not, for which the property lines are coincident with the outer walls of
the building on one or more sides.  May include single-family detached or
townhouse dwelling units but not condominium apartments.



(Ord. 1040, passed 1-5-16; Am. Ord. 1050, passed 9-20-16)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 155:  HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION



Section



   155.01   Powers and duties generally



   155.02   Definition



   155.03   Designation of heritage preservation sites



   155.04   Review of permits



   155.05   Additional powers and duties of the Commission



§ 155.01  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   Membership. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall consist
of five members: three shall be nominated by the City Council; one shall be
nominated by the County Historical Society; one shall be nominated by the
Planning Commission. All members shall be appointed by the City Council. The
members nominated from the Waseca County Historical Society and the City of
Waseca Planning Commission may serve only so long as they remain members of
their respective organization.



   (B)   Officers. The Commission shall elect its own Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson, may provide for its own rules, by-laws and procedures and
shall determine the date and times of its meetings.



   (C)   Principal duties. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall
have the following duties and responsibilities:



      (1)   To engage in a comprehensive program of historic
preservation and to preserve and promote the historical resources of the city;



      (2)   Designation of heritage preservation sites and districts;



      (3)   Advise the city’s Planning Commission and City Council
on matters relating to heritage preservation;



      (4)   Act in a resource and advisory capacity to owners of
historically significant sites regarding their preservation, restoration and
rehabilitation;



      (5)   Promote the continuing education of the residents of
Waseca with respect to the civic and architectural heritage of the city;



      (6)   Maintain a public register of designated and proposed
heritage preservation sites along with the plans and programs that pertain to
them;



      (7)   Make recommendations to the City Council regarding the
allocation of public funds in support of historical restoration; and



      (8)   Such other duties and responsibilities as determined by
this chapter and the City Council.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 951, passed 12-1-09; Am. Ord. 1017,
passed 3-18-14)



§ 155.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITE.  Any area, place, building, structure,
lands, districts or other objects, which have been duly designated heritage
preservation sites by this Commission and the City Council.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 951, passed 12-1-09)



§ 155.03  DESIGNATION OF HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITES.



   Heritage preservation sites shall be designated as follows:



   (A)   Criteria. The Commission shall recommend to the City Council
areas, buildings, districts or objects to be designated heritage preservation
sites. In considering the designation of heritage preservation sites, the
Commission shall apply the following criteria:



      (1)    The character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state or
county.



      (2)   The location as a site of a significant historic event.



      (3)   The identification with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the city’s culture and development.



      (4)   The embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural style, period, or treatment.



      (5)   The identification as work of an architect or master
builder whose individual work has influenced the city’s development.



      (6)   The embodiment of elements of architectural design,
detail, materials, or craftsmanship which represent a significant
architectural innovation.



      (7)   The unique location or singular physical characteristic
representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood,
community or the city.



   (B)   Findings and recommendations. The Commission shall determine
if the proposed heritage preservation site is eligible for heritage
preservation as determined by the criteria specified in this section.



   (C)   Communications with Minnesota Historical Society. A copy of
the Commission’s proposed designation of a heritage preservation site,
including boundaries, and a program for the preservation of a heritage
preservation site shall be sent to the Minnesota Historical Society/State
Preservation Office.



   (D)   Hearings. Prior to the Commission recommending to the City
Council any building, district or object for designation as a heritage
preservation site, the Commission shall hold a public hearing and seek the
recommendations of concerned citizens. Prior to the hearing, the Commission
shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation, notice of
the hearing at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and notice of
the hearing shall be sent to all owners of the property proposed to be
designated a heritage preservation site.



   (E)   City Council designation. The City Council, upon request of
the Commission may by ordinance designate a heritage preservation site and
make appropriate adjustments to the zoning map. Upon the approval of the
heritage preservation site, the Commission shall transmit to the City Council
its recommendation for the proposed program for the heritage preservation
site.



   (F)   Planning Commission notification. The City Council shall
advise the City Planning Commission of the proposed designation of a heritage
preservation district, including boundaries, and a program for the
preservation of a heritage preservation district. Upon City Council approval,
the Planning Commission will be notified of the change in the status of the
property, and the Council shall direct the Zoning Administrator to amend the
map.



   (G)   Gifts, donations and negotiations. The Commission may
recommend to the City Council that certain property eligible for designation
as a heritage preservation site be acquired by gift, donation or negotiation.
The Commission may recommend that the city accept gifts and contributions
made to the city. The city staff may assist in preparing application for
grant funds for heritage preservation.



   (H)   State and national register of historic places. Any property
designated to the state register of historic places or the national register
of historic places shall automatically become designated a local historic
site or district. Upon designation, the Heritage Preservation Commission
shall notify the Planning Commission of the designation and recommend that
the official zoning map be amended to reflect the change in status of the
property or properties.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 951, passed 12-1-09)



§ 155.04  REVIEW OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Site alteration permit. A site alteration permit shall be
required for any alteration of any designated heritage preservation site. The
Commission shall review the city’s issuance of a site alteration permit in
a heritage preservation site in the City of Waseca. In addition to any other
specifics the Zoning Administrator may require, the site alteration permit
application shall be accompanied by detailed plans including a property plan,
building elevations and design details and materials as necessary to evaluate
the request. The Commission may ask for additional plans and details they
feel necessary to evaluate the permit. Besides the site alteration permit,
regular city permits shall be required. Once the Commission has reviewed the
permits according to division (F) of this section, recommendation for
approval or disapproval will be made to the City Council. Recommendation for
approval or disapproval of the site alteration permit by the City Council
will be accompanied with specific reasons why the alterations meet or do not
meet the city’s approved design guidelines and standards for reasonable
rehabilitation related to the particular building or preservation site. The
following are subject to a site alteration permit:



      (1)   Painting, changes to architectural details and other
related exterior alterations.



      (2)   Additions or deletion of awnings, shutters, canopies,
and similar appurtenances.



      (3)   Application or use of exterior materials of a different
kind, type, color, or texture than those already in use which will
substantially cover one or more sides of the structure. This provision
applies to roofing as well as siding.



      (4)   Signs.



      (5)   Construction of a new building or auxiliary structure.



      (6)   Any addition to or alteration of an existing structure
which increases the square footage in the structure or otherwise alters its
size, height, contour, or outline.



      (7)   Change or alteration of a structure’s architectural
style.



      (8)   Alteration of a roof line.



      (9)   Demolition in whole or in part. This does not apply to
structures required to be demolished in accordance with M.S. Chapter 463.



   (B)   City actions. The Commission shall review and make
recommendations to the City Council concerning city activity that could
change the nature or appearance of a heritage preservation site.



   (C)   Preservation program. All decisions of the Commission with
respect to this section shall be in accordance with the approved program for
the rehabilitation of each heritage preservation site. The Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties shall be used as
a guide in the evaluation of applications for site alteration permits as
follows:



      (1)   A property will be used as it was historically or be
given a new use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials,
features, spaces, and spatial relationships.



      (2)   The historic character of a property will be retained
and preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alterations of
features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will
be avoided.



      (3)   Each property will be recognized as a physical record of
its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other
historic properties, will not be undertaken.



      (4)   Changes to a property that have acquired historic
significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.



      (5)   Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and
construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property will be preserved.



      (6)   Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather
than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color,
texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of historic features
will be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence.



      (7)   Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to
historic materials will not be used.



      (8)   Archeological resources will be protected and preserved
in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be
undertaken.



      (9)   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new
construction will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial
relationships that characterize the property. The new work will be
differentiated from the old and will be compatible with the historic
materials, features, size, scale, and proportion, and massing to protect the
integrity of the property and its environment.



      (10)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction
will be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment
would be unimpaired.



   (D)   Findings. Before approving any permit or application required
under division (A) of this section, the Commission shall make findings based
on the program for preservation of the heritage preservation site in regard
to the following:



      (1)   In the case of a proposed alteration or addition to
existing buildings, the Commission shall make written findings on how the
structure may be architecturally or historically affected. To be considered
are the existing exterior appearances, building height, building width,
depth, or other dimensions, roof style, type of building materials,
ornamentation, paving and setback.



      (2)   In the case of the proposed demolition of a building
prior to the approval of demolition, the Commission shall make written
findings on the following:



         (a)   Architectural and historic merit of the building.



         (b)   The effect on surrounding buildings.



         (c)   The effect on any new proposed construction on the
remainder of the building (in case of partial demolition) and on surrounding
buildings.



         (d)   The economic value or usefulness of the building
as it now exists, or if altered or modified, in comparison with the value or
usefulness of any proposed structures designated to replace the present
building or buildings.



      (3)   In the case of a proposed new building, the Commission
shall make written findings on how the building will in itself, or by reason
of its location on the property, materially affect the architectural or
historic value of buildings on adjacent sites or in the immediate vicinity
within the heritage preservation site.



   (E)   Appeal to the City Council.



      (1)   The applicant for a site alteration permit (or any other
party) aggrieved by the decision of the Commission relative to a site
alteration permit shall have a right to appeal such order and decision to the
City Council, if appealed within ten working days of the date of the
Commission’s order and decision.



      (2)   The appeal shall be deemed perfected upon receipt by the
Records Secretary of a notice of appeal and statement setting the grounds for
the appeal. The Records Secretary shall transmit a copy of the notice of
appeal and statement to the City Council and a copy to the Commission. The
City Council may overturn the Commission’s order and decision by a majority
vote of the Council. The Commission, in any written order denying a permit
application, shall advise the applicant of the applicant’s right to appeal
to the City Council and shall include this section in all such orders.



   (F)   Limitations. If within 60 days from the filing of a site
alteration permit application, the Commission has neither approved nor denied
the site alteration permit application, the plans and permit application
shall be deemed to have been approved by the Commission. If all other
requirements of the city have been met, the city shall authorize a permit for
the proposed work. No permit shall be issued and no work commenced in the
event the Commission disapproves the site application permit application in
accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 951, passed 12-1-09)



§ 155.05  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties, in addition
to those otherwise specified in this section:



   (A)   The Commission shall create and maintain an inventory of all
areas, places, buildings, structures or objects in the city which the
Commission, on the basis of information available or presented to it, has
reason to believe are significant to the city’s culture, social, economic,
political or architectural history.



   (B)   The Commission may on a continuing basis collect and review
certain planning and development records, documents, studies, models, maps,
plans and drawings to be entered into the historical archives as a permanent
record of city history and development.



   (C)   The Commission shall act in a resource and advisory capacity
to owners of historically significant sites regarding their preservation,
restoration and rehabilitation.



   (D)   The Commission shall work for the continuing education of the
city’s citizens with respect to the city’s civic and architectural
heritage. It shall keep current a public register of designated and proposed
heritage preservation sites along with the plans and programs that pertain to
them.



   (E)   The property owner may petition the Commission to have their
property designated as a heritage preservation site.



   (F)   The Commission will assist property owners, when possible,
with completion of an application to the national or state register.



   (G)   The Commission shall recommend to the City Council for their
approval guidelines to be used in the allocation of public funds in support
of historical restoration in a historical preservation district.



   (H)   The Commission shall recommend to the City Council for their
approval applications for public funds for historical preservation that meet
the established guidelines.



   (I)   The Commission shall review changes to the heritage
preservation ordinance and make recommendations to the Council.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 951, passed 12-1-09)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Table



   I.   ANNEXATIONS



   II.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS



   III.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



   IV.   RIGHTS-OF-WAY GRANTS



   V.   VACATIONS



   VI.   NUMBERING BUILDINGS; RENAMING STREETS



   VII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES; COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



   VIII.   RATES AND CHARGES; PENALTIES



   IX.   COMPENSATION



   X.   CHARTER AMENDMENTS



   XI.   MORATORIUMS



   XII.   CODIFICATION ADOPTIONS



   XIII.   MISCELLANEOUS



TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




262
 
8-13-1946
 
Annexation of R.P. Ward's Subdivision B, Lot 19 A, and unplatted area 66 feet
wide extending west from Lot 19


269
 
9-28-1948
 
Annexation of lots 1 through 7 of R.P. Ward's Subdivision A, including
extension of Fourth Street SW


273
 
11-14-1950
 
Annexation of land abutting Lot 2, Block 2, R.P. Ward's Addition


273A
 
5-8-1951
 
Annexation of part of government lot 2 in the northwest quarter of Section
16, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


288
 
7-27-1954
 
Annexation of south 10 Rods of North 20 Rods of the northwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 7, Township 107, Range 22


297
 
2-28-1956
 
Annexation of part of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 17, Township 107 North of Range 22 West


305
 
9-26-1956
 
Annexation of north ten feet of the west 18 acres of southeast quarter of the
southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


306
 
12-11-1956
 
Annexation of a tract of land in Section 18, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


312
 
12-9-1958
 
Annexation of a tract of land in R.P. Ward's Addition


335
 
10-23-1962
 
Annexation of a tract of land in R.P. Ward's Subdivision “A”


339
 
10-10-1963
 
Annexation of lots 8, 9, 10, 11 and 13 and the west half of Lot 12, Ward's
Subdivision “A”


340
 
1-23-1964
 
Annexation of the east half of Lot 12 of Ward's Subdivision “A”


349
 
9-27-1965
 
Annexation of all land in Lake Beds of Clear Lake and Loon Lake not within
the city's corporate limits


353
 
7-28-1966
 
Annexation of a tract of land in Section 17, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


363
 
9-14-1967
 
Annexation of Maplewood Park


364
 
10-11-1967
 
Annexation of a tract of land in Section 17, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


368
 
5-23-1968
 
Annexation of a tract of land in Section 17, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


371
 
9-11-1968
 
Annexation of a tract of land in Section 7, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


378
 
5-8-1969
 
Annexation of government lot 4, Section 18, Township 107 North, Range 22
West; the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 12 and the northeast
quarter of Section 13, Township 107 North, Range 23 West


383
 
11-26-1969
 
Annexation of a tract of land in the southwest quarter of Section 12,
Township 107 North, Range 23 West


388
 
9-25-1970
 
Annexation of a tract of land in the southeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of Section 7, Township 107 North, Range 22 West; a tract in the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 107 North,
Range 22 West; Highway 14 and the railroad right-of-way west and Highway 14
East and south of Clear Lake


389
 
12-22-1970
 
Annexation of a parcel 214.5 x 206.14 in the southeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 7, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


407
 
8-10-1972
 
Annexation of Schimek Addition and lands in Section 5, Township 107 North,
Range 22 West


411
 
5-24-1973
 
Annexation of a parcel south of Kanne Addition


430
 
1-20-1975
 
Annexation of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter and the north
half of the northeast quarter of Section, Township 107 North, Range 22 West


432
 
5-9-1975
 
Annexation of parcels in government lots 3 and 4 in Section 9, Township 107
North, Range 22 West


436
 
6-30-1975
 
Annexation of Schimek Addition No. 2


439
 
9-11-1975
 
Annexation of a tract of land in the southeast quarter of Section 17,
Township 107 North, Range 22 West, known as Maplewood Flats


442
 
9-11-1975
 
Annexation of a tract of land in the southwest quarter of Section 12,
Township 107 North, Range 23 West, Known as Brown Printing


454
 
10-14-1976
 
Annexation of two residential lots on Eighth Street southeast from
Schaumkessel


471
 
12-19-1978
 
Annexation of Quail Creek Addition


475
 
3-30-1979
 
Annexation of Highway 13 south


477
 
6-18-1979
 
Annexation of Industrial Park


479
 
9-5-1978
 
Annexation of 14th Avenue southwest


484
 
10-5-1979
 
Annexation of 10th Avenue northwest


488
 
10-6-1980
 
Annexation of Maplewood area


513
 
8-16-1983
 
Annexation of Highway 14 west


515
 
10-18-1983
 
Annexation of 8th Street southeast


524
 
12-4-1984
 
Annexation of North State Street


525
 
12-4-1984
 
Annexation of Born Rural Service District


529
 
5-7-1985
 
Annexation of Highway 13 south at 5th Street southeast (Mann)


530
 
2-19-1985
 
Annexation of U of M property


531
 
2-19-1985
 
Annexation of city marsh property


532
 
2-19-1985
 
Annexation of Main Rural Service District


533
 
4-2-1985
 
Annexation of Clear Lake Heights


542
 
7-9-1985
 
Annexation of Highway 13 north to 19th Avenue northeast


543
 
7-9-1985
 
Annexation of Highway 13 North to 14th Avenue northeast


544
 
7-16-1985
 
Annexation of a special service district


552
 
12-3-1985
 
Annexation of Highway 13 and 8th Street southeast


558
 
5-6-1986
 
Amendment of annexation of Highway 13 and 8th Street southeast


561
 
7-1-1986
 
Annexing the Schaumkessel property to 8th Street southeast


574
 
11-15-1988
 
Annexing the Ripka property to 2nd Street northeast


575
 
9-20-1988
 
Annexing certain lands


584
 
4-17-1990
 
Annexing lands 100% surrounded


634
 
4-20-1993
 
Annexing certain lands


645
 
11-1-1993
 
Annexing land north of the high school


682
 
8-20-1996
 
Annexing property into the city and setting zoning, Schmidt properties


702
 
10-7-1997
 
Annexing certain lands into city and establishing zoning, Northeast Park


713
 
2-17-1998
 
Annexing certain lands and establishing zoning thereof, Deml


720
 
7-7-1998
 
Annexation of the northwest nature area


729
 
3-2-1999
 
Annexing certain lands and establishing zoning thereof, South Industrial Park


745
 
4-18-2000
 
Annexing certain lands and establishing zoning thereof, Byron property


754
 
1-2-2001
 
Annexing certain lands


755
 
1-16-2001
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


756
 
1-16-2001
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


757
 
3-20-2001
 
Annexing property that abuts the eastern side of State Highway 13 along the
city’s north boundary


758
 
3-20-2001
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


775
 
10-16-2001
 
Annexing property that abuts the city on three sides and is adjacent to 120th
Street


900
 
4-18-2006
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


908
 
8-2-2006
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


930
 
7-17-2007
 
Annexing Gaiter Lake


953
 
6-15-2010
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


955
 
7-6-2010
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


962
 
11-16-2010
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


986
 
2-5-2013
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


1067
 
10-16-2018
 
Annexing less than 60 acres of property


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




200
 
1-25-1927
 
Repeal  of Ord. 140, granting franchise to Waseca Gas Company


591
 
7-3-1990
 
Amendment; gas distribution franchise agreement between the city and
Minnegasco, Inc.


622
 
8-18-1992
 
Amendment; cable television franchise between the city and Waseca Cable
Television, Inc.


883
 
10-4-2005
 
Amendment of Ord. 591; gas distribution franchise agreement between the city
and CenterPoint Energy Resources Corp.


958
 
7-6-2010
 
Granting Centerpoint Energy Resources Corp. a nonexclusive gas energy
franchise


959
 
7-20-2010
 
Implementing a gas energy franchise fee on Centerpoint Energy Minnesota Gas
for providing gas energy service within the city


 
 




 



TABLE III:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




370
 
8-22-1968
 
Sale of south 65 feet of lots 11 and 12 in Subdivision of Block 17 of
Jenkin's Addition to Rollins B. Roesler


373
 
10-24-1968
 
Sale of east 75 feet, two inches, of Lot 1, Block 2, Bennett's Addition to
Waseca Clinic Properties, Inc.


433
 
5-8-1975
 
Sale of city-owned house at 406 Second Street northwest


440
 
9-11-1975
 
Sale of city-owned house at 913 Second Street northwest


444
 
2-17-1976
 
Sale of city-owned house at 709 Third Street southwest


450
 
6-1-1976
 
Sale of city-owned property to Joseph Dayton by Hospital Parking Lot


472
 
1-2-1979
 
Amendment;  subrogate restrictive covenant and Waseca Clinic Properties


489
 
10-10-1980
 
Authorization of execution of lease for city property to Fairview Hospitals


508
 
4-5-1983
 
Authorizing the conveyance of real property


519
 
3-6-1984
 
Authorizing the sale of land, Girl Scout Park


521
 
9-4-1984
 
Authorizing the sale of 7th Street northwest, Mittelstaedt Lot 1, Block 8,
Auditor's Plat of Lot 1, Auditor's Plat of Unplatted Lands


522
 
9-4-1984
 
Authorizing the sale of 4th Street southwest/West Elm


565
 
1-6-1987
 
Authorizing the conveyance of real property, Waseca Inns


644
 
10-19-1993
 
Authorizing the transfer of real property for economic development purposes
to Woodville Leasing, Inc.


647
 
11-16-1993
 
Authorizing the conveyance of property to Harold J. Jewison


658
 
8-18-1994
 
Authorizing agreement to sell property to Ind. School District #829


662
 
2-21-1995
 
Authorizing the agreement to sell property adjacent to Itron


684
 
7-2-1996
 
Authorizing the sale of property to Woodville Leasing


748
 
7-18-2000
 
Authorizing the sale of property in natural acres


751
 
8-15-2000
 
Authorizing agreement to sell property in Nature Acres to Roger C. and
Cynthia S. Ashland


752
 
9-19-2000
 
Authorizing agreement to sell property in Nature Acres to Roger C. and
Cynthia S. Ashland


759
 
3-20-2001
 
Authorizing the sale of property in Corchrans Second Subdivision to
Corchrans, Inc.


770
 
6-5-2001
 
Authorizing the sale of property in Bartz Addition to Dr. john Gutfleisch


783
 
12-4-2001
 
Authorizing the sale of property in Parkridge Estates to Ronald Anderly


905
 
7-5-2006
 
Authorizing the acquisition, exchange and sale of property related to the
development of the Powell Development


909
 
8-15-2006
 
Authorizing the sale of property in the Market Place Addition


922
 
4-3-2007
 
Authorizing the sale of property by quitclaim deed to Craig I. and Kathleen
K. Miller in exchange for property on west shore of Clear Lake


925
 
5-1-2007
 
Authorizing the sale of property in Market Place Addition to Tricor
Development Corp


932
 
7-3-2007
 
Lease and sale of depot to Timothy and Tamie Collins


936
 
11-20-2007
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate to Brad Bartz


938
 
1-2-2008
 
Authorizing the sale of property in Market Place Addition to D.E. Winter and
Associates


948
 
4-7-2009
 
Authorizing the sale of property in Market Place Addition to D.E. Winter and
Associates


950
 
8-18-2009
 
Authorizing the sale of property adjacent to the Tower Industrial Park to
Gary and Kathy Worke Family, LLC


964
 
1-4-2011
 
Authorizing the lease of city-owned agricultural land at the Waseca Airport
to Steven Schoenfeld and Gary Schoenfeld


994
 
5-21-2013
 
Approving a lease between the city and Midwest Wireless Communications, LLC,
d/b/a Verizon Wireless, to lease space on the water tower and adjacent land
in Tower Industrial Park, Outlot B, Block 2


996
 
5-7-2013
 
Authorizing the sale of a three-foot strip of city property located west of
the building located on Gehring property (Lot 7, Block 1, Winona and St.
Peter Land Company’s First Addition) to Duane A Gehring, in exchange for an
access easement to the south side of Gehring property


1009
 
10-15-2013
 
Authorizing execution of the memorandum of lease and the sale of leased
property and assets to the Mayo Clinic Health System, formerly known as
Waseca Community Hospital


1012
 
12-17-2013
 
Authorizing the lease of building space at the Public Library to the
Waseca-LeSueur Regional Library Board


1021
 
7-15-2014
 
Authorizing the sale of property owned by Andrew Miller, located in Lot 7,
Block 6 of the Original Plat


1028
 
4-21-2015
 
Authorizing the sale of property to Timothy J. and Tamie J. Collins


1036
 
10-20-2015
 
Authorizing the reconveyance of property in Block 16 of Barney’s Addition
to Waseca to Larry W. and Linda K. Johnson


1039
 
11-4-2015
 
Declaring excess property and authorizing the sale of that property to
Nicholas A. and Cassandra A. Meister


1047
 
8-3-2016
 
Declaring excess property and authorizing the sale of that property to
Pinnacle Foods


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  RIGHTS-OF-WAY GRANTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




86
 
3-22-1894
 
Right-of-way grant to Winona and St. Peter Railroad


97
 
- -
 
Right-of-way grant to use streets and alleys to Northwestern Telephone
Company to erect poles, wires and fixtures


102
 
1-3-1898
 
Right-of-way grant to use streets and alleys to Waseca Telephone Company to
erect poles, wires and fixtures


103
 
4-20-1898
 
Right-of-way grant to use streets and alleys to Waseca Telephone Company to
erect poles, wires and fixtures


120
 
6-26-1901
 
Right-of-way grant permission to Chicago and Northwestern Railroad to lay
sidetrack on Second Street


126
 
4-1-1903
 
Right-of-way grant permission to Chicago and Northwestern Railroad to lay
sidetrack on First Street


182
 
7-8-1919
 
Right-of-way grant to Chicago and Northwestern Railroad




 



TABLE V:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




313
 
3-24-1959
 
Transfer of a portion of Seventh Avenue northeast to Independent School
District No. 829


314
 
3-24-1959
 
Vacation of a portion of the alley in Block 3, First Addition, and surrender
to owner of lots abutting


317
 
9-22-1959
 
Vacation of Latham Avenue


360
 
4-27-1967
 
Vacation of a portion of Fourth Avenue southwest and surrender to owner of
lots abutting


365
 
12-28-1967
 
Vacation of the alley in Block 19, Barney's Addition


393
 
6-10-1971
 
Vacation of the alley in Block 11, Barney's Addition


437
 
7-27-1975
 
Vacation of a part of an alley in Block 15, First Addition


455
 
10-5-1976
 
Vacation of a part of an alley as a part of a downtown urban redevelopment
plan


460
 
7-19-1977
 
Vacation of an undeveloped street on land owned by Brown Printing Company


468
 
8-1-1978
 
Vacation of land known as Grace Street, Barney's Addition


482
 
8-21-1979
 
Vacation on utility easement, Lot 13, Block 3, Southview


483
 
9-4-1979
 
Vacation of utility easement, Lots 15 and 16, Block 2, Seven-Three Addition


498
 
9-1-1981
 
Vacation of certain properties on Elm Avenue and Second Street southeast


512
 
7-19-1983
 
Vacation a of boulevard


678
 
5-21-1996
 
Vacation of interior side lot line easements and accepting new easement,
Louis M. Born No.3


679
 
5-21-1996
 
Vacation of easements and providing for new easements; Old Farm Estates


680
 
5-21-1996
 
Vacation of an alley in Block 14 and south portion of Block 13 in Barney's
Addition


697
 
5-6-1997
 
Vacation of a section of a utility easement at 1304 7th Street southeast,
Valento


699
 
6-3-1997
 
Vacation of a utility easement in Lot 12, Block 4, North Ridge Addition


703
 
9-16-1997
 
Vacation of easements in Louis M. Born No. 3


715
 
3-17-1998
 
Vacation of 5th Avenue northwest between North State Street and 2nd Street
northwest


736
 
9-21-1999
 
Vacation of easements on 5th Avenue northwest between North State Street and
2nd Street northwest


748
 
7-18-2000
 
Authorizing agreement to sell property in Nature Acres to Joe Hoehn


750
 
10-3-2000
 
Vacation of a portion of 4th Street NW and 16th Avenue NW


767
 
3-15-2001
 
Vacation of utility easement on Lot 2, Block 1 of Corchran’s Second
Subdivision


768
 
3-15-2001
 
Vacation of alley adjacent to Lots 1 through 4, Block 16 of Barney’s
Addition


776
 
9-18-2001
 
Vacation of utility easements located between Lots 2,3,5 and 6, Block 1 of
Bartz Addition PUD No. 2


782
 
12-4-2001
 
Vacation of alley adjacent to Lots 4 through 6, 7 through 9, Block 3, First
Addition


784
 
12-20-2001
 
Vacation of alley located between Lots 1, 2, 11 and 12 of the subdivision of
the west half of Block 4 of the original city plat


902
 
3-6-2006
 
Vacation of portions of Second Street between Blocks 2 and 3, Parkridge
Estates Subdivision


933
 
7-17-2007
 
Vacating portions of 26th Avenue NE adjacent to Woods Edge Subdivision


954
 
6-15-2010
 
Vacating a portion of a utility easement located in Lots 5, 6, and 7, Block
2, Westshores Third Subdivision


999
 
8-5-2013
 
Vacating certain public access and utility easements in Lots 5, 6, and 7,
Block 1, South Industrial Park


1023
 
9-16-2014
 
Vacating all that part of Mill Street which lies between Block 6 and Block 7,
Trowbridge’s Addition


1049
 
9-6-2016
 
Vacating the utility easements located on Lots 6 and 7, in Block 22, of
Jenkin’s Second Addition


1051
 
12-6-2016
 
Vacating the alleyway between Lots 1, 2 and Lots 7 and 8 in Block 2 of the
Hartley Heights Addition


1053
 
4-4-2017
 
Vacating the drainage and utility easement between Lots 1 and 2, Block 1,
Clemons Subdivision


1061
 
12-19-17
 
Vacating the utility easement between Lots 4 and 5 in Block 1 of the Woods
Edge Subdivision.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI:  NUMBERING BUILDINGS; RENAMING STREETS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


202
 
3-30-1928
 
Numbering of all buildings and houses in the city; renaming streets and
avenues and street signs


667
 
9-19-1995
 
Renaming 11th Street northeast “Clear Lake Drive”


708
 
12-1-1997
 
Naming 26th Avenue northwest


835
 
5-4-2004
 
Renaming 12th Street northwest “Lake Street NW”


952
 
1-5-2010
 
Renaming a portion of South State Street “8th Street SE”


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE VII:  ZONING MAP CHANGES; COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




546
 
7-30-1985
 
Restricting ward and precinct boundaries


628
 
9-22-1992
 
Amending the official map


636
 
5-3-1993
 
Amending the official map area south of Schaumkessel's Third Subdivision


641
 
6-15-1993
 
Amending the official map for the Louis M. Born Subdivision No. 2


646
 
11-1-1993
 
Amending the official map for the North Industrial Area


681
 
6-4-1996
 
Amending the comprehensive plan to add Highway 13, north corridor study


762
 
4-17-2001
 
Amending district boundaries for B-3, B-4 and RB districts


763
 
4-17-2001
 
Amending district boundaries for B-1, Central Business District


864
 
1-4-05
 
Rezoning the district boundaries I-2, Moderate Industry District to R-2,
Urban Residential District


901
 
2-4-06
 
Amending the official map


913
 
10-3-06
 
Amending the comprehensive plan to add West Interchange


918
 
12-5-06
 
Rezoning several B-2, Highway Business Zoning Districts to Urban Fringe
Business Districts and two parks


956
 
7-6-2010
 
Rezoning the district boundaries for I-2, Moderate Industry District, to B-3,
Limited Business District


957
 
7-6-2010
 
Rezoning the district boundaries for I-1, Limited Industry District, to R-2,
Urban Residential District


975
 
11-1-2011
 
Rezoning of real property to HP, Heritage Preservation Overlay District
(Trowbridge Park Bandstand)


995
 
5-7-2013
 
Rezoning real property to B-1, Central Business District (Waseca Public
Safety Center)


997
 
6-4-2013
 
Rezoning real property to B-3, Limited Business District (115 4th Street SW)


1007
 
10-1-2013
 
Repealing the Comprehensive Plan dated June 1995, and adopting the City of
Waseca Comprehensive Plan dated October 1, 2013


1042
 
4-19-2016
 
Rezoning real property to R-2, Urban Residential


1048
 
8-2-2016
 
Amending the Heritage Preservation Overlay District on the city’s official
zoning map


1059
 
11-7-17
 
Rezoning real property to B-1, Central Business District (Trowbridge’s
Addition, Lots 1 and 14, and Lots 12 and 13, Block 6, and all that part of
2nd Avenue SW abutting on the S Line of Lots 12 and 13)


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VIII:  RATES AND CHARGES; PENALTIES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


497
 
7-21-1981
 
Amending wastewater treatment charge for nonresidential businesses


660
 
1-10-1995
 
Amending penalties for winter parking violations



 



TABLE IX:  COMPENSATION



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




485
 
10-16-1979
 
Establishing Council salaries


490
 
10-21-1980
 
Establishing Council salaries


499
 
10-6-1981
 
Establishing Council salaries


516
 
11-1-1983
 
Establishing Council salaries


548
 
10-1-1985
 
Establishing Council salaries


576
 
9-20-1988
 
Establishing Council salaries


614
 
10-1-1991
 
Establishing Council salaries


639
 
6-1-1993
 
Establishing Council salaries


652
 
3-22-1994
 
Establishing Council salaries


661
 
2-21-1995
 
Establishing Council salaries


672
 
2-6-1996
 
Establishing Council salaries


695
 
2-4-1997
 
Establishing Council salaries


714
 
2-17-1998
 
Establishing Council salaries


730
 
1-19-1999
 
Establishing Council salaries




 



TABLE X:  CHARTER AMENDMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




480
 
7-5-1979
 
Amending Charter Chapter 12


651
 
4-19-1994
 
Amending Charter Sections 3.05, 3.07 and 3.08


688
 
8-20-1996
 
Amending Charter Section 6.01


690
 
10-1-1996
 
Amending Charter to be gender neutral


709
 
12-16-1997
 
Amending Charter Chapter 2


710
 
12-16-1997
 
Amending Charter Chapter 2


711
 
12-16-1997
 
Amending Charter Chapter 2


923
 
7-15-2008
 
Amending Charter Chapter 5


971
 
9-6-2011
 
Amending Charter Chapter 3


972
 
9-6-2011
 
Amending Charter Chapter 12


 
 




 



TABLE XI:  MORATORIUMS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


694
 
1-21-1997
 
Authorizing moratorium on construction of communication towers


719
 
6-2-1998
 
Authorizing temporary moratorium on location of adult uses; directing study
be conducted


738
 
10-19-1999
 
Authorizing a temporary moratorium on location of billboards in city limits;
directing a study be conducted


749
 
8-1-2000
 
Authorizing the extension of a temporary moratorium on the location of
billboards


1043
 
4-5-2016
 
Establishing a study period and moratorium for a period of up to one year on
tobacco related businesses and land uses in the city


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE XII:  CODIFICATION ADOPTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




385
 
3-26-1970
 
Adoption of a codification of city ordinances


441
 
8-28-1975
 
Adoption of a recodification of city ordinances


557
 
3-20-1986
 
Adoption of a recodification of city ordinances


929
 
6-19-2007
 
Adopting City Code Supplements (S-1, S-2 and S-3)


943
 
7-15-2008
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-4


949
 
5-19-2009
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-5


960
 
7-20-2010
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-6


963
 
1-4-2011
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-7


968
 
6-21-2011
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-8


985
 
10-2-2012
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-9


989
 
3-5-2013
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-10


998
 
6-4-2013
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-11


1011
 
11-5-2013
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-12


1026
 
3-17-2015
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-14


1037
 
11-4-2015
 
Adopting City Code Supplement S-15


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE XIII:  MISCELLANEOUS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




536
 
4-16-1985
 
Related to ditch proceedings


656
 
9-20-1994
 
Authorizing agreement to facilitate donation of UMV to Federal Bureau of
Prisons


658
 
8-18-1994
 
Authorizing agreement to sell property to Ind. School District #829


691
 
10-15-1996
 
Adopting uniform election date


773
 
8-21-2001
 
Interim ordinance temporarily prohibiting new building and ground signs
within the Central Business District


961
 
10-5-2010
 
Authorizing a temporary easement agreement for Soo Line Railroad Company on
property described as Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 5, South Addition


966
 
3-1-2011
 
Underground electric distribution easement to Xcel Energy


990
 
3-19-2013
 
Authorizing an easement agreement, granting Pinnacle Foods, LLC, a perpetual,
non-exclusive easement in order to install a force main within the
right-of-way on 6th Street SW and Johnson Avenue


1002
 
8-5-2013
 
Authorizing a permanent electric utility easement agreement with Charlie and
Ann Mathern


1003
 
8-5-2013
 
Authorizing a permanent electric utility easement agreement with Linda
Christensen, dba Christensen Properties, LLC


1005
 
8-20-2013
 
Amending a lease agreement with Michael and Tracy Jevning for placement and
maintenance of a trash receptacle, regarding screening


1030
 
5-19-2015
 
Authorizing a utility easement with Wendy Weber and David Kalis at 1317 7th
Street SE


1031
 
5-19-2015
 
Authorizing a utility easement with Ronald and Mary Jo Cristallo at 624 13th
Avenue SE


1032
 
5-19-2015
 
Authorizing a utility easement with Elaine Schroeder at 1313 7th Street SE


1033
 
5-19-2015
 
Authorizing a utility easement with Galen Ewest at 1309 7th Street SE


1034
 
5-19-2015
 
Authorizing a utility easement with Matthew and Michel Sorenson at 1213 7th
Street SE


1052
 
2-7-2017
 
Authorizing a utility easement with Bird’s Eye Foods, LLC.


1057
 
9-19-2017
 
Authorizing a permanent utilities easement within property located at 800
Second Street SE


 
 
 
 
 









PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to 1986 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Cites
 
Code Section




Ch. 13
 
36.01


13.37(b)
 
94.39


Ch. 13D
 
37.01


14.57 to 14.69
 
113.99


15.73 (3)
 
94.20


16B.59 to 16B.75
 
150.01, 150.03


16B.62 (1)
 
150.01, 150.02


16B.70
 
150.02


84.81
 
70.08


84.81 et seq.
 
70.08


93.44—93.51
 
154.202


Ch. 103F
 
154.062


Ch. 103G
 
154.047, 154.054


103G.005, Subd. 15
 
154.202


103G.005 (15)(a)
 
151.008, 154.202


103G.201
 
154.202


Ch. 115
 
53.01


115.01 (8)
 
53.01, 53.25


Ch. 116
 
53.01


116.202
 
91.42


144.50—144.56
 
154.202


144.382, Subd. 4
 
52.12


144.411—144.417
 
123.04


Ch. 144A
 
154.202


Ch. 144D
 
154.202


144D.025
 
154.202


145A.05 Subd.1
 
134.02


Ch. 157
 
154.202


157.15
 
113.08


157.16
 
113.03


157.16, subd. 3(d)
 
113.03


161.242
 
90.16


Ch. 168
 
70.04


168.002, Subd. 17
 
154.202


168.011
 
122.48


168.10
 
90.16


168.65
 
150.01


Ch. 168B
 
90.15


Ch. 169
 
70.04


169.01
 
90.16


169.01, subd. 4a
 
70.08


169.01, subd. 4b
 
70.08


169.01, subd. 90
 
70.08


169.041
 
90.16, 90.18


169.69
 
70.07


169.212
 
70.08


169.222—223
 
70.08


169.693
 
70.07


Ch. 171
 
70.04


216B.02 (4) and (6)
 
94.20


216B.097
 
50.04


216C, Subd. 14
 
154.180


Ch. 216D
 
94.22


216D.01 through 216D.09
 
94.32


216D.34
 
94.40


237.162
 
94.20


237.162 (4)
 
94.20


237.163
 
94.20


Ch. 238
 
94.20


245A.02
 
154.202


Ch. 245B
 
154.202


260.15
 
132.99


270.75
 
121.13


Ch. 278
 
113.11


278.01 through 278.03
 
122.23


297G.20
 
113.08


299C.67 through 299C.71
 
35.01, 35.08


300.06
 
94.23


303.06
 
122.20


Ch. 308A
 
94.20


325J.04 (2)
 
122.42


325J.05
 
122.01


327.14, Subd. 7
 
154.202


327.31
 
154.125


327.31 (6)
 
154.125


327.32
 
154.125


Ch. 329
 
112.03


333.01
 
122.20


Ch. 340A
 
113.01, 113.02, 113.06, 113.09, 113.12, 113.99


340A.24
 
113.08


340A.28
 
113.08


340A.101
 
113.03, 113.08


340A.101, subd. 7
 
113.08


340A.101, subd. 13
 
113.19


340A.101, subd. 25
 
113.19


340A.285
 
113.08


340A.301, subd. 6(c)
 
113.08


340A.301, subd. 6(d)
 
113.08


340A.301, subd. 6(I)
 
113.08


340A.301, subd. 6(j)
 
113.08


340A.404, subd. 1(b)
 
113.08


340A.404, subd. 4(a)
 
113.08


340A.404, subd. 4(b)
 
113.08


340A.404, subd. 5
 
113.08


340A.404, subd. 10
 
113.08


340A.409
 
113.11


340A.411
 
113.08


340A.413
 
113.06


340A.413, subd. 3
 
113.06


340A.414
 
113.08, 113.22


340A.418
 
113.08


340A.503 Subd.1(a)(1)
 
134.05


340A.503 (2)
 
116.06


340A.504
 
113.19


340A.504, subd. 3
 
113.08, 113.19


340A.509
 
113.02


340A.707
 
113.05


340A.801
 
113.11


340A.4011, subd. 1
 
113.08


347.50 to 347.54
 
95.18


347.50 through 347.55
 
95.29


Ch. 349
 
117.02, 117.20


349.01 through 349.15
 
122.26


349.11 through 349.60
 
122.26


360.063
 
37.11, 153.01, 154.073


364.03 (2)
 
122.23


364.06
 
35.05


364.09
 
35.05


Ch. 410
 
37.16


412.621
 
37.01


Ch. 429
 
150.21


429.011 et seq.
 
94.01


429.101
 
91.41


444.075
 
55.02, 55.12


Ch. 462
 
37.14, 154.047


462.357
 
154.051


462.357 (1)(b)
 
154.019


462.358
 
151.003, 151.008


462.358 (3)(b)
 
151.022


Ch. 463
 
154.070, 155.04


463.15
 
150.15


463.15 et seq.
 
91.40


463.151
 
150.18


463.152 through 463.26
 
150.24


469.003
 
37.20


469.095, Subd. 2
 
37.21


469.190
 
121.01, 121.14


471.193
 
37.17


471.195
 
90.01


471.924
 
122.20


Ch. 505
 
151.008, 151.072


505.02 (1)
 
151.052


508.47
 
154.202


515B.2-1101
 
154.197


604.113
 
36.01


609.033
 
10.99


609.0331
 
10.99


609.66 (1)(A)
 
116.06


609.67
 
116.06


609.72
 
116.06


609.487, Subd. 2
 
131.03


609.685, Subd. 1a
 
111.12


617.241
 
154.202


624.713
 
116.06


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1986 CODE



 

1986 Code
 
2004 Code




2.01
 
30.01


2.02
 
37.01


2.04
 
37.14


2.05
 
37.20


2.06
 
37.10


2.08
 
37.12


2.09
 
37.11


2.12
 
37.15


2.29
 
31.05


2.30
 
31.06


2.50
 
32.01


2.51
 
32.02


2.52
 
11.01


2.53
 
33.02


2.54
 
33.01


3.01
 
50.01


3.02
 
50.02


3.03
 
50.03


3.04
 
50.04


3.13
 
51.01


3.20
 
52.01


3.21
 
52.02 - 52.06


3.28
 
53.01


3.29
 
53.02


3.30
 
53.03


3.31
 
53.04


3.32
 
53.02, 53.05 - 53.10, 53.99


3.39
 
53.25


3.40
 
53.26


3.41
 
52.03, 53.27


3.42
 
53.28


3.43
 
53.29


3.44
 
53.30


3.45
 
53.31


3.47
 
53.32


3.56
 
53.45


3.57
 
53.46


3.58
 
53.47


3.59
 
53.48


3.60
 
53.49


3.61
 
53.50


3.62
 
53.99


4.01
 
110.01


4.02
 
110.02


4.03
 
110.03


4.04
 
110.03


4.05
 
110.02


4.06
 
110.04


4.34
 
111.01 - 111.12


4.35
 
115.01 - 115.03


4.36
 
112.10


4.37
 
114.01 - 114.05


4.38
 
118.01 - 118.04


4.385
 
54.01


4.60
 
119.01, 119.02, 119.04


4.63
 
117.01 - 117.06


4.64
 
92.01 - 92.06


4.90
 
120.01 - 120.03


4.92
 
117.20 - 117.22


4.93
 
116.01 - 116.06


4.94
 
34.01


5.03
 
94.01


5.05
 
94.02


5.06
 
94.03


5.08
 
94.04


5.10
 
94.05


5.11
 
94.06


5.12
 
94.07


5.13
 
94.08


5.14
 
70.01


6.01
 
70.02


6.02
 
70.03


6.03
 
70.04


6.04
 
70.04


6.05
 
70.05


6.07
 
70.06


7.01
 
71.01


7.02
 
71.02


7.03
 
71.02


7.04
 
71.03


7.05
 
71.04


7.06
 
71.05


7.07
 
71.05


7.08
 
71.05


7.10
 
71.06


8.02
 
150.15 - 150.21


8.03
 
150.22


8.04
 
150.23


8.05
 
150.24


8.06
 
150.25


8.21
 
95.16 - 95.20


8.29
 
95.01 - 95.04


8.30
 
132.01, 132.99


8.31
 
91.01 - 91.05


8.55
 
91.35 - 91.41


8.60
 
96.05


8.70
 
131.01


8.82
 
130.01


8.83
 
96.01 - 96.07


8.85
 
93.01


8.86
 
131.02


9.14
 
154.198


9.23
 
154.174


9.48
 
154.158


9.49
 
154.165


9.50
 
154.160


9.52
 
91.20


9.56
 
154.199


9.65
 
154.163


9.70
 
154.137


9.73
 
154.124


9.75
 
154.113


9.76
 
154.130


9.79
 
154.133


9.81
 
152.02 - 152.09


9.82
 
152.10


9.83
 
152.11


9.84
 
152.12


9.84A
 
151.13


9.85
 
152.01


10.01
 
151.001


10.02
 
151.002


10.03
 
151.003


10.04
 
151.004


10.06
 
151.005


10.07
 
151.006


10.08
 
151.007


10.09
 
151.008


10.17
 
151.020


10.18
 
151.021


10.19
 
151.022


10.20
 
151.023


10.21
 
151.024


10.22
 
151.025


10.23
 
151.026


10.30
 
151.040


10.31
 
151.041


10.32
 
151.042


10.33
 
151.043


10.34
 
151.044


10.35
 
151.045


10.36
 
151.046


10.37
 
151.047


10.38
 
151.048


10.39
 
151.049


10.40
 
151.050


10.41
 
151.051


10.42
 
151.052


10.43
 
151.053


10.44
 
151.054


10.45
 
151.055


10.50
 
151.070 - 151.072


10.52
 
151.085


10.53
 
151.086


10.54
 
151.087


10.55
 
151.088


10.56
 
151.089


10.60
 
151.100


10.61
 
151.101


10.62
 
151.102


10.63
 
151.103


10.64
 
151.999


11.01
 
150.01 - 150.03


11.02
 
150.04


12.01
 
153.01


12.02
 
153.02


12.03
 
153.03


12.04
 
153.04


12.05
 
153.05


12.06
 
153.06


12.07
 
153.07


12.08
 
153.08


12.09
 
153.09


12.10
 
153.10


12.11
 
153.11


12.12
 
153.12




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




68-6
 
2-5-68
 
70.08


69-4
 
1-6-69
 
70.08


69-90
 
11-10-69
 
70.08


70-49
 
11-9-70
 
70.08


74-48
 
5-28-74
 
70.08


76-1
 
1-27-76
 
70.08


76-5
 
2-23-76
 
70.08


560
 
5-4-86
 
94.04


559
 
5-6-86
 
112.10


570
 
9-1-87
 
70.06


571
 
3-16-88
 
31.05


616
 
2-18-92
 
131.01


617
 
3-2-92
 
37.14


618
 
4-6-92
 
70.05


623
 
8-18-92
 
54.01


632
 
12-15-92
 
151.052, 154.198


648
 
12-7-93
 
154.130


655
 
8-2-94
 
132.01, 132.99


654
 
8-16-94
 
70.06


669
 
10-17-95
 
111.01 - 111.12


674
 
2-20-96
 
31.01, 31.06


675
 
3-19-96
 
31.05


676
 
4-16-96
 
110.02, 110.03


683
 
6-18-96
 
37.01


686
 
8-6-96
 
117.02, 117.06


687
 
11-19-96
 
91.35 - 91.41


693
 
12-17-96
 
37.15


696
 
3-18-97
 
37.01, 37.12


700
 
7-15-97
 
154.199


704
 
9-16-97
 
50.04


705
 
10-7-97
 
116.01 - 116.06


706
 
12-2-97
 
151.045 - 151.055, 151.070 - 151.072, 151.085 - 151.089, 151.100 - 151.103


707
 
12-2-97
 
71.06


712
 
1-6-98
 
154.113


716
 
4-7-98
 
117.05


723
 
8-4-98
 
92.06


727
 
1-5-99
 
154.133


728
 
1-5-99
 
70.05


732
 
4-5-99
 
94.20 - 94.47


733
 
7-6-99
 
50.04


734
 
7-6-99
 
150.03, 150.04


737
 
9-21-99
 
150.04


739
 
11-16-99
 
34.01, 92.04, 111.05, 114.02, 116.04, 118.02, 120.01 - 120.03


741
 
1-18-00
 
132.01, 132.99


744
 
4-4-00
 
91.01 - 91.05


746
 
5-2-00
 
150.01


747
 
6-6-00
 
94.06


748
 
7-18-00
 
T.S.O. III, T.S.O. V


751
 
8-15-00
 
T.S.O. III


752
 
9-19-00
 
T.S.O. III


750
 
10-3-00
 
T.S.O. V


754
 
1-2-01
 
T.S.O. I


755
 
1-16-01
 
T.S.O. I


756
 
1-16-01
 
T.S.O. I


767
 
3-15-01
 
T.S.O. V


768
 
3-15-01
 
T.S.O. V


757
 
3-20-01
 
T.S.O. I


758
 
3-20-01
 
T.S.O. I


759
 
3-20-01
 
T.S.O. III


760
 
3-20-01
 
37.01


762
 
4-17-01
 
T.S.O. VII


763
 
4-17-01
 
T.S.O. VII


766
 
5-15-01
 
50.04


770
 
6-5-01
 
T.S.O. III


773
 
8-21-01
 
T.S.O. XIII


774
 
9-4-01
 
53.27


776
 
9-18-01
 
T.S.O. V


775
 
10-16-01
 
T.S.O. I


779
 
11-20-01
 
152.01, 152.02, 152.07, 152.11


780
 
11-20-01
 
91.37


781
 
12-4-01
 
122.01, 122.02, 122.15 - 122.27, 122.40 - 122.49, 122.99


782
 
12-4-01
 
T.S.O. V


783
 
12-4-01
 
T.S.O. III


784
 
12-20-01
 
T.S.O. V


785
 
2-5-02
 
91.20, 91.22


788
 
2-19-02
 
121.01 - 121.15, 121.99


769
 
3-19-02
 
53.29


791
 
5-7-02
 
91.21


792
 
5-7-02
 
91.37, 151.051


794
 
6-4-02
 
71.07


798
 
7-30-02
 
130.02


803
 
8-20-02
 
116.01 - 116.06, 116.99


811
 
3-4-03
 
71.06


816
 
5-20-03
 
150.01, 150.02, 150.04


818
 
7-15-03
 
151.003, 151.005


2003-56
 
12-1-03
 
70.08


830
 
3-1-04
 
152.07


847
 
7-6-04
 
Adopting Ordinance


852
 
9-7-04
 
70.05, 70.08


853
 
9-7-04
 
150.02


854
 
9-7-04
 
132.01


855
 
9-7-04
 
91.22


857
 
10-5-04
 
159.030


860
 
11-16-04
 
95.01, 95.03, 95.04, 95.15 - 95.17, 95.19, 95.20, 95.22 - 95.29, 95.99


861
 
11-16-04
 
131.03


862
 
11-16-04
 
71.05 - 71.10


872
 
4-19-05
 
37.01


879
 
8-16-05
 
151.049


880
 
8-16-05
 
10.98


881
 
8-16-05
 
96.08


883
 
10-4-05
 
T.S.O. II


884
 
12-6-05
 
91.23


886
 
10-18-05
 
94.25


888
 
11-1-05
 
151.100


894
 
12-20-05
 
31.05


895
 
12-20-05
 
35.01 - 35.11


835
 
5-4-04
 
T.S.O. VI


864
 
1-4-05
 
T.S.O. VII


896
 
2-6-06
 
150.04


897
 
2-7-06
 
151.103


900
 
4-18-06
 
T.S.O. I


901
 
2-1-06
 
T.S.O. VII


902
 
3-6-06
 
T.S.O. V


903
 
4-4-06
 
151.023


904
 
6-6-06
 
151.047


905
 
7-5-06
 
T.S.O. III


906
 
8-2-06
 
116.08


907
 
8-2-06
 
116.01, 116.03, 116.06, 116.99


908
 
8-2-06
 
T.S.O. I


909
 
8-15-06
 
T.S.O. III


913
 
10-3-06
 
T.S.O. VII


916
 
11-21-06
 
133.01 - 133.05


917
 
11-21-06
 
37.01


918
 
12-5-06
 
T.S.O. VII


919
 
12-5-06
 
10.98


922
 
4-3-07
 
T.S.O. III


925
 
5-1-07
 
T.S.O. III


926
 
6-5-07
 
152.01, 152.03, 152.11


929
 
6-19-07
 
T.S.O. XII


930
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. I


932
 
7-3-07
 
T.S.O. III


933
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. V


936
 
11-20-07
 
T.S.O. III


937
 
11-20-07
 
116.02, 116.99


938
 
1-2-08
 
T.S.O. III


939
 
3-3-08
 
134.01 - 134.06, 134.99


940
 
4-15-08
 
155.01 - 155.05


942
 
7-1-08
 
154.199


943
 
7-15-08
 
T.S.O. XII


946
 
10-21-08
 
150.02


947
 
3-17-09
 
70.01


948
 
4-7-09
 
T.S.O. III


949
 
5-19-09
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


950
 
8-18-09
 
T.S.O. III


951
 
12-1-09
 
155.01 - 155.05


952
 
1-5-10
 
T.S.O. VI


953
 
6-15-10
 
T.S.O. I


954
 
6-15-10
 
T.S.O. V


955
 
7-6-10
 
T.S.O. I


956
 
7-6-10
 
T.S.O. VII


957
 
7-6-10
 
T.S.O. VII


958
 
7-6-10
 
T.S.O. II


959
 
7-20-10
 
T.S.O. II


960
 
7-20-10
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


961
 
10-5-10
 
T.S.O. XIII


962
 
11-16-10
 
T.S.O. I


963
 
1-4-11
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


964
 
1-4-11
 
T.S.O. III


965
 
2-1-11
 
70.01


966
 
3-1-11
 
T.S.O. XIII


968
 
6-21-11
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


971
 
9-6-11
 
Charter 3.04, T.S.O. X


972
 
9-6-11
 
Charter 12.05, T.S.O. X


973
 
11-1-11
 
152.01, 152.11, 152.12


974
 
11-1-11
 
154.070


975
 
11-1-11
 
T.S.O. VII


976
 
12-6-11
 
152.01, 152.11


978
 
2-6-12
 
154.124


979
 
9-4-12
 
36.01


983
 
7-17-12
 
154.198


984
 
7-17-12
 
154.113, 154.137, 154.165


985
 
10-2-12
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


986
 
2-5-13
 
T.S.O. I


988
 
11-5-13
 
152.01, 152.06, 152.11, 152.12


989
 
3-5-13
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


990
 
3-19-13
 
T.S.O. XIII


993
 
10-1-13
 
31.01, 31.05, 31.06


994
 
5-21-13
 
T.S.O. III


995
 
5-7-13
 
T.S.O. VII


996
 
5-7-13
 
T.S.O. III


997
 
6-4-13
 
T.S.O. VII


998
 
6-4-13
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


999
 
8-5-13
 
T.S.O. V


1000
 
10-1-13
 
37.01, 37.10 - 37.17, 37.20, 37.21


1002
 
8-5-13
 
T.S.O. XIII


1003
 
8-5-13
 
T.S.O. XIII


1005
 
8-20-13
 
T.S.O. XIII


1006
 
10-1-13
 
151.008, 151.052


1007
 
10-1-13
 
T.S.O. VII


1009
 
10-15-13
 
T.S.O. III


1010
 
11-19-13
 
55.01 - 55.12


1011
 
11-5-13
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


1012
 
12-17-13
 
T.S.O. III


1014
 
2-18-14
 
91.42, 91.99


1015
 
2-3-14
 
36.01


1016
 
3-18-14
 
90.16, 91.36 - 91.38


1017
 
3-18-14
 
155.01


1018
 
3-18-14
 
111.01 - 111.12


1019
 
3-18-14
 
123.01 - 123.04, 123.99


1020
 
4-1-14
 
36.01


1021
 
7-15-14
 
T.S.O. III


1022
 
7-15-14
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


1023
 
9-16-14
 
T.S.O. V


1025
 
2-17-15
 
36.01


1026
 
3-17-15
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


1027
 
4-7-15
 
36.01


1028
 
4-21-15
 
T.S.O. III


1029
 
5-19-15
 
52.01 - 52.11


1030
 
5-19-15
 
T.S.O. XIII


1031
 
5-19-15
 
T.S.O. XIII


1032
 
5-19-15
 
T.S.O. XIII


1033
 
5-19-15
 
T.S.O. XIII


1034
 
5-19-15
 
T.S.O. XIII


1036
 
10-20-15
 
T.S.O. III


1037
 
11-4-15
 
Adopting Ordinance, T.S.O. XII


1039
 
11-4-15
 
T.S.O. III


1040
 
1-5-16
 
154.001 - 154.009, 154.011, 154.012, 154.014 - 154.019, 154.022 - 154.026,
154.029 - 154.031, 154.034 - 154.044, 154.047 - 154.063, 154.066 - 154.070,
154.073 - 154.082, 154.085 - 154.092, 154.095 - 154.098, 154.101 - 154.106,
154.109 - 154.144, 154.148 - 154.169, 154.173 - 154.191, 154.196 - 154.202


1041
 
3-2-16
 
36.01


1042
 
4-19-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1043
 
4-5-16
 
T.S.O. XI


1045
 
6-7-16
 
150.04


1046
 
7-19-16
 
37.01


1047
 
8-3-16
 
T.S.O. III


1048
 
8-2-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1049
 
9-6-16
 
T.S.O. V


1050
 
9-20-16
 
154.022, 154.202


1051
 
12-6-16
 
T.S.O. V


1052
 
2-7-17
 
T.S.O. XIII


1053
 
4-4-17
 
T.S.O. V


1054
 
4-4-17
 
36.01


1056
 
7-18-17
 
97.01 - 97.14


1057
 
9-19-17
 
T.S.O. XIII


1058
 
9-19-17
 
52.12


1059
 
11-7-17
 
T.S.O. VII


1060
 
12-5-17
 
113.01 - 113.22, 113.99


1061
 
12-19-17
 
T.S.O. V


1062
 
12-19-17
 
118.05


1066
 
9-18-18
 
37.14


1067
 
10-16-18
 
T.S.O. I


1069
 
12-18-18
 
111.01 - 111.03, 111.06, 111.08, 111.10, 111.12


 
 
 
 
 




 


